Gov. Scott Walker's administration will not appeal Lincoln Hills order on teen inmates
Buy Photo Lincoln Hills School for Boys in Irma has been the subject of a state and federal investigation for more than two years. (Photo: Mark Hoffman, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

MADISON - The state Department of Corrections will not appeal an order requiring it to drastically reduce its use of solitary confinement and pepper spray on teenage inmates.

U.S. District Judge James Peterson issued a ruling Monday requiring the state to limit stays in solitary confinement to seven days at most startingJuly 21 at Lincoln Hills School for Boys and Copper Lake School for Girls. That's down from a current maximum of 60.

His sweeping order also will limit the use of handcuffs at the prison and bar staff from using pepper spray except in instances when it will stop or prevent inmates from harming someone. Videos shown at a hearing last month showed pepper spray is sometimes used for other reasons, such as when juvenile inmates refuse to go in their rooms.

John Paquin, the administrator of the state Division of Juvenile Corrections, wrote in a staff memo Wednesday that the state would not appeal the decision or ask to delay its implementation. Meeting court deadlines over the coming months, some of which start July 21, will require a lot of work, he wrote.

"We believe that ... leadership and staff can successfully rise to this challenge," he wrote.

RELATED: Lawsuit alleges horrific conditions at Lincoln Hills

RELATED: Wisconsin shuts down unit that found Lincoln Hills abuses

Teen inmates at the facility north of Wausau filed their civil rights lawsuit in January with the assistance of the American Civil Liberties Union of Wisconsin and Juvenile Law Center. Peterson issued Monday's order after determining at last month's hearing that their rights are likely being violated.

The lawsuit is continuing as the inmates seek to abolish the use of solitary confinement as a form of punishment.

At least four other lawsuits have been filed and the FBI is investigating whether prisoner abuse, child neglect or other crimes have occurred.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2uSnpYY