Tammy Baldwin campaign calls foul on new radio ad
Buy Photo Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin. (Photo: Michael Sears / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

More than a year and a half before she faces re-election, Democratic U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin is confronting a controversial radio ad barrage.

On Thursday, several stations temporarily pulled the ad after a complaint was lodged by Baldwin's campaign. But Iowa-based Americas PAC is doubling down on its attack against Baldwin and is moving forward with a $650,000 ad buy.

On Friday, three radio station groups returned the ad to the air.

"There's 12,000-plus ads that will run over the next five months," said Tom Donelson, treasurer of the PAC. "I hope she has fun. We're ready to fight over the next five months."

Donelson said funding for the ad was provided by Solutions for Wisconsin, a super-PAC that received a $2 million cash infusion from GOP mega-donor Richard Uihlein. Solutions for Wisconsin has endorsed U.S. Marine veteran and businessman Kevin Nicholson, who has not yet formally declared his candidacy for an expected Republican Party primary.

Uihlein, who lives in Lake Forest, Ill., is founder of the Pleasant Prairie-based Uline company. Through outside groups, he and his wife, Elizabeth, provided major support to Republican U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson during his successful re-election campaign against Democrat Russ Feingold in 2016.

The new radio ad criticizes Baldwin over the scandal at the Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

The Tomah VA came under fire in January 2015, when a report by the Center for Investigative Reporting detailed high levels of opioid prescriptions at the facility and a pervasive culture of intimidation and retaliation against employees who spoke out.

Marine Corps veteran Jason Simcakoski died at the Tomah facility in August 2014 as a result of "mixed drug toxicity."

Lawyers for Baldwin's campaign sent a letter to radio station managers asking for the ad to be taken down.

"This particular advertisement claims that 'three disabled veterans died' as a result of mistakes made by Senator Baldwin’s office. This claim is false. In fact, two of those individuals died before Senator Baldwin was even elected to the Senate," said the letter from Jonathan S. Berkon and David J. Lazarus.

The lawyers from the national firm Perkins Coie added: "Americas PAC has played fast and loose with the facts, disseminating a falsehood to score political points, and acting recklessly in an area that deserves our utmost sensitivity."

Donelson said the ad is accurate.

"This is nothing but Tammy Baldwin's attempt against free speech," he said.

RELATED:Trump's 'Buy America' stance aligns him with top GOP target Tammy Baldwin

RELATED:Election prospects brighten for incumbents Scott Walker and Tammy Baldwin

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2pbaH6G