Feingold-Johnson: Political becomes personal
CLOSE

Archie Andrew Badura died at 19 of a heroin overdose. (Photo: Badura family photo)

In the race between Republican U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson and Democrat Russ Feingold, the campaigns have fought fiercely over the issues of what to do about the nation's opioid crisis and who bears responsibility for the scandal at the Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center.

But the issues aren't just abstract, they involve real people.

In the wake of two debates, two people whose families were struck with tragedy have stepped forward to make their voices heard in the campaign.

Lauri Badura, who lost her 19-year-old son Archie to a heroin overdose in 2014, appeared in a digital ad for the Johnson campaign. She spoke of Johnson's commitment to solving the opioid crisis and also sought to refute a Feingold radio ad that charged that Johnson had "essentially done nothing" on the issue.

Badura attended Tuesday night's second debate, which included a dramatic confrontation between the candidates over opioids. She also testified earlier this year at a hearing by the Johnson-chaired Senate Homeland Security & Governmental Affairs Committee.

"I know his work is making a difference on this epidemic," Badura said in an interview. "I just felt compelled to say something, do something and have justice be served."

The problems at Tomah erupted in last week's first debate as the two candidates traded charges about whether they or their staffs ignored problems at the facility, which included overprescribing opioid medications.

At one point, Johnson mentioned the plight of U.S. Army veteran Thomas Baer, 74, who died after suffering two strokes at the facility in January 2015. When word reached Baer's daughter, she grew upset.

"It has been miserable," Candace Delis told a reporter. "For him to bring up our family during that debate just started everything all over again."

For Badura, the tragedy of her son's death pushed her life in a new direction. She became an advocate for substance abuse awareness and prevention and established an organization, Saving Others For Archie (SOFA).

"It's not what I imagined for our family," said Badura of Oconomowoc. "When this tragedy struck, I refused to be paralyzed and burdened by shame. My strong faith leads me to share with other people."

Badura said she got to know Johnson when she testified at the field hearing. She learned that Johnson's family also suffered a loss to the opioid epidemic. Johnson's nephew died of a fentanyl overdose.

"I believe he is motivated to make changes, real changes," she said. "He spoke from his heart."

Badura said she was angered by the Feingold radio ad against Johnson on the opioid issue and made a video with the help of a friend.

CLOSE Columnist Dan Bice and Reporter Mary Spicuzza discuss how Russ Feingold and U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson performed in the senate debates.

Originally, Badura said she was going to post the video on Facebook, but "decided to share it," and gave it to Johnson's campaign.

In the video, she said the accusation of Johnson's inaction on opioids was "absolutely the furthest thing from the truth."

Feingold's campaign pointed to Johnson's votes against two amendments — the first for $1.1 billion to combat heroin addiction, the second for $600 million in emergency funding to fight the opioid crisis.The Feingold campaign said Johnson also voted for proposed budgets that would have cut funding for substance abuse programs.

Johnson's campaign said the senator introduced bipartisan legislation to ease pressure on doctors to overprescribe painkillers and that parts of the measure are already being implemented by the Obama administration. He has also held hearings on securing the border to cut off the flow of drugs.

Delis, of Wisconsin Rapids, has at various times been critical and complimentary of Johnson and his Democratic counterpart Tammy Baldwin.

This week, Delis said she asked for a separate investigation into her father's death and help in speeding up a claim with the VA, and charged that neither request was acted upon by Johnson.

"Rather than giving himself accolades for things he did halfheartedly, he should be working on actual problems within the VA and answering actual problems and answering questions of veterans," she said. "This isn't a time to pat yourself on the back. This is a time for fixing things."

She acknowledged Johnson had personally provided her family financial assistance.

Johnson campaign spokesman Brian Reisinger said the senator acted on complaints at the facility. The Johnson-led Senate Homeland Security & Governmental Affairs Committee issued a report on Tomah and in it there were references to Baer's case.

Johnson's campaign provided documents showing the senator pressing the VA to look into Baer's death. The campaign also said that the Senate Ethics Committee advises senators not to intervene in an "ongoing enforcement, investigative, or other quasi-judicial proceeding."

“Ron Johnson was deeply disturbed by the deaths of Wisconsin veterans like Thomas Baer, and he took immediate and effective action to uncover what happened, hold wrongdoers accountable, and force reforms to help prevent further tragedies," Reisinger said.

Read or Share this story: http://on.jsonl.in/2eWpiyT