Feingold talks guns, Clinton on tape
Buy Photo Democrat Russ Feingold speaks with reporters and editors at the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel about his Senate race with Republican incumbent Ron Johnson. (Photo: Michael Sears / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

Madison — Democratic Senate candidate Russ Feingold was captured on video in California by conservatives as he talked about guns and giving positions already put forward by Hillary Clinton and himself.

The video from James O'Keefe shows the conservative activist and his Project Veritas team impersonating a liberal donor giving money to Feingold at a Palo Alto fundraiser and asking whether Clinton could issue an executive order to tighten restrictions on firearm sales. In the video, Feingold says Democrats should work to win control of the U.S. Senate and pass legislation to regulate gun sales but also points to a position on Clinton's website — that like President Barack Obama she could do an end run around Congress and issue an executive order to expand background checks on gun show sales.

Feingold, a former Democratic U.S. senator, is running against Republican U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson.

"Well, there might be an executive order,” Feingold tells a disguised O'Keefe and other wealthy liberal donors. "...But what we all need is to win the Senate, have (Clinton) there, and then put pressure on the (GOP-controlled) House. And we might even win the House."

Feingold goes on to lay out his own public position on gun control, which includes requiring background checks on gun sales at firearms shows, a step that is currently required only at retail store purchases.

"What I do, is I go with the majority view of the people of the state, which is very common sense. They believe there should be background checks. Overwhelmingly, they believe there should be," Feingold says on the video.

Surveys such as the Marquette University Law School poll have borne that out in recent years.

Republicans, however, say that there is little point to taking such steps since they would increase the cost of gun show sales and not guarantee that a criminal, terrorist or mentally ill person could not obtain a firearm through other means.

State GOP spokesman Pat Garrett said that the recording showed Feingold going beyond his public statements, though he did not state specifically how.

"Add the 2nd Amendment to the large list of issues Senator Feingold can't be trusted on. Feingold claims to support the 2nd Amendment, but when he’s with his California donors he’s sticking up for Hillary Clinton’s ideas," Garrett said.

A spokesman for Feingold dismissed that, saying that Feingold was actually willing to disappoint the donors by telling them he would continue to support the 2nd Amendment.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"It's sad to see Senator Johnson and his allies stoop to the worst elements of dirty politics in an effort to save his political career, but we do appreciate them reminding Wisconsinites of Russ's strong commitment to protecting the 2nd Amendment and common-sense safety measures," Michael Tyler said.

Feingold was attending an Aug. 17 private fundraiser at the home of tech executive Amy Rao and her husband Harry Plant.

The video also shows an August exchange in which a conservative activist attempts to infiltrate the Feingold campaign office in Madison and is discovered. Feingold adviser Josh Orton politely asks the activist to leave the campaign office and she respectfully agrees.

The woman signed up to be a volunteer as Allison Moss, but was let go a day later after the Feingold campaign asked her if she was actually Allison Maass.

Read or Share this story: http://on.jsonl.in/2eb2WFp