Marquette poll: Feingold narrowly leads Johnson
CLOSE

U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson (left), a Republican, narrowly trails Democrat Russ Feingold in the latest Marquette University Law School poll. (Photo: AP, Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)

Democrat Russ Feingold leads by 2 points, but Republican U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson appears to be coming on strong in their rematch race, according to Wednesday's Marquette University Law School Poll.

Feingold was backed by 46% of likely voters, while Johnson was supported by 44%, with Libertarian Phil Anderson at 4%.

In the Sept. 21 Marquette poll, Feingold led Johnson by 5 points among likely voters in a three-way race. The former three-term U.S. senator has led in every Marquette poll since the race began, although this is the narrowest margin.

The poll results add even more drama as the race enters its critical period, with Feingold and Johnson meeting in debates Friday in Green Bay and Tuesday in Milwaukee.

With control for the U.S. Senate up for grabs, the poll results could also move more outside groups to launch ads in the state amid a shrinking map of competitive races nationally. In recent weeks, both the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and National Republican Senatorial Committee canceled ad buys in Wisconsin.

On Wednesday, before the poll was released, Club for Action Growth, a political arm for the conservative Club for Growth, announced a $750,000 television ad push against Feingold.

For months, the race appeared to be static. Republicans have now come home to their candidate, Johnson, backing him with 89% support, while 90% of Democrats who say they'll head to the polls in November support Feingold.

Feingold held an edge among independents with 44% support to 37% for Johnson. The partisan makeup of the survey was 30% Republican, 31% Democratic and 35% independent.

"This looks like a perfectly understandable highly polarized partisan race," poll director Charles Franklin said.

Johnson appears to have made strides in the last few weeks, since his campaign went up with a string of ads. For months, nearly a third of Wisconsinites couldn't give an opinion when asked if they had a favorable or unfavorable view of him. That number shrunk to 20% among likely voters, with 43% saying they had a favorable view of Johnson, with 37% unfavorable.

Feingold was viewed favorably by 45% and unfavorably by 40%, with 15% lacking an opinion.

Johnson improved his standing when it comes to being seen as caring for voters, rising to 45% while Feingold was at 52%. Fifty-two percent of likely voters saw Feingold as honest and 49% saw the same for Johnson.

"As we’ve consistently said, this is going to be a tight race with a real choice for Wisconsinites — between an Oshkosh manufacturer getting things done and a 34-year career politician saying one thing and doing another," said Johnson spokesman, Brian Reisinger. "The home stretch has only just begun, but it’s becoming clear Wisconsinites are getting ready to fire Senator Feingold for good."

"Russ is heading into the home stretch of this close race as the only candidate who fights for Wisconsin’s middle class and working families," said Feingold spokesman, Michael Tyler. "Senator Johnson is trying to hide his record of protecting a system that benefits corporations and multi-millionaires like himself in a desperate attempt to stay in Washington and save his political career. And he’s continuing to cling to Donald Trump, despite the fact that his Republican colleagues are repudiating his disgusting actions."

In other results, Gov. Scott Walker's job approval was at 44%, compared to 51% disapproval among registered voters. President Barack Obama's job approval was at 52%, with 43% disapproval.

The poll of 1,000 registered Wisconsin voters was conducted Thursday through Sunday.The margin of error was plus or minus 3.7% for the full sample. For 878 likely voters, the margin of error was plus or minus 3.9%.

Franklin said Marquette will survey voters again in three weeks, with results out in early November.

Read or Share this story: http://on.jsonl.in/2esgXD5