In op-ed for Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, President Trump touts his tax reform agenda
CLOSE President Donald Trump declared Wednesday that his push to overhaul the nation's tax system would "bring back Main Street by reducing the crushing tax burden". (Aug. 30) AP

President Donald Trump speaks during a rally on Aug. 22, 2017, in Phoenix. (Photo: David Kadlubowski/The Republic)

MILWAUKEE — In a Labor Day op-ed submitted to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, President Trump called on Congress to pass a tax reform plan that is “pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-worker and pro-American."

The president wrote in the Journal Sentinel, part of the USA TODAY Network, that lawmakers of all parties should “unite in the name of common sense” on the issue.

Tax reform is the GOP’s chief legislative mission for the remainder of this year and comes with acute political urgency — shared by Trump and congressional Republicans — because of the party’s failure to pass a health care bill.

The Journal Sentinel op-ed follows the president’s speech on the issue in Missouri last Wednesday, calling for corporate and income tax cuts that he said would spur economic growth.

In Monday’s op-ed, Trump wrote:

“Our plan will dramatically reduce income taxes for American workers and families. It will nearly double the standard deduction to help families get ahead. It will make our complex tax code more simple and fair. It will put money back into the pockets of the people who earned it. And it will bring back American jobs by making our businesses competitive once again.”

Read: President Trump's op-ed piece on tax reform

More: Fact check: In speech on changing tax code, Trump spins the facts

Previously: Trump heads to heartland to talk tax cuts, but won't get into details

The president’s opinion column was submitted specifically to the Journal Sentinel. A White House spokesman explained that by calling Wisconsin "the heartland of America" and saying, "local and regional media tend to spend more time discussing the issues that are of greater concern to American families such as jobs and taxes."

Trump's aides contacted the newspaper over the Labor Day weekend to submit the op-ed. Wisconsin was one of the states that were critical to Trump’s Electoral College victory last fall but where his approval ratings are languishing now as they are nationally.

In an August poll by NBC/Marist, only 34% of registered voters in Wisconsin approved of the job the president is doing.

NEWSLETTERS Get the NewsWatch Delivered newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Todays top news delivered to your inbox Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-844-900-7103. Delivery: Mon - Fri Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for NewsWatch Delivered Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

But the state has received more than its share of attention from Trump. The president held a White House event in July to laud plans for a giant Foxconn plant here and has visited several times since the campaign.

President Donald Trump in the Oval Office of the White House. In the background is a portrait of former President Andrew Jackson, which Trump had installed in the first few days of his administration. (Photo: Alex Brandon, AP)

Trump cited his April 18 trip to Kenosha in the op-ed.

“Earlier this year, I traveled to Wisconsin to sign the Buy American and Hire American executive order. With that action, we sent a powerful signal to the world that we are going to defend our workers, protect our jobs and put America first,” he wrote.

The president, who has not laid out a detailed tax proposal, wrote in the op-ed that “I want to work with Congress on a plan that is pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-worker and pro-American.”

As he did in Missouri last week, Trump framed his tax agenda in populist and nationalist terms, arguing that high business tax rates have been a “disaster for American workers” and saying his administration has adopted an “American” economic model. Trump said his approach would benefit workers and middle-class Americans as well as businesses — a claim Democrats and some economists dispute, saying the benefits would go largely to wealthier Americans.

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer of New York called it a "boon for the rich" under a populist veneer.

Trump wrote in his op-ed:

“It’s time for Congress to provide a level playing field for our workers, to bring American companies back home, to attract new companies and businesses to our country, and to put more money into the pockets of everyday hardworking people.”

Wisconsin’s Paul Ryan, the House Speaker, appeared before the Journal Sentinel editorial board Friday, broadly describing a GOP tax overhaul that includes shrinking the number of tax rates from seven to three, maintaining deductions for charitable donations and mortgage interest, doubling the standard deduction, but potentially doing away with the deduction for state and local taxes.

Like Trump, Ryan also wants to lower the corporate tax rate, though it’s not clear if Republicans in Congress will support lowering it as much as the president would like (from 35% to 15%).

The details remain a political and policy challenge for the party, and GOP lawmakers and the White House are still negotiating the plan that will be presented to Congress.

Follow Craig Gilbert on Twitter: @WisVoter

CLOSE Speaker of the House Paul Ryan visited employees at Intel's Hillsboro, Oregon office on Wednesday, pushing for tax reform, which is high on Republicans' agenda once Congress returns from recess. (Aug. 23) AP

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2eAkEIn