Police visit Holloway properties 863 times
When cops are called to one of Acting Milwaukee County Executive Lee Holloway's rental properties, they don't need help getting directions.

There's a well-worn rut between the cop shop and his apartment complexes.

Records provided by the Milwaukee Police Department show that police have responded to a total of 863 calls - the summary takes up 13 single-spaced pages - to Holloway's rental properties since January 2009. Most of his 15 buildings are clustered near the intersection of W. Atkinson Ave. and W. Capitol Drive on the city's north side.

The source of many of those calls is Holloway's 18-unit apartment complex at 2061 W. Atkinson Ave.

Police have received more than 175 calls for service to that building in the past two years. That's an average of more than seven calls a month.

"Man, that's a lot," said Thelma Murphy, 50, the tenant whose recent complaints about the veteran politician have drawn renewed attention to his real estate business.

Last week, Murphy sued Holloway, alleging she took a bad fall down the stairs in her building in August because he didn't maintain the area.

She also is accusing him of sending an armed security guard to her apartment earlier this month to intimidate her. Prosecutors are considering criminal charges against the guard, Eric Turner, 39. Another Holloway tenant, Laura Dyer, is facing three misdemeanors for busting up Murphy's apartment after Murphy went public with her criticisms of the powerful county official.

As if that weren't enough, city inspectors have identified more than 100 building code violations at Holloway's properties, and he is facing six municipal suits filed by city officials over earlier problems.

Holloway is one of five candidates in the Feb. 15 primary contest for county executive.

Of the hundreds of police calls to his apartment buildings, some were for relatively minor incidents, such as an injury or illness or loud music. A large number involve allegations of battery, domestic violence and restraining order violations. A few had to do with accusations of armed robberies and drug dealing.

In all, police wrote up 75 reports for various incidents at Holloway's real estate holdings since the start of 2009.

The situation got so bad at the one building - 2061 W. Atkinson Ave. - that police and a prosecutor sat down with Holloway's wife, Lynda, in June. Holloway and his wife own and operate most of the buildings under their joint business, the Holloway Living Trust.

"The (District 5 Community Prosecution) Unit met with her because of the volume of calls for police service that fall under the nuisance property ordinance," MPD spokeswoman Anne E. Schwartz said in an e-mail.

The Holloways have since come up with a written plan to try to reduce the number of calls, Schwartz said.

She added: "Nuisance calls have dropped since then, but we kept the file open to monitor because of the large number of calls for police service, even though those calls did not fall under the nuisance ordinance (e.g. domestic violence, people in need of mental observation)."

Lee Holloway did not return calls for comment. But Lynda Holloway said Friday in an interview that she doesn't remember the details of the June meeting or her written plan. But she said things are getting better.

"Oh, most definitely, most definitely," she said.

Records suggest a slight improvement.

Police were called to 2061 W. Atkinson Ave. eight times so far this month - up from five in December and seven in November. Police encourage landlords to keep the number under three a month.

If it exceeds that number, the city can declare a property a chronic nuisance to the community, depending on the types of calls that are made. If a property owner doesn't fix the problem, the city can start billing for police calls, putting the charges on the tax bill.

Last week, Police Chief Edward Flynn bragged about the joint efforts by his department and city inspectors at targeting the five-building Pine Tree Apartments on the city's northwest side. His department had received more than 200 calls for service from the apartment buildings in one year.

"Pine Tree is now boarded up, pending repairs, but no longer a menace and a nuisance to the neighborhood," Flynn said.

Lynda Holloway said her situation is far from reaching that point. She said she has been attending monthly community police meetings to discuss the problems at the rental properties and fulfilling the terms of the agreed-upon plan.

But she did shift the blame to her tenants for some of the many police calls, saying officers even count 911 calls accidentally made by children. She also pointed out that there are other landlords in the same situation.

"This is for a lot of landlords," she said. "This isn't just for me."

Murphy, the tenant suing the Holloways, isn't convinced that things are improving.

On Friday, she said, water was draining into her bedroom and onto her bed and clothes because of snow melting from the apartment building's roof. Lawyers at Legal Action of Wisconsin took pictures documenting the problem.

As for all the visits by police, Murphy has her own way of dealing with them.

"I just stay in the back," she said. "Then I don't hear all that."

Daniel Bice can be contacted by phone at (414) 224-2135 or by e-mail at dbice@journalsentinel.com.