Senate candidate makes his own history
It's one thing to flip-flop on the issues.

But who's ever heard of a candidate rewriting his own company history?

That's exactly what U.S. Senate candidate Ron Johnson did last week.

For nearly nine years, his plastics company has carried this online description of its beginning:

"Founded in 1977, Pacur occupies a facility constructed specifically for sheet extrusion, which provides polyester and polypropylene sheet and rollstock to converters, distributors, and end users," said the website for the Oshkosh-based factory.

But that changed on Wednesday.

Johnson's firm tinkered with its website to move up Pacur's first day of operation by a couple of years.

"Founded in 1979*, Pacur occupies a facility constructed specifically for sheet extrusion, which provides polyester and polypropylene sheet and rollstock to converters, distributors, and end users," the site says now. The footnote points out that Pacur's predecessor, Wisconsin Industrial Shipping Supplies, came into existence in '77 before being renamed and restructured two years later.

Why the change?

Here's one possibility: A Madison TV story said last week that Johnson's plastics factory paid for construction of a railroad line years ago with the help of a federal grant - even though the candidate is a sharp critic of government help for private firms.

Johnson's campaign responded by saying the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development made the grant in March 1979, months before Pacur was even founded.

"Ron Johnson moved to Wisconsin in June of 1979 and started Pacur, which has become a true Wisconsin success story," Johnson's campaign countered. "Nonetheless, these allegations from WKOW are based entirely on dubious premises."

The only problem with Johnson's timeline, however, was Pacur's own website, which put its founding in 1977. It is not unusual for companies to adopt the corporate histories of their predecessors or firms they acquire, especially if it makes them look like they have deeper roots in a community. Wisconsin Industrial Shipping was owned by Johnson's brother-in-law, Pat Curler.

But by Wednesday - voila! - Johnson's company website had been brought in line with statements by Johnson's campaign. The multimillionaire Oshkosh businessman is the overwhelming favorite to win the Sept. 14 Republican primary for the right to challenge U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold, a three-term Democrat.

A company employee said Monday that he was guessing that the change was something ordered up by the Johnson campaign. The staffer said he was unaware of the website edits.

"They're probably doing this to make sure all their T's are crossed and I's are dotted," said Brad Sall, a Pacur employee.

A Johnson campaign spokeswoman, however, disputed any suggestion that her office had a hand in modifying the company history.

"If that is what he said, then he was mistaken," said Sara Sendek, Johnson's press secretary. "It is Pacur's website, and it would have been changed by Pacur."

OK, but why would the company decide - out of the blue - to update and change the company history for the first time in some nine years?

Another company official blames it on the press.

Barry Johnson of Pacur and brother of Ron Johnson said members of the media have been hounding the company with questions about its origins.

"In reviewing our website, we found it did not clearly state the difference between Wisconsin Industrial Shipping Supplies and PACUR, so we made the decision to update the website in order to clarify the history of the two companies," Barry Johnson said in a statement.

And it was just a coincidence that this occurred at about the same time as the Madison TV story.

But the edited company history doesn't resolve all questions.

According to the new and improved information, Pacur's predecessor was founded in 1977.

But state records say it was actually incorporated on July 21, 1978. Its name was officially changed to Pacur one year later.

Perhaps the company history is in for yet another revision.

Daniel Bice can be contacted by phone at (414) 224-2135 or by e-mail at dbice@journalsentinel.com.