One Holloway tenant charged with damaging unit of another
For Lee Holloway, it's proving easier to run Milwaukee County than his north side apartment buildings.

Already facing more than 100 building code violations and six lawsuits filed by the city, the acting county executive now must contend with yet another bizarre but serious incident at one of his units.

County prosecutors have filed criminal charges against one Holloway tenant for going on a rampage and busting up the apartment of another Holloway tenant, Thelma Murphy - just days after Murphy publicly accused Holloway of trying to intimidate her with an armed security guard.

Laura Dyer, 30, is facing three misdemeanor counts of disorderly conduct, criminal trespass to a dwelling and criminal damage to property of less than $2,500. The complaint accuses her of smashing Murphy's door, her glass coffee table and other furniture with a sock containing a hard object, perhaps a billiard ball, on Jan. 19.

No Quarter published Murphy's allegations about Holloway's guard five days earlier, and local TV stations followed up on the story for days afterward.

"The Holloways can't get you out, but I bet you I can," Dyer yelled at Murphy as she tore through the apartment at 2061 W. Atkinson Ave., according to the complaint.

Murphy said this week that she has no idea if Dyer, who rents a unit at another Holloway complex down the block, trashed the apartment because Murphy blew the whistle on Holloway.

The whole incident has Murphy looking for an explanation.

"I'm just glad it's over," she said. "I'm going through so much here."

With all these troubles, isn't it a good time for Murphy to start looking for another place?

Perhaps, she agreed, but there's one hitch.

"Mr. Holloway won't break my lease," said Murphy, whose yearlong lease ends in July. "They just want me to suffer, I guess."

That's interesting, since Holloway's real estate firm, the Holloway Living Trust, has filed suit three times trying to evict Murphy. He told the Journal Sentinel this month that he considered her "a terrible tenant."

Holloway and his wife, Lynda, did not return calls Wednesday. Holloway, who took over as acting county exec last month, is one of five candidates running in the February primary to succeed Scott Walker, the newly elected governor.

Dyer, who was released from custody over the weekend, could not be reached at her two cell numbers.

Holloway has long battled with the city over the condition of his apartments. He and his wife are facing scores and scores of building code violations at their various properties, ranging from defective handrails and leaking pipes to roach infestation and structural defects.

Because of the ongoing problems, city officials recently took Holloway's real estate business to Municipal Court, filing six separate actions over various code violations. The hearings are set for Thursday.

Murphy first tangled with the Holloways, she said, when she injured herself while falling down tattered steps in an unlighted stairway at the apartment last August. Her lawyer sent a note to the landlord asking who insures the rental business and apartments.

Five days later, she said, she received her first eviction notice.

Murphy filed suit over the matter this week.

But things really escalated this month, Murphy said, when Lynda Holloway refused to accept her monthly rent check. Not long after, Murphy said, Eric L. Turner, a security guard who works for Holloway's rental business, showed up with a gun and demanded to be let in. She said he then ransacked the apartment and demanded that she leave.

Turner was arrested but has not been charged. Prosecutors say they will make a charging decision this week.

Turner, 39, called the newspaper last week and disputed various aspects of Murphy's story. He said, for instance, he didn't disturb her apartment or put a gun to her head, as reported by WITI-TV (Channel 6). He declined to say if he had a gun or rifle.

Turner also emphasized that Holloway didn't direct him to go to Murphy's apartment this month. He said he was scouring the apartment building for another former tenant.

"Mr. Holloway had nothing to do with it," said Turner, whose security guard license is expired and his firearms certification not approved. He blamed those problems on others.

On Jan. 19, the criminal complaint against Dyer said, Murphy was at home in her apartment when she heard glass shatter in the hallway. Murphy had kept some decorative bottles outside her apartment door.

When she went to the door, Murphy said, she saw Dyer and another woman. The complaint said Dyer then swung the weighted sock at Murphy, who stepped out of the way, and the sock struck and damaged the wooden door.

Dyer forced her way into the apartment and hit the glass coffee table with the sock, breaking it and several picture frames. Murphy told authorities Dyer continued her rampage through the apartment, the complaint said, until she grabbed a coat rack and threw it across the room, smashing a glass end table.

Police interviewed Murphy and the second woman, Pamela Lewis, who said she came down the hallway to see what was happening, the complaint said. Lewis confirmed that she heard glass breaking in the apartment and Murphy yelling for Dyer to stop what she was doing.

In the pre-booking room at the District 5 police station, the complaint said, Dyer admitted what she had done.

"I did it," she is quoted as saying. "Pam did not do anything. Put it all on me."

Fair enough.

But Dyer hasn't addressed one key question.

"Why did she come over here and do this?" Murphy asked in an interview.

Daniel Bice can be contacted by phone at (414) 224-2135 or by e-mail at dbice@journalsentinel.com.