Gronik: Walker's 'Wisconn Valley' is a con all right
Buy Photo Foxconn Chairman Terry Gou, left, and Gov. Scott Walker speak during the Foxconn announcement at the Milwaukee Art Museum on July 27. Mark Hogan, second from right, secretary and CEO of the Wisconsin Economic Development Corp., and Gou's translator, Louis Woo, look on. (Photo: Mike De Sisti / Milwaukee Journal Sentinel)Buy Photo

For 35 years, I made sure my customers had the very best information so they could make the very best business decisions. This comes second nature to me, and it’s how I helped companies grow and create jobs throughout the world. Wisconsin taxpayers deserve the same thing before betting the future of our state, and $3 billion, on Foxconn.

It’s ridiculous that Republicans are trying to justify this deal by saying, “Democrats don’t like jobs.” I want good-paying, family sustaining jobs for everyone in our state. If Gov. Scott Walker finally got it right with Foxconn, I’d applaud his achievement. But, “Wisconn Valley” is nothing but a con to Wisconsin.

We are guaranteeing Foxconn almost $3 billion but Foxconn is not contractually guaranteeing how many full-time employees it will hire, for how long and at what pay. It’s these details that determine how and if we ever get our money back.

Walker has been telling Wisconsinites that we don’t pay Foxconn until after the company has spent its money first. This is misleading. The way this deal is structured, Wisconsin pays Foxconn up to $1.35 billion for constructing a one-of-a-kind building no matter how many Wisconsinites are actually employed. That’s crazy because Wisconsin gets its money back from Foxconn by taxing the incomes of those employees. Foxconn should be contractually obligated to hire a prescribed number of employees who are making a prescribed wage for a prescribed amount of time. Then, based on these and other revenue projections, we could decide what the Foxconn deal is worth to our state.

Walker bought into Foxconn’s highest job estimates and wants us to believe that only 10% of these workers will live in Illinois even though the building likely will be constructed near the Illinois border. This is risky and defies logic, which is why the Department of Administration, EY, and Baker Tilly all say this deal is highly speculative.

Foxconn also gets up to $1.5 billion to cover 17% of its payroll expense by paying workers $10.88 an hour — that’s just $22,620 per year. These are the kinds of wages that have families throughout our state working two and three jobs just to get by. While this might be Walker's vision for Wisconsin, it’s not mine.

We’re making a 25-year bet on an industry that will continue to automate and that makes devices that are obsolete in a year. I promise that 25 years from now we will not be holding a device to our ears to receive voice and data. And then what? What does Wisconsin do with that massive building if Foxconn walks away? No one knows because it’s not in the contract.

The governor is letting Foxconn sidestep procedures to access water from the Great Lakes basin even though water is gold to Foxconn. Foxconn also gets to sidestep environmental regulations when everyone else has to play by the rules.

And he’s valuing every dollar received from Foxconn as though it were received on day one, but it won’t be in our pockets for 25 years.

Wisconn Valley is a con; it’s an anchor around the necks of taxpayers and further starves our schools, our roads and our economy for decades.

At a minimum, Foxconn should be contractually obligated to hire enough full-time Wisconsin workers at family-sustaining wages so this deal pays us back in less than 15 years. And Foxconn should be required to make available to Wisconsin a cash equivalent mechanism that allows taxpayers to claw-back money paid to Foxconn if it doesn't deliver on its contractual obligations.

It’s clear that Walker and the political class in Madison don’t know what it takes to spur economic growth. But as a progressive businessman, I do. I won’t mortgage our future for the next election.

Andy Gronik, a Milwaukee businessman, is a Democratic candidate for governor.

Read or Share this story: https://jsonl.in/2eHgaj5