Conservatives question Happ's role in dropping sex charges
Consider the race for state attorney general now officially underway.

Jefferson County District Attorney Susan Happ — the Democratic candidate for AG — is coming under fire because her office gave a favorable plea agreement in a child sexual assault case to a defendant with whom Happ and her husband had previously done a real estate deal.

Daniel J. Reynolds, 36, was given a deferred prosecution agreement by Jefferson County prosecutors this year after being charged with felony counts of first-degree and second-degree sexual assaults of a child. Under the deal, Reynolds' offense would be reduced to a disorderly conduct violation if he stays out of trouble for 12 months and completes other requirements.

Records show Happ and her husband sold a piece of property to Reynolds under a $180,000 land contract that was executed in 2009 and paid off three years later.

"This case from her time leading the Jefferson County district attorney's office raises questions about how tough (Happ) and her office are on alleged sex criminals," said Brian Sikma, communications director for Media Trackers, a conservative outfit that alerted No Quarter to the case.

But Joshua M. Lease, campaign manager for Happ, said the criticism is misguided.

"Despite the innuendos from the right-wing organization that dug this up, the record will show this case was handled appropriately," Lease said via email over the weekend. "Anyone who is not hell-bent on assassinating Susan Happ's character will agree if they look at the facts of the case."

Lease said the house had been owned by Happ's husband, Laurence Rupprecht, before the pair married in March 2009. Reynolds and his girlfriend had been renting the property before offering to buy it.

Happ signed the land contract, Lease said, "because she had a marital property interest in any appreciation of the house's value after their marriage."

Furthermore, the decision to file charges in this case, he said, was made by an assistant district attorney, not by Happ.

That same ADA, Monica Hall, agreed to the deferred prosecution deal, which had the support of the victim. Hall received some criticism from conservatives last year for her handling of the drunken-driving case involving former Democratic Party spokesman Graeme Zielinski.

Why not turn over the case to a special prosecutor to avoid any appearance of a conflict of interest?

"There was no need for a special prosecutor because DA Happ had no direct involvement in the case and referred it to an assistant who made the decisions," Lease said.

Johnny Koremenos, campaign manager for Waukesha County District Attorney Brad Schimel — the Republican candidate for AG — accused Happ of "cutting deals for an alleged child rapist who has financial ties to her family."

"The more we know about Susan Happ, the worse it gets for her," Koremenos said Tuesday morning.

Schimel and Happ are vying to replace Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen, who is not running for re-election.

The allegations of sexual assault emerged from Reynolds' acrimonious 2008 divorce. Reynolds was convicted of a misdemeanor in 2010 for violating a restraining order related to the case.

The younger sister of Reynolds' first wife told authorities in 2011 that he had groped and

touched her inappropriately when she was younger, according to a police report.

The criminal complaint charged Reynolds with first-degree sexual assault on allegations of touching and kissing the sister — now 25 — when she was visiting him and her sister while in fifth grade. He was charged with second-degree sexual assault in connection with another incident in which he was accused of making out with the sister, touching her breasts and forcing her to touch his penis.

The complaint said the assaults became "a daily occurrence."

When she was 16, the sister "finally stood up for herself and told the defendant, 'no,'" the complaint said. "The defendant got mad, picked her up and threw her outside."

Daniel Fay, the defense attorney for Reynolds, called it a "piece of (expletive) case."

Prosecutors did what they should have done by filing the charges, Fay said. But the case then got "worse and worse" for the prosecution, Fay said. Among other things, the defense lawyer said, the sister failed to identify such distinguishing characteristics as a tattoo on his client's penis.

As for the Happ-Reynolds property deal, Fay said he laid that out during the court proceedings. "There was nothing hidden about it," Fay said.

Fay said his client was prepared to take the case to trial because he was sure that he would win. But Reynolds eventually agreed to accept the deferred prosecution deal because a trial would have cost the defendant somewhere between $20,000 and $30,000, money he never would have recovered.

Fay said he believes the case was "100% properly handled" by the Jefferson County DA's office.

"Schimel would have made the same decisions as (ADA) Monica Hall," Fay said of the case's resolution. "It was the right decision."

Lease, the spokesman for Happ, said it was Hall's call to go with the favorable plea deal.

"There were a number of factors involved in that decision, including the delayed reporting and the wishes of the victim, who was in full agreement with the disposition of the case," Lease said.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@jrn.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.