Lawmakers want review of system
Cashing in on Kids | Watchdog Update

Cashing in on Kids

Thirty-two Democratic legislators signed a letter Tuesday calling for a comprehensive audit of the state's taxpayer-funded child-care program and asking that it examine every element from initial intake to the final payment.

The senators and representatives called the issue "very pressing" after reports of fraud, deceit and loose oversight of the $340 million program were published in the Journal Sentinel on Sunday, Monday and Tuesday.

"Illegal activity of this kind calls us to swift action to address the problems within the Wisconsin Shares program," they wrote to Sen. Kathleen Vinehout (D-Alma) and Rep. Peter Barca (D-Kenosha), the two co-chairs of the Joint Legislative Audit Committee.

The letter follows a similar one drafted by Sen. Mary Lazich (R-New Berlin) on Monday.

Rep. Tamara Grigsby (D-Milwaukee) issued her own statement in addition to Tuesday's letter, saying it's time to "put an end to the egregious violations of this vital program."

She also stressed the importance of the program to the people who truly rely on it and use it properly.

"We must close loopholes, we must prevent fraud, but we must also ensure that those in need are empowered to care for their families and escape poverty," Grigsby wrote. "Wisconsin Shares was created as a pledge to assist the working families of Wisconsin, and we cannot betray that promise."

Grigsby also told the Journal Sentinel she is working with the Department of Children and Families to come up with some more immediate remedies.

The Journal Sentinel's four-month investigation - which focused on the five counties with the most subsidy cases - found that county workers don't adequately verify parents' employment and sometimes approve funding based on bogus jobs. That enables parents and providers to easily con the system.

Regulators, meanwhile, seldom revoke a provider's license, and no parents have been charged criminally with fraud.

Loose rules allow siblings to stay home and take care of each other's children, netting hundreds of thousands of taxpayer dollars. Other rules have allowed parents to call just about anything work. Payments were provided after moms claimed to have ironed a man's shirts or sold their own amateur artwork.