Unsealed John Doe filings reveal roots of recall probe
For 11/2 years, prosecutors have been running around the state conducting a John Doe investigation into possible campaign law violations during the tumultuous recall elections.

It's been the shadowy probe of the shadowy political groups.

But with court filings unsealed last week, we now know more about the undercover probe than ever before — from why and when it started to the fact that the special prosecutor is preparing a legal challenge to a court order quashing subpoenas.

Here are the facts:

In August 2012, Milwaukee County prosecutors filed a petition seeking to launch the John Doe investigation into the recall races prompted by Gov. Scott Walker's legislation to curb the power of state employee unions.

From the outset, the probe focused on possible "illegal campaign coordination between (name redacted), a campaign committee, and certain special interest groups," according to a filing signed by the five district attorneys in the case.

The campaign committee under the microscope?

Almost certainly it's the Friends of Scott Walker, the governor's campaign committee.

"Good guess," said one source familiar with the probe. "That's it."

Several others, however, were reluctant to identify the governor's campaign, noting the secrecy order remains in place. A John Doe probe is similar to a grand jury in that it allows prosecutors to collect evidence and gather testimony in secret.

Still, only one candidate campaign committee has surfaced so far in the 11/2-year-old investigation.

The Wall Street Journal noted last month that former Court of Appeals Judge Gregory Peterson, who is overseeing the John Doe, quashed a subpoena sent to Friends of Scott Walker, as well as ones delivered to such conservative groups as Wisconsin Club for Growth and Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce.

Plus, Walker's campaign disclosed Friday that it had paid $86,000 to the Mequon law firm run by former U.S. Attorney Steven Biskupic and ex-federal prosecutor Michelle Jacobs in the second half of last year.

Overall, the case targets five suspects in five counties in southern Wisconsin. Some of them are tax-exempt "social welfare" nonprofits that increasingly have become banks for anonymous political donations.

Wisconsin Club for Growth has identified itself as one of the targets. Republican political strategist R.J. Johnson is a consultant both for Walker's campaign and Wisconsin Club for Growth.

The new case apparently grew out of an earlier John Doe investigation into Walker's time as Milwaukee County executive. So says a recently unsealed court filing written by Madison defense lawyer Dean Strang:

"In the rough equivalent of secretive prosecutorial chain-smoking, then, the Milwaukee County District Attorney's office seems to have lit its next cigarette with the still-glowing butt of its last one."

Milwaukee County prosecutors closed the first John Doe probe without bringing charges against anyone in Walker's current administration. Among those convicted were three former Walker aides, an appointee and a major campaign donor.

Most of the records from the first John Doe — which closed in March 2013 — remain under seal.

Only four months into the new investigation, prosecutors realized the case was leading them all around southern Wisconsin.

On Jan. 18, 2013, Chisholm and his top deputy, Kent Lovern, sat down with Attorney General J.B. Van Hollen and two of his aides — Deputy Attorney General Kevin St. John and Division of Criminal Investigation Administrator David Matthews — to ask for help.

After weighing his options for more than four months, Van Hollen ultimately decided to take a pass, citing a possible conflict of interest and other factors.

"I am concerned about the perception that my office cannot act impartially ... particularly if the investigation does not result in enforcement action," Van Hollen wrote to Chisholm on May 31.

It's anybody's guess as to why the GOP attorney general chose to sit on the sidelines.

"Maybe he thought it was a bad idea," said Rick Esenberg, a lawyer who heads the conservative Wisconsin Institute for Law & Liberty.

Had he joined in the case, Van Hollen would have come under fire from Democrats if he didn't bring charges against Walker or his campaign, said another attorney who asked to remain anonymous.

But the state's top cop would have drawn the ire of Republicans had he found the governor's campaign or the conservative groups crossed the line.

"It's a no-win situation for the guy," said the attorney who has links to the John Doe probe.

Van Hollen, who is not running for re-election, had some options if he wanted to lend a helping hand to the investigation.

It's not unusual for agencies to create a firewall to cordon off those with conflicts. This was done at the state Department of Justice during the caucus scandal more than a decade ago. Or his agency could have provided some investigators to assist with the case.

Neither happened.

"With something that could become as messy as this, it would be safer to find a reason to recuse yourself and your office," said former Attorney General Peg Lautenschlager, a Democrat.

With the AG out of the picture, prosecutors were left last summer with the unwieldy task of running simultaneous John Doe investigations in Columbia, Dane, Dodge, Iowa and Milwaukee counties.

The solution: One judge was appointed by Director of State Courts John Voelker to oversee all five cases. In late August, the John Doe judge appointed ex-federal prosecutor Francis Schmitz to lead the investigation.

The five district attorneys — three Democrats and two Republicans — saw a political advantage in having Schmitz as lead litigator.

"Democratic prosecutors will be painted as conducting a partisan witch hunt and Republican prosecutors will be accused of 'pulling punches,'" wrote the five DAs in August. "An independent Special prosecutor having no partisan affiliation addresses the legitimate concerns about the appearance of impropriety."

Or so they thought.

Since Schmitz and his team began conducting raids and executing search warrants in the early fall, conservative groups targeted by the investigation and their allies have mounted an aggressive defense.

Eric O'Keefe of Wisconsin Club for Growth has openly defied the secrecy order, going public with the fact that he has been subpoenaed. His lawyer, David Rivkin, has said he will file a federal lawsuit if prosecutors don't close the probe and publicly exonerate his client.

In November, three unnamed targets asked the Wisconsin Court of Appeals to halt the investigation and remove the special prosecutor and judge. The motions failed, but lawyers for the three individuals may appeal to the state Supreme Court, which is controlled by a conservative bloc.

The targets were able to convince Peterson, the John Doe judge, to quash the latest batch of subpoenas.

Newly released records show Peterson, the John Doe judge, agreed in mid-December to take a look at the supporting evidence. On Jan. 10, Peterson delivered a stunning blow to prosecutors by finding that they had failed to demonstrate "probable cause that the moving parties committed any violations of the campaign finance laws."

Sources indicate that Schmitz is expected to head back to court to challenge Peterson's decision.

Even with the appointment of the special prosecutor, much of the conservative criticism continues to focus on Chisholm, a Democrat whose office launched the probe.

Lautenschlager, the former Democratic attorney general, said Chisholm shouldn't feel the pressure to bring charges against anyone. She said she already thinks he has shown a "good amount of courage" to face the wrath of Walker supporters.

There's plenty of that.

Esenberg, the conservative attorney, said the veteran Milwaukee prosecutor can forget about running for statewide office if he fails to deliver in this John Doe.

"He's going to be anathema to a lot of people," Esenberg said.

Isn't he already to many on the right?

"Probably," he said.

Patrick Marley of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@journalsentinel.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.