Healthy Youth Survey The Healthy Youth Survey (HYS) is a statewide, collaborative effort of OSPI, the Department of Health, the Department of Social and Health Service's Division of Behavioral and Health and Recovery, Family Policy Council, Department of Commerce, and Liquor Control Board. The survey is conducted every two years. In the fall of 2018, over 230,000 students from all 39 counties took part in the survey. Results are located on the Healthy Youth Survey website. 2018 Healthy Youth Survey Substance Use Press Release

Data Briefs: Substance Abuse Tobacco and Vaping Marijuana Alcohol Prescription Drugs and Opiates

Accessing your Data

Please visit the AskHYS.net website for guidance on how to access your data. What it measures

The survey measures health risk behaviors that contribute to morbidity, mortality, and social problems among youth in Washington state. These behaviors include alcohol, tobacco, and other drug use, behaviors that result in unintentional and intentional injuries (e.g., violence), dietary behaviors, physical activity, and related risk and protective factors. How it informs

The survey results are an important source of needs-assessment data for school districts, community-based organizations, local health and human service agencies, and state agencies. The results are used to monitor the health status of adolescents and track progress on state and federal education and health-related goals. HYS results help schools make evidence-based decisions that lead not only to positive academic outcomes, but also provides information that allows schools to identify conditions that impact student learning and the overall school climate. Schools in Washington state with students in grades 6, 8, 10, and/or 12 are eligible to participate. The survey takes only one class period to administer and student participation is completely voluntary and anonymous. Participation is free. How you can participate

If you have questions about registering for the 2018 Healthy Youth Survey, please email, SurveyAdmin@AskHYS.net If participating, principals must agree to follow the survey administration procedures: Administer the survey during the allocated administration time, which is October 8-19th.

Send out an informational survey brochure to parents provided in the materials sent to schools prior to the survey administration.

Post information about the survey on the school website.

Inform students of the survey.

Place a copy of the survey in the school office for parent review.

Provide an alternative activity for those students that choose not to participate in the survey.

Correctional facilities are not eligible to participate based on Human Research Review rules. Download recruitment materials such as answers to frequently asked questions, an overview of each type of behavior covered by the survey and a statement of rationale for the inclusion of these items, details about using the survey data, and regional recruitment contacts. Questions about accessing your data and general questions about HYS

Emily Maughan (OSPI)

(360) 725-6030 or Emily.Maughan@k12.wa.us Questions about HYS Administration and AskHYS.net website

Susan Richardson (Looking Glass Analytics)

susan@lgan.com