The Kindergarten To College Program
Welcome to Kindergarten to College. It'll be great going to school with you.

Why did we create this program? Because a college savings plan can make a huge difference. College grads tend to get better jobs, avoid layoffs, and earn more money over their careers. College doesn't just change lives, it transforms communities.

The City and County of San Francisco Kindergarten to College program wants to give your kindergartner a college savings account containing its first $50 deposit. If you and your child add to it regularly, it can become a 12-year head start towards college tuition.

Beginning Fall 2012, every kindergartener entering an SFUSD elementary school is eligible to participate.

If your kindergartner is in a participating school, your child has already been given a college savings account at Citibank. To get you started, the City and County of San Francisco has made the first $50 deposit. Account cards will be mailed to you in mid-October. If you did not receive your account information, email info@k2csf.org, call 3-1-1 (or 415-701-2311 if outside of SF).

Account Cards and numbers are mailed to newly participating families in the Fall. Contributions can be any size. You can contribute up to $2,500 per year. Deposits into this account can only be used for qualified educational expenses. See program rules for more details. There are three ways to make contributions: in person, by mail, or online. To make them in person, bring your deposit and Account Card to any Citibank location. To find one near you, call 3-1-1 or visit www.citibank.com.

To deposit by mail, you can send checks or money orders to:

Citibank PG&E Plaza

Attn: Kindergarten to College Account

245 Market Street, San Francisco, CA 94105 Please write your child's name and account number on your check or money order .

. To make online electronic payments from your bank, you'll need your child's K2C account number and the San Francisco Citibank ABA routing number: 321171184. Remember birthdays and special occasions are a great time to ask family and friends to make gift contributions toward your child's future. They can use any of the above payment methods. Just let them know your child's K2C account number.

You can boost your savings through matching funds and incentives.

However, you MUST turn in a K2C consent form to receive additional incentives from K2C. MATCHING FUNDS. We'll match every dollar you save up to the first $100 this year.

FREE AND REDUCED LUNCH PROGRAM INCENTIVE. If your child is enrolled in the Free and Reduced lunch program, you'll earn a $50 incentive.

SAVE STEADY BONUS. Earn an additional $100 when you sign up for auto-deposit for a minimum of $10 every month for six months!

MORE TO COME. Look for other opportunities throughout the year.

The consent form gives your school permission to share information about your child to qualify for additional incentives and to administer the program through the San Francisco Treasurer's Office. This form is 100% confidential. You won't be asked for your Social Security number, and only our partners will be given access to your information. You can download a form here. (Other languages are available here) Please give it to your school secretary or mail directly to:

San Francisco Unified School District (SFUSD)

Attn: K2C Program

555 Franklin Street, 3rd Floor

San Francisco, CA 94102.

To view your account activity, please visit https://mysavingsaccount.com/k2c and create a user name and password using the account number and activation code mailed to you. Once the activation code is used to set up a user name and password, the activation code expires. Please write down your security questions and keep your user name and password in a safe place.

No. Money saved in a K2C account can only be used for post-secondary education after high school graduation. This includes tuition for college, community college, or other kinds of training programs. It can also be used for books and other education-related expenses. You can learn more in the K2C program rules