U.S. Students Receive Average Scores on International PISA Assessments
Results of the 2012 PISA (Program for International Assessment) assessments, announced on December 3, show 15-year-olds in the US. continuing to perform somewhat below average in mathematics literacy and fairly close to the international average in science and reading literacy.

PISA is an assessment that looks at Mathematics, Science and Reading Literacy in an International context. Covering 15-year-olds from public and private schools in over 60 nations and world economies, it is one of the largest educational studies in existence. It also looks at additional skills that have cross-curricular implications, such as problem solving.

PISA is coordinated in the United States by NCES (National Center for Educational Statistics) and is overseen by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). Released for the first time in the year 2000, this report has been released every three years since. Math, Reading and Science Literacy results for the 2012 assessment were released in December of 2013.

For each participating country, a minimum of 4,500 students from at least 150 schools was needed. In the U.S. a total 6,111 students from 162 schools participated in the 2012 assessment. In addition to being incorporated into the U.S. average, results were tabulated separately for three states: Massachusetts, Connecticut and Florida.

Summary and Results Over Time

Eighteen educational systems had higher average scores than the U.S. in all three subject areas. The 18 are: Australia, Canada, Chinese Taipei, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Hong Kong-China, Ireland, Japan, Liechtenstein, Macao-China, Netherlands, New Zealand, Poland, Republic of Korea, Shanghai-China, Singapore, and Switzerland.

United States 15-year-old students remained below the OECD average score in mathematics literacy and fairly close to the calculated international average in science and reading literacy. Massachusetts scores were above average in all three subjects, with only three education systems outperforming MA students in reading literacy. Connecticut had above average scores in reading and science literacy and nearly met the OECD average in mathematics literacy. In Florida, scores were below average in mathematics literacy and science literacy, and fairly close to the international average in reading literacy.

In comparison to previous years’ assessments, there was no measurable difference in U.S. PISA 2012 averages. Here is a closer look at the results in each of the three subject areas:

Mathematics Literacy

In the U.S., 9% of students scored at Level 5 proficiency or above, below the international average of 15%.

In the U.S., 26 % of U.S. students scored below Level 2 which is considered baseline. The OECD average was 23%. The U.S. was higher than 29 educational systems, lower than 26 educational systems and similar to 9 educational systems.

The average U.S. score for Mathematics Literacy overall was 481, placing it below the OECD average of 494 and in 28th place out of 65 education systems tested in this subject area.

In the three U.S. states tested, Massachusetts had the highest scores (with 19 percent scoring at level 5 or above), followed by Connecticut (16 percent) and Florida (6 percent).

Science Literacy

In the U.S., 7% of U.S. students scored at Level 5 proficiency or above, as compared with the OECD average of 8%. The U.S. was 18th out of 65 educational systems tested in the subject area.

The percentage of U.S. students scoring below baseline in Science literacy matched the international average: 18%. The U.S. was 30th out of 65 educational systems tested.

The average U.S. score overall for Science Literacy was 497. The international average was 501. Both Massachusetts (527) and Connecticut (521) tested above average with Florida (485) scoring slightly below both the U.S. and international averages.

Reading Literacy

The percentage of U.S students who scored at Level 5 proficiency or above was 8% -- matching the OECD average.

In the U.S., 17% of U.S. students scored below baseline in Reading Literacy. The average percent of students scoring below baseline internationally was 18%.

The average U.S. score overall for Reading Literacy was 498, slightly above the OECD average of 496 for all education systems.

In the U.S. states tested, Massachusetts averaged 527, Connecticut 521, and Florida 492.

U.S. Computer-Based Assessments

In addition to the standard assessments, computerized Mathematics and Reading assessments were delivered to 32 educational systems.

On the Computerized Math assessments, the U.S. scored 498. The OECD average score was 497 which is not statistically different from the U.S. score. The U.S. score was 13th out of 32 educational systems assessed.

On the Computerized Reading assessments, the U.S. scored 511. This was higher than the OECD average score of 497. The U.S. score was 8th out of 32 educational systems assessed.