School choice comes to a head

On Friday, the Nevada Supreme Court heard oral arguments in the case against the state’s sweeping education savings account program.

It’s been a long time coming for critics and supporters, in addition to the nearly 8,000 applicants who have waited for months as lawyers duked it out.

Both sides turned out en masse for Friday’s hearing, with chants of “we want choice!” and “public money, public schools” ringing outside the Regional Justice Center in downtown Las Vegas.

The program is controversial because it allows qualified families to use state education funds — around $5,100 per student — to pay for private school or tutoring. Some say it spurs public schools to perform better, others that it starves an already ailing public education system.

Whatever the case may be, the ultimate decision now lies in the hands of Nevada’s seven Supreme Court justices. Here are a few key points about what’s at stake:

Whatever ends up happening, the outcome will be felt throughout the country

The Nevada ESA program is the most comprehensive of its kind ever enacted, far surpassing similar programs in other states. That’s why Friday’s hearing attracted hundreds of demonstrators and a good amount of media attention. Nevada has seen a flurry of activity from national school-choice groups, including the Friedman Foundation for Educational Choice. On the other side, civil rights groups such as the American Civil Liberties Union, Americans United for the Separation of Church and State and the Education Law Center have rallied against the program. What happens to education savings accounts in Nevada could set the precedent elsewhere.

There are actually two lawsuits in play

The ESA program has been the subject of two lawsuits, one from the Nevada ACLU and another from a group of parents. The ACLU’s lawsuit alleged that the program violated the state constitution’s ban on public money being used for religious purposes (some families will use ESA to pay for private religious schools), while the parents say the program unconstitutionally diverts money away from public schools.

The ACLU’s lawsuit was thrown out in May by a District Court judge, but the group appealed to the Supreme Court. The parents’ lawsuit was upheld in January, but the state appealed to the Supreme Court as well. The court on Friday heard arguments in both cases.

If the court upholds the program, it could be up and running as soon as November

According to the Nevada Treasurer’s Office, ESA accounts could be reactivated as early as this fall if the Supreme Court were to uphold the program. For that to happen, however, the court would have to rule relatively soon, around the beginning of August. The program has been in limbo since an injunction was placed on it by District Judge James Wilson in January. Before that, the Treasurer’s Office was in the middle of processing thousands of applications with an eye toward disbursing the first funds in February.

Defending the case has cost Nevada about $420,000

With the ESA program’s status as the darling of Gov. Brian Sandoval and the Republican-controlled Legislature, the state retained the services of Bancroft PLLC, a vaunted Washington, D.C., firm that has taken on a number of conservative causes such as defending the Defense of Marriage Act and challenging the Affordable Care Act. Attorney General Adam Laxalt’s office said Bancroft gave the state a reduced fee, and that the full cost would have been around $800,000.

A decision could come soon

With Nevada Supreme Court Justice Nancy Saitta stepping down from the bench in a little more than a week, the court could choose to issue a ruling as early as next week. Even if the court decides not to uphold the program, a quick ruling would at least put the issue to bed for the thousands of applicants who have been in limbo.

Many families have been forced to put off plans to move their children out of public school due to the uncertainty about how the courts would rule.