Press Release: David Perdue Flip-Flops Again, Refuses to Release Tax Returns
ALPHARETTA, GA - At various times during this campaign, David Perdue has flip-flopped on Common Core, repealing Dodd-Frank, nationalized health care, and protecting the 2nd Amendment. Yesterday, David added another item to this ever-growing list by refusing to release his tax returns.

When announcing his candidacy in 2013, David was asked how much of his tax returns he would release and said:

“Everything. I have no problem in that. I’m not the wealthiest guy, probably even in this race, but I’m going to tell you that I want to get there and make a difference. And if that’s what it takes, I’m going to be totally transparent.” (WSB)

Nine months later, David has reversed course and now is not willing to be “totally transparent” as he said he would be.

“We applaud Jack Kingston and Phil Gingrey for following Karen’s lead and agreeing to promote government transparency by releasing the last five years of their tax returns,” said campaign manager Corry Bliss. “David fails to realize that this is an election, not an auction, and that he has an obligation to the voters of Georgia to be transparent and forthcoming about the millions of dollars he is spending to try to buy this election. One can only assume that David has a lot to hide since he has changed his mind on releasing his taxes.”

Seemingly every day we’re learning something new about David Perdue. On Friday, MSNBC reported that while at Haggar Clothing Co., David oversaw thousands of lay-offs and outsourcing of jobs to Mexico in the 1990s. Then on Saturday, The Hill reported that David sat on the board of Alliant Energy while it accepted $3.4 million in stimulus dollars. The same company has paid David over $1 million in director fees.

All of this leads to one simple question, who is the real David Perdue?

“As we learn more about the real David Perdue, it is clear there is not enough money in the world to cover up his record of outsourcing thousands of jobs at Haggar and accepting millions in stimulus money at Alliant Energy,” Bliss said. “How can we trust David to keep his promises in office if he can’t keep them now?”

###