Radio Ad: Tillis May Have Values, But They’re Not North Carolina’s - Kay Hagan for U.S. Senate
TILLIS IS TRYING TO HAVE IT BOTH WAYS ON HEALTH CARE – BUT WE KNOW HE WOULD TAKE US BACK TO A TIME WHEN INSURANCE COMPANIES COLD DENY COVERAGE AND CHARGE WOMEN AND SENIORS MORE FOR CARE

Charlotte Observer Editorial: If The Legislature Had Agreed To Operate A State-Based Exchange, North Carolina Would Have Been Able To Create More Competition Among Insurance Plans, Which “Could Have Resulted In Better Pricing And Insurance Choices.” “But Wayne Goodwin knows this: He would be more confident about the Affordable Care Act in North Carolina had state lawmakers not refused this year to participate in a state-based insurance exchange, as Obamacare encouraged states to do. […] ‘I would feel a lot better today if we had a state-based exchange,’ Goodwin told the editorial board Friday. So might North Carolinians who discover that they’re paying more on average for insurance than residents of most states. N.C. families of four with incomes of $50,000 will pay $880 a month for the mid-range federal plan if they don’t qualify for subsidies. That’s $106 more than the national average. Participating in a state-based exchange would have allowed the state to create more opportunities for competition, as the N.C. Rate Bureau does for auto insurance companies. ‘With a state-based exchange, we would’ve been in control over discussions that would’ve incentivized companies to participate,’ Goodwin said. More competition, of course, could have resulted in better pricing and insurance choices, as it has with the 166 companies participating in auto insurance in the state. With Obamacare, only two companies are participating in the N.C. exchange, leaving North Carolinians with an average of 22 qualified health care plans to choose from, less than half the national average.” [Editorial, Charlotte Observer, 9/28/13]

Raleigh News & Observer Editorial Board Editor Ned Barnett: Because The Federal Government Was Forced To Run North Carolina’s Exchange, They Add 3.5 Percent To Premiums To Cover The Cost. “North Carolinians who buy insurance through the exchange will pay more because of the Republicans’ temper tantrum. The extra cost is a mix of hard and soft numbers. One hard number is 3.5 percent. That’s the percentage the federal government adds to premiums to cover its cost for running an exchange. If North Carolina had run its own, the cost could have been lower and broadly dispersed across the state’s tax base – an allocation from the general fund, for instance – with little or no effect on premiums.” [Editorial page editor Ned Barnett, Raleigh News & Observer, 10/5/13 ]

Raleigh News & Observer Editorial Board Editor Ned Barnett: If North Carolina Had Run Its Own Exchange, “The State Likely Would Have Produced Plans Better Tailored To The State’s Needs And With More Coverage Per Premium Dollar.” “[North Carolina Insurance Commissioner Wayne] Goodwin, a Democrat and a former state legislator, was eager to set up an exchange that could attract more insurance companies and offer advice on the new health care law. Involvement by the state likely would have produced plans better tailored to the state’s needs and with more coverage per premium dollar. As it was, a basic compliance review of plans being offered by Blue Cross and Blue Shield found an error in the numbers, faulty assumptions and a benefit not required under the new law. As a result, Blue Cross policies went onto the exchange at rates 10 percent lower than originally proposed.” [Editorial page editor Ned Barnett, Raleigh News & Observer, 10/5/13 ]

North Carolina Insurance Commissioner Wayne Goodwin Said He Would Be More Confident About The Implementation Of Obamacare If The Legislature Had Agreed To A State-Based Exchange Rather Than Letting The Federal Government Create It. “There will be problems. There may be a lot of them. There may not. Beginning this week, Americans will start signing up for health insurance at exchanges across the country – the most sizable federal endeavor since Social Security. No one is sure what the impact of Obamacare will be. Not even the insurance commissioner of North Carolina. But Wayne Goodwin knows this: He would be more confident about the Affordable Care Act in North Carolina had state lawmakers not refused this year to participate in a state-based insurance exchange, as Obamacare encouraged states to do. Instead, the Republican-led legislature passed Senate Bill 4, which opted North Carolina out of running a state-based exchange. As a result, North Carolinians who enroll beginning Tuesday will do so through an N.C. exchange run by the federal government, and that will affect competition, pricing and the quality of information citizens get about their health care options. ‘I would feel a lot better today if we had a state-based exchange,’ Goodwin told the editorial board Friday.” [Editorial, Charlotte Observer, 9/28/13]

Raleigh News & Observer Editorial: “States Such As North Carolina That Rejected A State-Run Exchange Have To Shoulder At Least Some Of The Blame For The Rollout Problems. The State Would Have Gotten Millions Of Dollars To Help It With The Exchange And Could Have Shaped It To Suit This State.” [Editorial, Raleigh News & Observer, 10/22/13 ]

Charlotte Observer Editorial: The Legislature Should “Do What’s Best For North Carolinians” And Revisit Operating A State-Based Exchange. “That not stopping anytime soon, as Republicans in Washington continue to stoke fears about the law. Perhaps, as millions of Americans begin to realize Obamacare’s core benefits, Republicans will bow to the law’s inevitability and fix its problems, not kill it. Closer to home, that will mean revisiting the issue of who should run the state’s insurance exchange. Maybe then, N.C. Republicans will finally decide to do what’s best for North Carolinians.” [Editorial, Charlotte Observer, 9/28/13]

Raleigh News & Observer Editorial Board Editor Ned Barnett: “North Carolinians Who Buy Insurance Through The Exchange Will Pay More Because Of The Republicans’ Temper Tantrum” In Refusing To Operate A State-Based Exchange And Expand Medicaid. “The General Assembly, in a fit of pique against the Affordable Care Act lawmakers deride as “Obamacare,” barred the state from any participation in the rollout of the historic effort to insure the nation’s 48 million uninsured. The Republican-led legislature and Republican Gov. Pat McCrory rejected billions of dollars in federal aid to expand Medicaid to about 500,000 low-income state residents. They also refused to set up a state-run marketplace to sell insurance to individuals. North Carolina left that job to the federal government. […] North Carolinians who buy insurance through the exchange will pay more because of the Republicans’ temper tantrum.” [Editorial page editor Ned Barnett, Raleigh News & Observer, 10/5/13 ]

Raleigh News & Observer Editorial: The North Carolina Legislature Figured By “Shirking Their Duty” And Refusing To Create A State Exchange, They Could “Score Some Political Points.” “But in most states in the South (read that: where the most vitriolic opponents of President Obama are) Republican governors and legislatures surrendered control of the exchanges through which uninsured people must buy insurance. […] Doubtless these Republicans also rubbed their hands together and figured that if there were problems with the exchanges, people would turn against the health care program and against the president who instigated it. In other words, by shirking their duty, as the GOP leadership in North Carolina did, they can score some political points. What a dreadful line of reasoning.” [Editorial, Raleigh News & Observer, 10/22/13 ]

Tillis “Reversed Course, Dropping The [State Exchange] Legislation And Letting The State Default To A Federal Exchange To Avoid The Stigma Of The Health Care Law.” In February 2014, the Raleigh News & Observer reported: “The measure was first pitched as a way to give the state more control and push back against Washington. Tillis and other leading Republicans later reversed course, dropping the legislation and letting the state default to a federal exchange to avoid the stigma of the health care law.” [Raleigh News & Observer, 2/26/14]

Under Health Care Reform, Insurance Companies Cannot Charge Women More Than Men. “So, there is evidence that some women buying health insurance in the individual market, a key target of Obamacare, are charged 50 percent more than men for the same coverage. Such gender rating is made illegal under the health reform law.” [PolitiFact, 10/6/13 ]

Under Health Care Reform, Those With Pre-Existing Conditions Will No Longer Be Denied Health Insurance. “Today, insurers can no longer deny coverage to children because of a pre-existing condition, like asthma or diabetes, under the health care law. And beginning in 2014, health insurers will no longer be able to charge more or deny coverage to anyone because of a pre-existing condition.” [HHS, North Carolina, accessed 8/15/13 ]

Tillis’ Position On The ACA On His Website: A “Full Repeal” Of The Affordable Care Act. According to Thom Tillis’ campaign website: “Thom will fight in the Senate for full repeal of ObamaCare, for defunding ObamaCare, and he will work to implement private sector solutions to reduce healthcare costs for North Carolinians.” [ThomTillis.com, accessed 10/15/13 ]

WE KNOW WHERE TILLIS REALLY STANDS ON HEALTH CARE: FULLY REPEALING THE LAW, TAKING US BACK TO WHEN INSURANCE COMPANIES COULD DENY COVERAGE FOR PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS, CHARGE WOMEN MORE THAN MEN, AND SENIORS PAID MORE…

Washington Post ’s Greg Sargent: Tillis “Has Been Struggling To Explain His Stance On Obamacare” Since “The Goals Of Obamacare Remain Popular, But Isn’t Willing To Embrace Any Alternatives” Besides Repeal. “The other day I noted that Thom Tillis, the expected GOP candidate for Senate in North Carolina, has been struggling to explain his stance on Obamacare — he knows repeal is a non-starter because the goals of Obamacare remain popular, but isn’t willing to embrace any alternatives. Tillis’s equivocations — which capture the problems with the GOP repeal stance in general — have taken a pounding in the North Carolina press. Now North Carolina Dems have unearthed a radio interview Tillis gave which again illuminates the problem here. It contains this wonderful quote about the ACA: ‘It’s a great idea that can’t be paid for.’” [Washington Post, Plum Line, 3/4/14]

Washington Post ’s Greg Sargent: Tillis’ “Great Idea” Comment Shows That “Republicans Want Credit For Embracing The Good Stuff In Obamacare” While Still Bashing The Law. In March 2014, Greg Sargent wrote in the Washington Post: “Tillis’ quote is particularly noteworthy, though. Republicans want credit for embracing the good stuff in Obamacare (since repeal is unpopular and risks signaling to swing voters that Republicans just want to go back to the old system) while also bashing the overall law as #Obummer Big Gummint Spending run amok, which they are claiming as their mandate in the midterms, which tend to be about the president in office.” [Washington Post, Plum Line, 3/4/14]

Tillis “Is Getting Squeezed From Both Sides” On Health Care. In February 2014, the Raleigh News & Observer reported: “As conservatives hammer Democratic U.S. Sen. Kay Hagan on the failures of the federal health care law, her chief Republican rival is getting squeezed from both sides of the political spectrum on the issue.” [Raleigh News & Observer, 2/26/14]

78% Of GOP Primary Voters Disagreed With Tillis’ Sentiment That “Obamacare Is A Great Idea.” In March 2014, PPP conducted a poll in North Carolina and found: “Even more problematic for Tillis could be his statement expressed last week that ‘Obamacare is a great idea that can’t be paid for.’ Only 15% of primary agree with Tillis’ sentiment that ‘Obamacare is a great idea,’ compared to 78% who say they disagree with it.” [Public Policy Polling, 3/11/14]

Brannon Blasted Tillis For Supporting A State Exchange In North Carolina, And Saying The Affordable Care Act Was A Great Idea. In an April 2014 appearance on the Glenn Beck radio program, Brannon said, “Yeah and that’s why I’m optimistic because the percentage on top is so small in the establishment, they’re playing with smoke and mirrors. It’s us. We the people are back. And it’s an exciting time. So, back to Mr. Tillis, he said Obamacare’s a great idea we just can’t afford it. He actually started getting the state exchanges in the House but got stopped in the Senate. He said, it’s not if we have Obamacare it’s how are we going to implement it.” [Brannon On The Glenn Beck Show, 4/10/14]

FreedomWorks: Tillis “ Helped Bring A Bill To The Floor That Would’ve Established An Obamacare Exchange In North Carolina” But “Now He’s Running For Senate As An Anti-Obamacare Candidate.” “As Speaker of the House in the State House, Thom Tillis helped bring a bill to the floor that would’ve established an ObamaCare exchange in North Carolina! And now he’s running for Senate as an anti-ObamaCare candidate. Talk about Turncoat Tillis. While principled Conservatives were hard at work fighting Obama’s job-killing health care takeover, Thom Tillis was working with Democrats to implement the law. It’s time we stop sending spineless, fake Conservatives to Washington. Sign the petition and tell RINO Thom Tillis that North Carolina doesn’t need a U.S. Senator who supports the ObamaCare exchanges!” [FreedomWorks, accessed 2/14/14 ] https:// turncoattillis.act. freedomworks.org/?source= FWFBtillis – primary_form

Tillis Brought A Bill To The Floor That Would Have Created A State Health Exchange Under The Affordable Care Act. In February 2014, the Daily Caller reported: “North Carolina Republican Senate hopeful Thom Tillis has been a very vocal critic of Obamacare, but when he was speaker of the state House, he helped bring a bill to the floor that would have created a state health care exchange. […] House Bill 115 was introduced in the state House in February of 2011 and was passed in May. It later died in the Senate. The bill would have created the North Carolina Health Benefit Exchange Authority, a state-based healthcare exchange where North Carolinians could purchase insurance, instead of having to use the federal website.” [Daily Caller, 2/12/14; Vote 600, (Tillis- NV), HB 115, 5/25/11 ]

VO: “Values should still matter. Two years ago, news broke that two of Thom Tillis’ top staffers were having extramarital affairs with Raleigh lobbyists.”VO: “Instead of firing them, Tillis arranged for golden parachutes – paid for by taxpayers – worth over nineteen thousand dollars. Our tax dollars, bailing out the indiscretions of Thom Tillis’ staff.”VO: “Those may be values, but they’re not North Carolina’s.” HAGAN: “I’m Kay Hagan, candidate for US Senate, and I approve this message.” VO: “Paid for by Hagan for US Senate, Inc.”