Kelly for New Hampshire
MANCHESTER – As she faces mounting criticism for her continued absences from the state, Governor Hassan claimed in an interview yesterday with WKXL that her “first priority is always” her job as governor. WMUR reported on Monday that although Hassan pledged in October to focus “each and every day” on her job as governor, she was out of state on 30 days in February, March, and April. Hassan was also out of the state last week for fundraisers in New York City and Chicago.

WKXL, 5/17/16: HASSAN: “My first priority is always my job as governor and it will be until my last minute in office… I will continue to focus on my job as governor…”

“If Governor Hassan’s first priority is ‘always’ her job as governor, she wouldn’t have been out of state on 30 days over the last three months,” said spokeswoman Liz Johnson. “With serious questions being raised about Hassan’s management of the state, the people of New Hampshire deserve a full-time governor who truly puts their interests first.”

BACKGROUND

WMUR, 5/16/16: “From February through April, Hassan has been out of state for similar events on 30 days… Under the state constitution, Morse is acting governor when Hassan is gone”

But some are rankled because from February through April, Hassan has been out of state for similar events on 30 days. Her office confirmed the travel. “I think there’s been far too many this session,” Senate President Chuck Morse said. “Obviously, there’s problems, and they’re not getting solved.” Under the state constitution, Morse is acting governor when Hassan is gone, and he said that he is given little or no notice when she leaves. He said he also believes that funding for issues such as mental health are among those taking a back seat to Hassan’s Senate run. “We’re putting a plan forward, and we said we wouldn’t punt on this, and the governor hasn’t been there,” Morse said.

Keene Sentinel Editorial, 5/16/2016: “If she’s spending more than a third of her time out of state on campaigning at this point, it’s fair to ask how distracted she’ll be by July or September.”

Ayotte and her allies have been ringing and re-ringing the “out-of-state” bell to claim Hassan is neglecting her duties as governor to instead spend her time campaigning for another office, despite having vowed when she announced her senatorial bid in October that “My focus each and every day will be on my job as governor.” It’s a fair point as far as it goes. … Serving as governor of a state both in the midst of a health crisis and working under considerable fiscal limitations should give her plenty to do “each and every day.” Hassan should, indeed, be wary of presenting the impression that she’s looking ahead rather than focusing on the job at hand. If she’s spending more than a third of her time out of state on campaigning at this point, it’s fair to ask how distracted she’ll be by July or September.

Union Leader, 5/14/2016: “Hassan, who was at a political fundraiser in Chicago”

A spokesman for Governor Maggie Hassan, who was at a political fundraiser in Chicago during the shooting, said she was in touch with state officials by phone to make sure they had all necessary resources.

NH1 News, 5/6/2016: “Gov. Maggie Hassan heads to New York City”

Gov. Maggie Hassan heads to New York City Monday, to team up with Vice President Biden for a fundraiser for her U.S. Senate challenge against Republican Sen. Kelly Ayotte. … Hassan’s travel to New York City will come less than a week after Ayotte’s campaign highlighted an article in the New Hampshire Union Leader that reported that the governor spent half of the month of April outside the Granite State.

Union Leader, 5/3/2016: Hassan “spent 12 days in April out of New Hampshire “

Gov. Maggie Hassan, D-Newfields, spent 12 days in April out of New Hampshire, according to political travel records provided by her U.S. Senate campaign. Hassan campaign manager Marc Goldberg wrote a letter to Republican State Committee Chairman Jennifer Horn as a courtesy response to previous requests for out-of-state travel.

WMUR, 10/5/2015: Hassan promised to focus on her job as governor

Transcript…

MCELVEEN: How do you plan on navigating your day job, which you still have, while running a campaign?

HASSAN: My focus each and every day will be on my job as Governor of the state of New Hampshire. A job I love.

###