Kesha Rogers for U.S. Senate
President Barack H. Obama is willfully advancing the post-9/11 banker's dictatorship initiated by his predecessor, George W. Bush, Jr., and must be legally removed from office immediately, by impeachment, resignation, or Section IV of the 25th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

Mr. Obama has pushed his own version of policies made notorious by the Adolph Hitler regime, and since condemned by the entire world. His flagrant violations of the U.S. Constitution, national and international law, in addition to posing a clear and present danger of new violations, including martial law, thermonuclear war and the violent suppression of peaceful domestic opposition, warrant his immediate removal from the office of the Presidency. This is not a Republican or Democratic issue; it is existential to our nation's survival in the midst of a global disintegration of the trans-Atlantic monetary system.

Summary of Impeachable Offenses

1. Violation of Article I, Sec. 8.11 of the U.S. Constitution, granting Congress the sole authority "to declare war… and make rules concerning captures on land and water", as well as the 1973 War Powers Resolution. The invasion and regime change in Libya occurred without any authorization by Congress, U.S. troops were in command of NATO's forces, and lasted beyond the 90 day grace period set forth within the WPR.

Engaging in regime change against a nation posing no military threat to us, is in violation of Principle VI(a) of the Nuremberg Principles , "crimes against peace", otherwise known as waging aggressive warfare.

, "crimes against peace", otherwise known as waging aggressive warfare. Recent evidence suggests the Central Intelligence Agency was in fact running weapons through the U.S. consulate at Benghazi to militias known by the U.S. State Department to be affiliated with Al-Qaeda. This constitutes a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 2(a) , "aiding and abetting" a declared enemy of the United States of America, which is treason, according to Article III, Sec. 3 of the U.S. Constitution , by "giving aid and comfort" to our enemies.

, "aiding and abetting" a declared enemy of the United States of America, which is treason, according to , by "giving aid and comfort" to our enemies. In October and September 2013, Mr. Obama explicitly stated his intention to engage in regime change against another country posing no military threat to the United States, Syria, under the "humanitarian intervention" clause of the dubious Responsibility to Protect doctrine. Overwhelming opposition to this by Congress and the American people caused Mr. Obama to seek authorization, yet he still claims he does not need such approval.

2. Violation of the Fifth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which states that no person shall "be deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law." President Barack Obama has violated this provision of the Constitution flagrantly, with the avowed execution of at least four American citizens, Anwar Al-Awlaki, his 16-year-old son, Samir Khan, and Jude Mohammed, without benefit of due process of law. Indeed, the death warrants against these individuals were effectively signed in secret, in a committee which is overseen directly by the President.

The killing of non-combatant civilians, including children, through use of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) or "drones" by this administration is categorized as a "crime against humanity" by Principle VI(c) of the Nuremberg Code . The killing of medical first responders after a drone strike, is categorized as a "war crime" by Principle VI(b) of the Nuremberg Code . Such practices have been condemned as war crimes and/or crimes against humanity by former President Jimmy Carter, Christof Heyns, United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and Amnesty International.

. The killing of medical first responders after a drone strike, is categorized as a "war crime" by . Such practices have been condemned as war crimes and/or crimes against humanity by former President Jimmy Carter, Christof Heyns, United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, and Amnesty International. The legal justification of drone warfare, under the 2001 Authorization for the Use of Military Force is not clear.

3. Violation of the First, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Eighth Amendments of the U.S. Constitution, by signing of the National Defense Authorization Act of FY 2012; Sec. 1021 of which grants the President authority to detain U.S. citizens without a trial, indefinitely, in foreign prisons, on secret evidence, if the citizen is suspected of being "part of or substantially supported Al Qaeda, the Taliban, or associated forces that are engaged in hostilities against the United States or its coalition partners."

4. Violation of Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution, which protects "right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures," and requires specific warrants "particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized". The massive global surveillance program of the National Security Agency, as exposed by former contractor Edward Snowden in July 2013, is engaged in continuous, global warrantless surveillance of (including but not limited to) domestic and international telephone calls, text messages, personal emails, video conferencing, bank account information including wire transfers, tracking of cell phone locations, and even online gaming discussions, of millions of law abiding Americans, as well as foreign governments allied to the United States, including their heads of state.

Various administration officials, including DNI James Clapper, and Attorney General Eric Holder, are in violation of 18 USC § 1621 , for committing "perjury" by denying, under oath, before the U.S. Congress, that such activities did not occur.

, for committing "perjury" by denying, under oath, before the U.S. Congress, that such activities did not occur. Mr. Obama himself has said on public television, that such violations were not occurring, yet subsequent revelations show they are indeed occurring.

5. Violation of the Preamble to the United States Constitution, by enacting laws and using various other means to undermine and destroy the General Welfare of the citizens of this nation, while benefiting political and financial supporters with ideological agendas combative to the U.S. Constitution.

The cancellation of NASA's Constellation program, defunding of thermonuclear fusion research, and the promotion of anti-scientific "green" energy programs, all constitute an attack on the scientific progress of human knowledge, lowering the ability to support the current population.

The rationing of health care according to "cost-effectiveness" methods, by an unelected panel of accountants known as the Independent Payment Advisory Board, in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2009. The rationing of health care according to financial cost was one of several crimes levied against Nazi doctors at the 1946 Nuremberg Trials.

The creation of a "bail-in" mechanism in Title II of the Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010, which allows 27 so-called "globally systemic important financial institutions" to seize the accounts of depositors -including public pensions, savings accounts, business accounts, and public budgets- to insure "financial stability" of intrinsically worthless derivatives portfolios. Such portfolios currently make up approximately 98% of the world's finances on record.

These, and numerous other violations of the law and public trust, demonstrate that Barack Hussein Obama is incapable of fulfilling his duties as President of the United States of America, and must be legally removed from office by impeachment and conviction, or resignation, or invocation of Section 4, Amendment 25 of the U.S. Constitution.

Any member of Congress who does not fulfill his or her responsibilities under the Constitution to remove such a President, is guilty by allowing such atrocities, and likely new ones, to occur.