In CNN debate with Crist, Scott says the state 'spent $350 million to deal with sea-level rise down in the Keys.' That isn't true
During Tuesday's final debate in the race to be Florida governor, Republican Gov. Rick Scott declared his administration "spent $350 million to deal with sea-level rise down in the Keys."



That came as news to most in the Florida Keys.



"I have no idea what he's talking about. It's the first I've heard of it," said Monroe County Commissioner Heather Carruthers, a local representative to the Southeast Florida Regional Climate Change Compact comprising Monroe, Miami-Dade, Broward and Palm Beach counties.



Chris Bergh manages The Nature Conservancy in the Keys and is widely considered a leading authority on the effects of rising seas on South Florida.



"If there is a program specific to sea-level rise in the Keys, I am not aware of it," he said.



Since his declaration Tuesday, Scott's amended his sea-level expenditure statement to include "in the Miami area," according to a transcript by CNN, which televised the hour-long debate in Jacksonville.



Jackie Schutz, a spokeswoman for the Scott re-election campaign, said in a Thursday e-mail that the $350 million "is money allocated by [the Florida Division of Emergency Management] for flood mitigation over the past three years."



Several state agencies are tied to the $350 million total, which covers flood mitigation for all of Florida's 35 coastal counties over the past few years, said Aaron Gallaher, communications director for Emergency Management.



A more detailed explanation of the reference was being prepared at press time Friday, Gallaher said.



But the division's share of money "obligated" for Monroe County is $6.7 million, he said.



At the debate, Scott's opponent, Democratic former Gov. Charlie Crist, challenged Scott, "Why are you so reluctant to believe the overwhelming majority of scientists who say that man contributes to climate change?"



Scott responded that he is focused on "the solutions.... I'm going to tell you what we've done."



He then brought up the $350 million, and went on to say, "We spent hundreds of millions dollars to deal with coral reefs."



Scott was referring to $100 million sent to the Keys to help fund countywide sewer projects required by the state. The improved wastewater treatment is expected to protect Keys nearshore waters from damaging effects of nutrients that previously leaked from septic tanks.



The $100 million is half the $200 million the Florida Legislature authorized in 2008 as part of Everglades and Florida Bay restoration.



Crist did not follow up on the $350 million reference but expressed his concern over global warming and his support for "renewable energy."



Scott charged that when Crist served one term as governor, "He didn't put money into dealing with sea-level rise. He didn't lift a finger to settle the lawsuit over the Everglades. He didn't put a dime in to coral reefs."



Studies have shown the Florida Keys are among the most at-risk areas in the U.S. to be at risk of rising seas in the coming decades.



Carruthers said a "very well-attended" climate-change conference held on Miami Beach in early October featured lengthy sessions on Florida's potential sea-level rise.



"The one glaring omission was nobody from the governor's office was there," she said.