...I would come back as President of the United States and so even though it took a few years, I'm keeping my promise.EPS: Thank you, Mr. President.POTUS: Well, it's great to be back.EPS: I thank you for that.POTUS: Thank you.EPS: I know you are a man that keeps the promise and you make it happen, so we're gonna start, Mr. President. I'm gonna give you the option, you know, which topic would you like me to begin with.POTUS: We can talk about anything you want, Piolín.EPS: I'm gonna give you options. Multiple choice. Are you ready?POTUS: I am.EPS: A.) Immigration reform B.) Immigration reform, C.) Immigration reformor D.) All of the above.POTUS: I think I'll take D.) All of the above. Absolutely.[Laughter]EPS: Many Hispanics feel disappointed with you because comprehensive immigration reform has not been passed. What can you tell them?POTUS: Well, I'm disappointed, too. As you heard in the introduction, this is something that I've been committed to for many years. I committed to it when I was a U.S. Senator, I committed to it when I was a state senator. It's something that I deeply believe that we've got to solve our immigration problem so that we're both a nation of immigrants and a nation of laws so that people can come out of the shadows, that people who are productive and otherwise law-abiding are able to get on a pathway to citizenship. They pay a fine, pay back taxes, learn English, become part of this beautiful American community of ours. And the fact that we have not got it done is something that frustrates me and I know that it frustrates many people in the community. But I think it's important for people to understand why it hasn't gotten done. In the United States Senate, over the last two years, many Republicans who used to support Comprehensive Immigration Reform, like John McCain, decided not to support it and in the Senate, you've got a rule that says 50 votes is not enough. That you can't just pass a law with 50 or 51 votes, you have to have a super majority of 60 votes. We have the majority of Democrats supporting us, so I could easily get 50 votes, Democratic votes, but I'd need some help from our Republican friends. And what happened was we still have 11 Republicans in the United States Senate who voted for Comprehensive Immigration Reform four years ago, but now are not willing to step up. And so the problem that we have is, is that until I can get some cooperation from the other side, then people who are anti-immigration reform can continue to block it. And that's why this election coming up is so important because we essentially have to say that those who are politicizing the issue, who are supportive of the Arizona law, who talk only about border security but aren't willing to talk about the other aspects of this, who don't support the Dream Act, who are out there engaging in rhetoric that is divisive and damaging that -- those aren't the kinds of folks who represent our core American values.EPS: But Mr. President, you were able to pass a healthcare plan and you worked a lot for that. And most of my listeners, they haven't seen that, the same way that you worked for healthcare for immigration reform. The same effort.POTUS: Well, here's the difference, Piolín. First of all, on immigration reform, I can't get 100 percent of Democrats. I can get 90 percent of Democrats, but I can't get 100 percent. So with healthcare reform, we were just, like, a vote short, just one vote, and so if we've worked so hard, we could finally tip it over the edge. Right now on immigration reform, we're eight votes short or 10 votes short, so we have do the work behind the scenes to build the groundswell of support that can get us then over the finish line. What I don't wanna do is start this thing like we did several years ago and then it just collapses because if you start it and you don't finish it, then people say, well, this can't be done and four years from now, five years from now, we'll still be talking about immigration reform. What we're trying to do is to build a consensus in the country that says, this is the right thing to do, that we've got some bipartisan support. I've met with the Congressional Hispanic Caucus many times, I've met with immigration rights groups many times. I have not backed off of this issue. Just a few months ago, I gave a speech outlining very clearly my support for comprehensive immigration reform. My cabinet has been working very hard on trying to get it done, but ultimately, I think somebody said the other day, I am president, I am not king. I can't do these things just by myself. We have a system of government that requires the Congress to work with the Executive Branch to make it happen. I'm committed to making it happen, but I've gotta have some partners to do it.EPS: Yes. And that's why last year, I put together a group of well-respected leaders to help you, but I never heard back from your office.POTUS: Ah, but Piolín, look, the truth of the matter is -- here's the question that I think all your listeners have to ask themselves. If the vast majority of Democrats support this issue, if I as the President support this issue, if we've been willing to speak out on this issue forcefully and we have the other party, which not only is not supporting it, but actually doing things that are damaging to the Latino community, then the question I have is why are we spending time talking about us instead of spending time focusing on getting Republicans to do what is right? Because I'm not asking for 100 percent support from Republicans, I'm not asking even for 50 percent support from Republicans. I just want a little bit of support so that I can actually get this thing passed. Now, the fact of the matter is, is that we have worked this issue hard; we will continue to work this hard. I'm only in the first two years of my presidency and, by the way, I had a huge economic crisis. The issues like healthcare reform that we worked on are hugely important to the Latino community. By far, Hispanics are the most likely to work and not have health insurance. The issues of the economy hugely affect the Hispanic community. A lot of them were in construction and when the housing market collapsed, that meant a lot of people were laid off. So it's not as if the issues that we're working on are issues that aren't important to the Latino community. They're very important. Immigration reform is one of those issues we're gonna get it done, but I'm gonna continue to need some help from the other side.EPS: When is it going to happen? You will tell me after this.[COMMERCIAL BREAK]POTUS: Well, here's what we're gonna do. We're gonna see how well we do in this election and I think a lot of it is gonna depend on whether we still have some support not only from Democrats, but also Republicans, but they're gonna be paying attention to this election. And if Latinos sit out the election instead of saying, we're gonna punish our enemies and we're gonna reward our friends who stand with us on issues that are important to us, if they don't see that kind of upsurge in voting in this election, then I think it's gonna be harder and that's why I think it's so important that people focus on voting on November 2.EPS: But how can you ask for their vote now… if, like… most of my listeners, that's what they see … that you haven't worked that hard to make comprehensive immigration reform now.POTUS: Piolín, I completely disagree with you on this. With all due respect, even though I'm in your studio. The notion that we haven't worked it hard is just not true. There is a notion that somehow if I had worked it hard enough, we could have magically done it. That's just not the way our system works. If I need 60 votes to get this done, then I'm gonna have to have some support from the other side. If the Latino community decides to sit out this election, then there will be fewer votes and it will be less likely to get done. And the other side, which is fighting against this, is not gonna support it, so look, let me say this as an African American. We worked for decades on civil rights. Civil rights didn't come after one year. It didn't come after two years. People had to march, they had to have their heads beaten, they had fire hoses put on them. Even after Dr. King gave his I Have a Dream Speech, it still took years before African Americans achieved full citizenship in this country. Change isn't easy. It doesn't happen overnight. Now, you know, for us to say, oh, it didn't happen right away and so we're just giving up and we're not gonna be involved in the system, that makes no sense. That's not the history of this country. That's not the history of change in our own lives. All of us, you included Piolín, have gone through hardships, you've had your struggles and what happens is, is that you keep on working and you keep on working and you keep on working and finally, eventually you make a breakthrough and you get things done. That's how change happens for us personally, that's how change happens in the country, so instead of us giving up, we just have to keep working until it gets done.EPS: Well, yeah, we're gonna keep working.POTUS: Absolutely.EPS: But I would like to find out the steps that we need to take, Mr. President, so we can help you to make this happen.POTUS: Look, the steps are very clear. Pressure has to be put on the Republican Party.EPS: How?POTUS: Well, let me give you a very specific example. Right now, Nevada, you've got a majority leader of the Senate, Harry Reid, who's running against a woman named Sharron Angle who is completely opposed to comprehensive immigration reform. Now, you've got a Republican Latino ad that's being run saying to Latinos, don't vote. It's a cynical attempt to discourage Latinos from voting so that Harry Reid, who supports comprehensive immigration reform, would lose because the Latino vote doesn't come out. The woman who's running against him, who opposes comprehensive immigration reform, would win and we would be in much worse shape. It would -- we'd be farther away from achieving it, so a very specific example is making sure that you support the person who supports comprehensive immigration reform and Latinos in Nevada turn up. And that's true all across the country. I mean, the -- there is no place in the country where the Latino vote doesn't matter and even if Latinos are gonna support Republicans, they should say to the Republican candidate, the price of our support is you publicly saying that you're gonna support comprehensive immigration reform because I've already said that, Harry Reid has already said that, Democrats are already on record as saying it. If I can get the votes, I'd sign the bill tomorrow. So you have to put the same pressure on those who have not yet been willing to publicly commit to comprehensive immigration reform and if they don't publicly commit, then you've gotta vote against them.EPS: Believe me, we will.POTUS: Good.EPS: Under your administration, Mr. President, almost half a million immigrants have been deported, more than any other president. I want to be clear that I'm talking about immigrant families that are hard working, are learning the English language and are helping our economy. What can your administration do to stop deportations now?POTUS: Well, the main thing we have to do to stop deportations is to change the laws. What my administration has done is actually change our priorities because you mentioned that there are a lot of families out there, but the truth is, it’s actually that the way we're now enforcing the law puts less emphasis on families, more emphasis on those with criminal records and so the big increase in deportations has actually to do with people with criminal records who've been engaging in illegal activity, not just because they don't have papers, but because they've been engaging in criminal activity. But the most important thing that we can do is to change the law because the way the system works -- again, I just wanna repeat, I'm president, I'm not king. If Congress has laws on the books that says that people who are here who are not documented have to be deported, then I can exercise some flexibility in terms of where we deploy our resources, to focus on people who are really causing problems as a opposed to families who are just trying to work and support themselves. But there's a limit to the discretion that I can show because I am obliged to execute the law. That's what the Executive Branch means. I can't just make the laws up by myself. So the most important thing that we can do is focus on changing the underlying laws. That requires Congress to cooperate. As I've said before, I've got the majority of Democrats who are ready to make those changes, but we are gonna need some help from the other side and that's where our focus has to be.EPS: Mr. President, would you try to approve the Dream Act in Congress after the election and before next year?POTUS: You know, I'm a big supporter of the Dream Act. I've spoken about it many times. I used to be a sponsor of the bill when I was in the Senate. What I wanna do is I wanna consult with immigrant rights groups and with the Congressional Hispanic Caucuses to make a strategic decision. It may be that we can pass the Dream Act without comprehensive immigration reform. The only thing I'm concerned about is if we just take that small piece, then maybe it becomes harder for us to get the whole thing and so I would love to see the Dream Act passed right away, but I think it's very important for us to have a discussion within the community. If we think realistically that's the only thing that we could get done, then we may make that judgment, but I'm still holding out right now to see if we can get the Dream Act passed and AgJobs passed as part of a broader package so that we allow the 10 to 12 million people who are still living in the shadows to come out and not live in fear. Look, obviously, the Dream Act would be better than nothing and that's something that I think we're gonna have to judge. But I don't wanna make that decision by myself. I wanna be in a discussion with the community and we're not gonna know until after this election. So, so much depends on what do things look like after the election.EPS: So you'll give me a call?POTUS: You know, I will be happy to give you a call, Piolín, the -- I'm not sure that -- I'm not sure that we're gonna know the day after the election, but I think that we are gonna be able to have a better sense of how many votes we've got for comprehensive immigration reform, how many votes do we have for the Dream Act. You know, sitting down with the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, I think we'll have a strategy and we'll certainly let your listeners know.EPS: What can you tell the 50 million people that don't have a job right now, Mr. President?POTUS: It's gonna take time for us to rebuild this economy after taking such a bad blow. Keep in mind what happened. We went through the worst crisis since the Great Depression, since the 1930s and so what happened was that the housing market collapsed, businesses shrank, banks weren't lending and we lost four million jobs before I was even sworn in. We lost almost another four million jobs in the first three months that I was sworn in. We lost eight million jobs before any of my economic plans had a chance to take effect. Now, we've worked very hard over the last two years to help to rebuild and stabilize the housing market, to put people back to work building roads and bridges and our infrastructure, saving jobs of teachers who were threatened to be laid off and now we have an economy that's growing again and we've seen in the private sector job growth for the last nine months. All that is important, but we have a long way to go and the key now is to help small business get loans so that they can keep their doors open and hire more workers and that’s especially important in the Latino community because Latino community's an entrepreneurial community. People like to start a business and they've gotta get financing and we've been putting a lot of emphasis on that. We've gotta make sure that we keep on building our infrastructure. A lot of Latino workers who are in construction, they could also be working to help to build new airport runways, new school construction, so getting projects going that can put people back to work right away, that's something that we've proposed. But it's gonna take a few more years. When you fall into such a deep hole, it takes time for you to climb back out. That's what we're doing right now. I feel confident that we're moving in the right direction. The one thing that we can't do is go back to the same policies that the Republicans had in place that resulted in this disaster in the first place.EPS: I agree, Mr. President. We understand that, you know, you've been working a lot and you can count on us, you know, to help you so we can become, you know, united and together move forward in this beautiful country. And that's why we have a gift for you.POTUS: Oh, this is beautiful. The -- for those of you who are just listening, this is a -- just a beautiful picture. Piolín read what it says on there. I've gotta take a look at it.EPS: I want you to read it, Mr. President.POTUS: Okay. It says…EPS: It's a drawing.POTUS: It's a beautiful drawing with beautiful kids and a dove at the top and it quotes a passage of scripture from Joshua. It says, "Have I not commanded you be strong and courageous, do not be terrified, do not be discouraged, for the Lord your God will be with you wherever you go." I will treasure this always. This is just a beautiful gift and this will have a beautiful place in the White House for me to put this up.EPS: I know, Mr. President, that it hasn't been easy for you.POTUS: You know, let me say this, Piolín. You know, 'cause a lot of people say this to me, they say, oh, you know, you have a really hard job. You know, you have all these problems, everybody expects you to solve them right away, people are criticizing you and I say, you know what? The problems that I have are not nothing compared to the problems that people have every day if their losing their job, they may lose their mortgage, they're trying to figure out how to finance their kids' college education. This is a great privilege for me to be president and to be able to help people as much as I can and I get frustrated that we're not moving as quickly as I'd like. I'm not getting as much cooperation sometimes as I want in Congress, but I feel confident that we're making progress. I'll just give you one example. You know, we were able, because of the work that we did, to change how we finance the Student Loan Program to take tens of billions of dollars that used to go to the banks that are now going to Pell Grants and student loans. Millions of children, a lot of young Latino students, are now getting scholarships and grants that didn't get it before and are able to aspire to college. When you get something like that done, you feel good in the morning when you wake up because you know, okay, I still have a long check list of things I have to do, but at least we're making a difference right now.EPS: I'm gonna tell you, Mr. President, that we're inviting my listeners to vote in this election. We’re gonna make a difference again because we did it on the last election.POTUS: Absolutely.EPS: You know that?POTUS: Listen, the -- you did a great job and this is such a popular show and I think people are so inspired by your story, I am inspired by your story, so I just want everybody who's listening to remember that just as you were able to rise up and become incredible success, just as I, somebody from modest means, was able to become president, everyone of your listeners can succeed. You've got a president who cares about your success and we're gonna keep on working hard to make sure that everybody is able to live out the American dream.EPS: Thank you, Mr. President.POTUS: It's great to be here.EPS: Thank you, thank you, thank you, Mr. President.POTUS: Thank you so much, thank you.EPS: Thank you once again.POTUS: It's great to see you.EPS: And it's great to see you, too. And thank you for keeping the promise that you told us.POTUS: Just as I kept my promise on this, I'm gonna keep my promise on immigration reform. Thank you, guys.Member of Audience: Thank you, thank you.EPS: With God, anything's possible. Thank you. ####

TRADUCCION DE TRANSCRIPCION DE ENTREVISTA, Programa: “Piolin por la Mañana”

Cadena: Univision Radio

Contenido: Entrevista con el Presidente de los Estados Unidos Barack Obama

Fecha: 25 octubre 2010

Guía:

EPS: Eddie “Piolin” Sotelo:

POTUS (pos sus siglas en ingles): Presidente de los Estados Unidos Barack Obam

EPS: Gracias por estar con nosotros Señor Presidente. [Audio de varios discursos del Pres. Obama se presenta]

POTUS: Es maravilloso estar aquí, Piolín. Piolín ese fue un increíble preámbulo. Muchas gracias.

EPS: Gracias por tomarse el tiempo para estar con nosotros Señor Presidente.

POTUS: ¿Recuerdas la última vez que estuve en el estudio? Te prometí que regresaría como presidente de los Estados Unidos. Y aunque me tomó algunos años, estoy cumpliendo con mi promesa.

EPS: Gracias Señor Presidente.

POTUS: Estoy encantado de estar de regreso.

EPS: Se lo agradezco.

POTUS: Gracias.

EPS: Sé que es usted un hombre que cumple sus promesas y así lo ha hecho. Vamos a empezar, señor Presidente. Le voy a dar la opción, ¿con qué tema quiere usted comenzar?

POTUS: Podemos hablar de lo que quieras, Piolín.

EPS: Le voy a dar opciones, múltiples opciones. ¿Está listo

POTUS: Sí.

EPS: A.) reforma de la inmigración. B.) reforma de la Inmigración. C.) reforma de la inmigración, o D.) todas las opciones.

POTUS: Selecciono D.) todas las opciones. Absolutamente. [Risas]

EPS: Muchos hispanos están desilusionados con usted porque la reforma de inmigración comprensiva no ha sido aprobada. ¿Qué les puede decir?

POTUS: Bueno, yo también estoy desilusionado. Como escuchaste en el preámbulo, esto es algo a lo cual me he comprometido durante muchos años. Me comprometí a esto cuando fui un senador de los Estados Unidos. Me comprometí a esto cuando fui senador estatal. Creo profundamente que tenemos que solucionar los problemas de inmigración para que seamos tanto una nación de inmigrantes como una nación de leyes; para permitir que las personas salgan de las sombras; para permitir que las personas que son productivas y respetan la ley puedan seguir el camino hacia la ciudadanía. Van a pagar una multa, pagar impuestos que se deben, aprender inglés, y ser parte de esta hermosa comunidad americana. Y, el hecho de que no hemos logrado esto es algo que me frustra y sé que frustra a muchas personas en la comunidad. Pero creo que es importante que las personas entiendan el por qué no ha ocurrido esto. En el Senado de los Estados Unidos, en los últimos dos años, muchos Republicanos que solían apoyar la reforma inmigratoria comprensiva, como John McCain, decidieron no seguir apoyándola. En el Senado tenemos una regla que dice que 50 votos no son suficientes. No se puede aprobar una ley solamente con 50 o 51 votos. Se necesita una súper mayoría de 60 votos. Tenemos la mayoría de los Demócratas apoyándonos. Podría conseguir fácilmente 50 votos demócratas, pero necesito ayuda de nuestros amigos Republicanos y lo que ocurrió es que todavía tenemos a 11 Republicanos en el Senado de los Estados Unidos que votaron a favor de la reforma de inmigración comprensiva hace cuatro años. Ahora, no están dispuestos a brindar su apoyo. El problema que tenemos es que hasta que yo logre obtener algo de cooperación del otro lado, las personas que están en contra de la reforma de inmigración seguirán bloqueándola. Y es por eso que esta siguiente elección es tan importante. Esencialmente tenemos que decir que los que le están dando a este tema un carácter político, que están en apoyo de la ley de Arizona, que hablan solamente de la seguridad fronteriza pero no están dispuesto a hablar de los otros aspectos de este tema, que no apoyan el Dream Act, que están fomentado retórica que nos divide y daña, esas no son las personas que representan los valores principales de nuestro país.

EPS: Pero Señor Presidente, usted logró que se aprobara la ley del cuidado de la salud. Usted trabajó mucho para lograr eso. La mayoría de mis radioescuchas no han visto esto, la misma forma en la que usted trabajó para lograr la ley del cuidado de salud, en la lucha por la reforma de inmigración. El mismo esfuerzo.

POTUS: Esta es la diferencia, Piolín. Primero, para la reforma de inmigración no puedo obtener que me apoyen el 100 por ciento de los Demócratas. Puedo conseguir el 90 por ciento pero no puedo conseguir el 100 por ciento. En el caso de la reforma del cuidado de la salud, solamente nos faltaba un voto. Solamente un voto. Haciendo un gran esfuerzo sabíamos que podíamos lograr la aprobación. En el caso de la reforma de inmigración estamos cortos ocho votos, 10 votos. Tenemos que hacer el trabajo detrás de las cortinas para lograr obtener el apoyo que nos ayude a cruzar la meta. Lo que no quiero hacer es empezar esto, como lo hicimos hace algunos años, y luego se derrumba. Si uno comienza y no acaba, entonces la gente dice que esto no se puede lograr y seguiremos hablando de esto dentro de cuatro o cinco años. Lo que estamos tratando de hacer es obtener un acuerdo en el país que dice que esto es lo correcto y que tenemos apoyo de ambos partidos. Me he reunido con el consejo hispano del Congreso muchas veces; me he reunido con grupos de derechos de inmigración muchas veces; no me he echado hacia atrás. Hace algunos pocos meses hice un discurso en donde delinee claramente mi apoyo para la reforma de inmigración comprensiva. Mi gabinete ha estado trabajando mucho para lograr esto. Pero ultimadamente, creo que alguien lo dijo el otro día, soy presidente. No soy rey. No puedo hacer estas cosas sólo. Tenemos un sistema gubernamental que requiere que el Congreso trabaje con la rama ejecutiva para lograr esto. Yo estoy comprometido a lograr esto pero necesito socios para poder lograrlo.

EPS: Sí, y es por eso que el año pasado organicé a un grupo de líderes altamente respetados para ayudarlo, pero nunca recibí una respuesta de su oficina.

POTUS: Ah, Piolín, mira. La verdad del asunto es que -- esta es la pregunta que creo que todos tus radioescuchas deberían de hacerse a ellos mismos. Si la mayoría de los Demócratas apoyan este tema, si yo como presidente apoyo este tema, si hemos estado dispuestos a hablar fuertemente en apoyo de este tema, y tenemos al otro partido que no sólo no está apoyando esto pero que también están haciendo cosas que perjudican a la comunidad latina. Entonces, la pregunta que yo tengo es, ¿por qué estamos perdiendo el tiempo hablando acerca de nosotros en lugar de hablar sobre cómo hacer que los Republicanos hagan lo que es correcto? Porque yo no estoy pidiendo el 100 por ciento de apoyo de los Republicanos. No estoy ni siquiera pidiendo el 50 por ciento de apoyo de los Republicanos. Yo sólo quiero un poco de apoyo para lograr que esto sea aprobado. El hecho es que hemos trabajado mucho sobre este tema, y seguiremos trabajando así. Estoy sólo en los primeros dos años de mi presidencia. Y, por cierto, tuve una crisis económica enorme. Los temas como la reforma del cuidado de la salud, en la cual trabajamos, son muy importantes para la comunidad latina. Los hispanos son el grupo que más probabilidad tiene de trabajar y no tener seguro médico. Los temas de la economía afectan enormemente a la comunidad latina. Muchos de ellos trabajan en la construcción y cuando se derrumbó el mercado inmobiliario, muchas personas perdieron sus trabajos. No es como si los temas que hemos estado tratando no son importantes para la comunidad latina, sí lo son. El tema de la reforma de inmigración es uno de esos temas y vamos a lograr esto pero voy a necesitar la ayuda del otro lado.

EPS: ¿Cuándo va a ocurrir esto? Usted me va a responder después de este mensaje.

[CORTE COMERCIAL]

POTUS: Bueno, esto es lo que vamos a hacer. Vamos a ver qué tan bien nos va en esta elección. Yo creo que mucho va a depender de si todavía tenemos apoyo no sólo de los Demócratas pero también de los Republicanos y ellos van a estar prestándole atención a esta elección. Si los latinos no participan en esta elección, en lugar de decir vamos a castigar a nuestros enemigos y vamos a recompensar a los amigos que nos apoyan en temas que son de importancia para nosotros, si no ven este tipo de aumento en la votación durante esta elección, creo que va a ser mucho más difícil y es por eso que yo creo que es muy importante que las personas se enfoquen en votar el dos de noviembre

EPS: ¿Cómo puede usted pedir el voto ahora porque, como he dicho, la mayoría de mis radioescuchas piensan que usted no ha hecho un esfuerzo para lograr que se apruebe la reforma a las leyes de inmigración?

POTUS: Piolín, estoy en completo desacuerdo contigo en esto. Con todo respeto, a pesar de que estoy en tu estudio, la idea de que no hemos trabajado duro no es verdad. Hay la idea de que si yo hubiera trabajado lo suficiente lo hubiera podido lograr como por magia. Esa no es la forma en la que nuestro sistema funciona. Si yo necesito 70 votos para lograr este objetivo, voy a tener que recibir apoyo del otro lado. Si la comunidad latina decide no participar en esta elección, entonces habrá menos votos y será menos probable lograr esto y el otro lado, que está peleando en contra de esto, no va apoyarlo. Entonces, permíteme decirte esto como un afroamericano. Trabajamos por décadas en derechos civiles. Los derechos civiles no fueron logrados después de sólo un año; no fueron logrados después de dos años. Las personas tuvieron que marchar, sufrieron golpes, los amarraron con mangueras de bomberos, aún después de que el doctor King presentó su discurso llamado, "I Have a Dream" (Tengo un Sueño), se demoró años antes de que los afroamericanos pudieran lograr obtener ciudadanía completa en este país. El cambio no es fácil. No ocurre sobre noche. Ahora, para nosotros decir que como no ocurrió de inmediato, entonces nos vamos a rendir y no vamos a participar en el sistema, eso no tiene sentido. Esa no es la historia de este país; esa no es la historia de cambio en nuestras propias vidas. Todos nosotros, incluyéndote a ti Piolín, hemos sufrido mucho; hemos tenido nuestras batallas y lo que pasa es que uno sigue adelante trabajando y trabajando hasta que finalmente, eventualmente, uno logra llegar a sus objetivos. Así es como el cambio ocurre para nosotros personalmente y así es como el cambio ocurre en el país. Entonces, en lugar de rendirnos, tenemos que seguir trabajando hasta lograr estos objetivos.

EPS: Vamos a seguir trabajando --

POTUS: Absolutamente.

EPS: Quisiera saber cuáles son los pasos que se tienen que tomar, Señor Presidente, para poder ayudarlo a lograr estos objetivos.

POTUS: Mira, los pasos son muy claros. Se tiene que presionar al partido Republicano.

EPS: ¿Cómo?

POTUS: Quiero darte un ejemplo muy específico. En este momento, en Nevada, tenemos al líder mayoritario del Senado, Harry Reid, compitiendo en contra de una mujer que se llama Sharron Angle quien está completamente opuesta a la reforma migratoria comprensiva. Allí tenemos un anuncio Republicano latino en el aire, que les dice a los latinos, no voten. Es un intento cínico para desanimar a los latinos de votar para que Harry Reid, quien está en apoyo de la reforma migratoria comprensiva, pierda porque los latinos no votaron. Su contrincante, quien está en contra de la reforma migratoria comprensiva, ganaría y entonces estaremos mucho más lejos de poder lograr nuestro objetivo. Entonces, es un ejemplo muy específico para asegurarnos que apoyamos al candidato que está a favor de la reforma migratoria comprensiva, y de que los latinos en Nevada participen. Esto es cierto en todo el país; no hay ningún lugar en todo el país en donde el voto latino no cuenta. Y aún si los latinos van a apoyar a los Republicanos, les deberían decir a esos Republicanos, candidatos, el precio de nuestro apoyo es que ustedes digan públicamente que ustedes está en apoyo de la reforma migratoria comprensiva. Yo ya lo he dicho. Harry Reid ya lo ha dicho. Los Demócratas ya han declarado oficialmente esta intención. Si yo pudiera lograr obtener los votos yo firmaría la ley mañana. Así que tiene uno que poner la misma presión sobre aquellos que no han declarado públicamente su apoyo para lograr una reforma migratoria comprensiva y si no declaran esto públicamente tiene uno que votar en contra de ellos.

EPS: Créame usted, así lo haremos.

POTUS: Bien.

EPS: Bajo su administración, Señor Presidente, casi medio millón de inmigrantes han sido deportados, más que en la administración de ningún otro presidente. Quiero aclarar que estoy hablando de familias inmigrantes que trabajan duro, están aprendiendo inglés, y que están apoyando a nuestra economía. ¿Qué puede hacer su administración para etener las deportaciones ahora?

POTUS: Lo primero que tenemos que hacer para detener estas deportaciones es cambiar las leyes. Lo que mi administración ha logrado hacer es cambiar nuestras prioridades. Tú mencionas que hay muchas familias afectadas pero la verdad es que de la manera en la cual estamos implementando la ley, se les da menos énfasis a familias y más énfasis a las personas con antecedentes criminales. El aumento principal en deportaciones tiene que ver con personas que tienen antecedentes criminales y que han participado en actividades ilegales, no sólo porque no tienen papeles sino porque han participado en actividad ilegal. Pero lo más importante que podemos hacer es cambiar la ley. De nuevo, quiero repetir que la forma en la que nuestro sistema funciona -- soy presidente, no soy rey-- si el Congreso tiene leyes que dicen que las personas que están aquí y que no están documentadas tienen que ser deportadas, entonces yo puedo ejercer cierta flexibilidad en cómo utilizamos nuestros recursos para enfocarnos en aquellas personas que realmente están causando problemas en lugar de en las familias que simplemente están tratando de ganarse la vida. Pero hay límites en cuanto a lo que yo puedo hacer. Yo tengo la responsabilidad de implementar la ley. La rama ejecutiva es la encargada de eso. Yo no puedo simplemente inventar las leyes por mí mismo. Lo más importante que podemos hacer es enfocarnos en cambiar las leyes que nos afectan y esto requiere de la cooperación del Congreso. Como he dicho antes, cuento con el apoyo de la mayoría de los Demócratas y ellos están listos para llevar a cabo esos cambios, pero necesitamos ayuda del otro lado y allí es en donde tiene que estar nuestro enfoque.

EPS: Señor Presidente, ¿va a intentar usted aprobar el "Dream Act" en el Congreso antes de la elección y antes el próximo año?

POTUS: Me considero como un gran partidario del “Dream Act” y he hablado a favor de esto muchas veces. Cuando yo era miembro del Senado fui uno de los autores de la ley y lo que quiero hacer es consultar con grupos de derechos de inmigración y con el consejo de hispanos del congreso para llevar acabo una decisión estratégica. Tal vez podemos aprobarla ley del Dream Act sin la reforma migratoria comprensiva. Lo único que me preocupa de esto es que si tomamos solamente este pequeño pedazo, nos va a costar más trabajo lograr obtener todo lo demás. Yo quisiera ver que el “Dream Act” se aprobara inmediatamente, pero creo que es muy importante tener una discusión dentro de la comunidad. Si pensamos que realísticamente es lo único que podemos lograr, entonces tal vez tendremos que tomar esa decisión. Pero yo todavía tengo la esperanza de ver si podemos lograr aprobar el “Dream Act”, y el AgJobs (trabajos agrícolas,) como parte de un paquete más amplio y de esta forma poder lograr que esas 10 o 12 millones de personas que siguen viviendo en la penumbra puedan salir y no tengan que vivir atemorizados. Mira, obviamente el “Dream Act” sería mejor que nada y creo que tendremos que examinar eso. Pero no quiero tomar esa decisión sólo. Quiero discutir esto con la comunidad, y no vamos a saber sino hasta después de esta elección. Mucho depende de qué es lo que ocurra después de esta elección.

EPS: ¿Entonces me va a llamar usted?

POTUS: Me dará gusto llamarte por teléfono, Piolín. No estoy seguro de que vamos a saber inmediatamente después de la elección, pero tendremos una mejor idea de cuántos votos tenemos disponibles para la reforma migratoria comprensiva, cuántos votos para el “Dream Act”, y entonces nos reuniremos con el consejo hispano del Congreso para formular una estrategia y con gusto les avisaremos a tus radioescuchas.

EPS: ¿Qué le puede usted decir a los 50 millones de personas que no tienen trabajo, señor Presidente?

POTUS: Se va a tomar tiempo para poder reconstruir nuestra economía, después de haber sufrido tantas pérdidas. Recuerda qué fue lo que pasó. Pasamos por la peor crisis desde la gran depresión, en los años 30s; lo que ocurrió fue que se cayó el mercado inmobiliario, muchas compañías vieron grandes reducciones en sus negocios, los bancos dejaron de prestar, y perdimos cuatro millones de trabajos antes de que yo tomara mi cargo. Perdimos casi otros cuatro millones de trabajos en los primeros tres meses después de que recibí el juramento. Perdimos ocho millones de trabajos antes de que ninguno de mis planes para mejorar la economía tuviera la oportunidad de producir resultados. Hemos trabajado muy duro durante los dos últimos años para ayudar a reconstruir y a estabilizar el mercado de viviendas y para crear más trabajos, construyendo caminos, puentes y nuestra infraestructura; protegiendo los trabajos de maestros que estaban en peligro de perder sus trabajos. Ahora tenemos una economía que está creciendo otra vez. Hemos visto en el sector privado un aumento en el número de trabajos en los últimos nueve meses. Todo esto es importante pero nos falta todavía mucho. Lo clave ahora es ayudar a los negocios pequeños a obtener préstamos para que ellos puedan seguir funcionando y puedan contratar a más empleados. Esto es especialmente importante en la comunidad latina porque la comunidad latina es muy emprendedora. A las personas les gusta abrir negocios y necesitan obtener financiamiento, y hemos puesto mucho énfasis en esto. Necesitamos asegurarnos de seguir construyendo nuestra infraestructura. Muchos de los trabajadores latinos en el campo de la construcción también podrían estar trabajando para ayudar a construir nuevas pistas en los aeropuertos, nuevas escuelas, así que el poder iniciar trabajos que puedan poner a la gente a trabajar de nuevo es algo que hemos propuesto. Pero se va a tardar algunos años. Cuando uno cae en un agujero tan profundo se toma tiempo para poder salir. Eso es lo que estamos haciendo en este momento. Tengo confianza de que estamos en la dirección correcta. Una de las cosas que no podemos hacer es regresar a las mismas normas que los Republicanos tenían antes, las que produjeron este desastre en primer lugar.

EPS: Estoy de acuerdo Señor Presidente. Nosotros entendemos eso. Ha estado usted trabajando mucho. Y puedo usted contar con nuestro apoyo para ayudarlo a poder unirnos y juntos poder seguir adelante en este hermoso país. Y es por eso es que tenemos un regalo para usted.

POTUS: Esto es hermoso. Para los que están solamente escuchando, esta es una pintura muy bonita. Piolín, por favor lee lo que dice. Necesito darle un vistazo.

EPS: Quiero que usted lo lea Señor Presidente.

POTUS: De acuerdo. Dice --

EPS: Es un dibujo.

POTUS: Es un dibujo hermoso con niños preciosos y una paloma arriba, y cita un pasaje de la escritura sagrada, de Josué, y dice, "¿no os he ordenado ser fuertes y valientes? No se atemoricen; no se desanimen porque Dios, su Rey, estará con ustedes a donde sea que vayan". Apreciaré este regalo siempre, es un regalo hermoso y este regalo tendrá un lugar muy bonito en la Casa Blanca.

EPS: Yo sé, Señor Presidente, que no ha sido fácil para usted.

POTUS: Permíteme decir esto, Piolín. Muchas personas me dicen esto. Usted tiene un trabajo muy difícil. Tiene usted todos estos problemas, todo mundo espera que usted los resuelva inmediatamente, la gente lo critica. Y les digo, los problemas que yo tengo no son nada comparados con los problemas que las personas tienen todos los días. Si pierden su trabajo, es posible que pierdan sus casas; están tratando de encontrar cómo financiar la educación universitaria de sus niños. Este es un gran privilegio para mí, ser presidente. Y para poder ayudarle a la gente lo más que pueda. Me frustro que no estamos progresando tan rápido como yo quisiera. No estoy recibiendo tanta cooperación como yo quisiera en el Congreso. Pero tengo confianza de que estamos haciendo progreso. Te quiero dar un ejemplo. Hemos logrado, debido al trabajo que hemos hecho, cambiar cómo se financia el programa de préstamos escolares. Muchos billones de dólares que antes eran enviados a bancos ahora son usados para becas Pel y préstamos estudiantiles; millones de niños, muchos estudiantes jóvenes latinos, ahora están recibiendo becas y subsidios que no recibían antes y ahora tienen la esperanza de poder llegar a la universidad. Cuando uno logra hacer esto, uno se siente bien al levantarse en la mañana porque uno sabe que a pesar de que todavía hay una lista larga de cosas por hacer, por lo menos estamos logrando hacer una diferencia en este momento.

EPS: Quiero decirle, Señor Presidente, que hemos estado invitando a nuestros radioescuchas a que voten en esta elección. Volveremos a hacer una diferencia. Lo logramos en la última elección.

POTUS: Absolutamente.

EPS: ¿Usted lo sabe?

POTUS: Escucha, ustedes hicieron un gran trabajo y este es un programa muy popular. La gente se inspira mucho por tu historia; a mi me inspira tu historia. Yo quiero que todas las personas que están escuchando que recuerden que así como tú pudiste superar tus obstáculos y lograr ser un gran éxito, así como yo -- alguien de recursos modestos -- logró llegar a ser presidente, cada uno de tus radioescuchas puede tener éxito. Tienen a un presidente que se preocupa por el éxito de ustedes. Y vamos a seguir trabajando mucho para lograr que todo el mundo pueda realizar el sueño americano.

EPS: Gracias, Señor Presidente.

POTUS: Me dio gusto estar aquí. Muchas gracias.

EPS: Gracias, Señor Presidente.

POTUS: Gracias.

EPS: Gracias de nuevo.

POTUS: Me dio gusto verte.

EPS: Me dio gusto verlo también. Gracias por cumplir con la promesa que nos hizo. ####

-- Tony Pierce

Photo: Obama shakes hands at the University of Southern Ccalifornia ater a Friday speech. Credit: Luis Sinco / Los Angeles Times