Medicaid Eligibility for Adults as of January 1, 2014
As enacted, the Affordable Care Act (ACA) would expand Medicaid to adults with incomes at or below 138% of the federal poverty level (FPL) ($15,856 for an individual as of 2013) starting January 1, 2014, nationwide. This expansion would significantly increase eligibility for parents in many states and end the historic exclusion of adults without dependent children, referred to as childless adults, from Medicaid. In addition, starting January 2014, the ACA establishes new streamlined eligibility and enrollment processes for Medicaid, which include determining income eligibility for most groups based on Modified Adjusted Gross Income (MAGI). The move to MAGI will largely align Medicaid income eligibility determinations with the standards used to determine eligibility for federal subsidies to help pay for coverage through the new Marketplaces.

While the Medicaid expansion was intended to occur nationwide, the Supreme Court ruling on the ACA effectively made it a state option. As of September 2013, 26 states, including DC are moving forward with the expansion and 25 states are not currently moving forward. There is no deadline for states to decide to expand. Regardless of state Medicaid expansion decisions, all states must implement the new eligibility and enrollment processes, including the transition to MAGI income determinations. As part of the transition to MAGI, states’ existing Medicaid income limits for children, pregnant women, parents, and childless adults will be converted to MAGI-equivalent limits. Tables 1 and 2 show Medicaid income limits for parents and childless adults as of January 2013, and the new income limits that will be in effect as of January 1, 2014.

In states that expand Medicaid, many low-income parents and other adults will become newly eligible for coverage. Overall, the median eligibility limit for parents in the 26 states moving forward with the Medicaid expansion will rise from 106% FPL to 138% FPL for parents and from 0% to 138% FPL for childless adults (Figure 1). However, the scope of changes for these groups varies widely across the states. Overall, eligibility levels will increase for parents in 19 states and for childless adults in 24 states. The remaining states in this group had already expanded Medicaid to higher incomes. These states will either maintain higher eligibility levels or reduce eligibility to 138% FPL. In states reducing Medicaid eligibility, those losing Medicaid coverage would have incomes that would qualify for federal subsidies to help pay for Marketplace coverage.

In states that do not expand Medicaid, significant coverage gaps will remain for many poor adults. In the 25 states not currently moving forward with the Medicaid expansion, adults between the January 2014 Medicaid eligibility limits and 100% FPL will not gain a coverage option. These adults will not be eligible for Medicaid or the federal subsidies to help pay for Marketplace coverage. As of January 2014, 21 states will have Medicaid eligibility levels for parents below 100% FPL (Figure 2). Moreover, in nearly all of the states that are not currently expanding Medicaid, childless adults generally will not be eligible regardless of how low their incomes are.