Decade-old federal judge vacancy emerges as campaign issue
The Eastern District of North Carolina’s been short a federal district judge since Dec. 31, 2005.

The Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts calls it a “judicial emergency,” defined by an excessive amount of filings per judges able to handle the cases.

It’s the longest current vacancy in the federal courts system by a full four years and according to U.S. Sen. Richard Burr, it’s unlikely to get filled any time soon.

Burr announced late Thursday he wouldn’t provide a “blue slip,” the Senate custom of allowing home-state senators to effectively veto a judicial nomination, and called the nomination of former N.C. Supreme Court Justice Patricia Timmons-Goodson “a brazenly political nomination” made without consulting him or U.S. Sen. Thom Tillis, R-N.C.

“I have always worked in good faith with the White House on North Carolina nominees, and expect the same respect in return,” Burr said in a statement. “It is regrettable that the White House has chosen a different path. This transparent attempt to turn the Eastern District vacancy into an election- season stunt is unacceptable, and I will not support a new nomination in North Carolina from this administration.”

When Senior U.S. District Court Judge Malcolm Howard adopted that senior status on Jan. 1, 2006, it meant he accepted a reduced workload and opened up the position for a full-workload jurist. During that time, in former President George W. Bush’s second term, both Burr and then-U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Dole urged confirmation votes for Thomas Farr, who Bush nominated twice.

“Like (federal circuit court nominee) Judge (Bob) Conrad, Thomas Farr’s nomination to the federal bench has languished far too long without so much as a hearing,” Dole said in a statement by both senators July 19, 2008. “Nearly 600 days ago, Thomas Farr was nominated to serve as a District Court Judge in the Eastern District of North Carolina.

“Both of these dedicated public servants are abundantly qualified to serve on the bench, and it’s high time their nominations were given appropriate consideration by the Judiciary Committee.”

Since then, Burr refused to pass the blue slip for President Barack Obama’s first appointee, Assistant U.S. Attorney Jennifer May-Parker, who heads up the appellate division for the U.S. Attorney for the Eastern District of North Carolina. And as he stated Thursday, Burr won’t consider a new appointment until the swearing-in of a new president.

Burr’s opponent – attorney, Democrat and former 10-year state Rep. Deborah Ross – said while stopping Friday in Kinston that the vacancy needs filling sooner than later.

“The Eastern District has a huge backlog of cases – now, we’re throwing all employment discrimination cases into the federal courts because they’ve been taken out of the state courts by the legislature,” Ross said. “It’s just wrong. We have had some fabulous, fabulous judges of both parties in North Carolina. I’ve practiced in federal court before, and we just need for justice for our people.

“We need to make sure we put people on the bench, and the most recent (nominee) has won statewide twice. So, it’s clear the people of North Carolina are familiar with her and have given her their vote of confidence.”

Wes Wolfe can be reached at 252-559-1075 and Wes.Wolfe@Kinston.com. Follow him on Twitter @WesWolfeKFP.