Year in Review: Atlanta’s Corporate Relocations in 2016
The companies have something in common: In 2016, they all chose Atlanta for their new facilities or relocated operations.

The city continues an upward trend for corporate relocations, and time and time again as Atlanta competes against other cities for business, the city’s low costs, business-friendliness, quality of life and access to top workforce talent continues to put the city at the top of the list for major companies.

Over the last year, some of the biggest corporate brands have chosen the metro area, with Midtown and the Perimeter area leading choices for new locations, noted for their access to MARTA Stations nestled within vibrant, walkable communities that encourage employees to live, work and play all within the same neighborhood.

At the Metro Atlanta Chamber of Commerce’s Nov. 30 annual meeting, MAC President and CEO Hala Moddlemog lauded her organization for assisting several major companies with location and expansion needs, further advancing Atlanta’s position as a digital hub. “These companies and many others are creating 10,489 jobs and generating over $5 billion in investment in our region,” adds Moddlemog.

Get up to speed with these new-to-Atlanta headquarters and expansions below to learn more about what each of these companies is bringing to the city.

Mercedes-Benz USA

Type of Facility: Headquarters

Where: Sandy Springs

The Details: The auto manufacturer broke ground on the new $93 million headquarters in September 2016, bringing one of the world’s best known brands and 500 jobs to the city from it’s previous location in New Jersey. Mercedes plans to open its 200,000-square-foot headquarters where it will employ up to 1,000 in early 2018.

‘Atlanta is a premier city which places us closer to our ever-growing Southeast customer base, our port in Brunswick, Georgia, and to Mercedes-Benz U.S. International, our Alabama manufacturing facility, which accounts for half of the vehicles we sell here in the U.S. For our employees, Atlanta offers a strong quality of life, terrific schools and wonderful cultural and recreational opportunities.’ – Mercedes-Benz USA President and CEO Stephen Cannon

NCR

Type of Facility: Headquarters

Where: Midtown

The Details: In 2009, NCR relocated its headquarters from Dayton, Ohio, to Duluth, and now the financial technology company announced in 2015 it would be taking its talents to Midtown on Spring and Eighth streets near Technology Square. The company will bring as many as 5,400 workers to the two-tower complex, which is set to open in early 2018. The Fortune 500 software company has 30,000 employees and does business in 180 countries.

‘Our campus will provide a world-class work environment for all of our metro Atlanta employees and become a technology landmark in one of the city’s fastest growing neighborhoods.’ – NCR President, CEO and Chairman Bill Nuti

Honeywell

Type of Facility: Software Center/Home and Building Technologies Global Headquarters

Where: Midtown

The Details: In early December 2016, Honeywell announced it had leased 62,000 square feet of a mid-rise office building in Midtown Atlanta for a new software hub and the headquarters of its home and building technologies business. The Morris Plains, New Jersey-based company said it planned to invest $19 million in the site and staff it with more than 830 employees over the next five years. The Midtown location was selected based on its proximity to the Georgia Institute of Technology, access to public transportation and area amenities, scalability for future growth, and the abundant and growing pipeline of Millennial talent that lives and works in the area, according to a release.

Just like GE, Honeywell is expanding past its previous reputation for manufacturing thermostats and other hardware to software development and what’s known as the Internet of Things, the interworking of physical devices with network connectivity to collect and exchange data.

‘As a pioneer in the IoT [Internet of Things], Honeywell’s Home and Building Technologies business, along with the new Software Center, is developing the next generation of connected offerings that will make our customers and their customers more productive, safer, and more secure. We are excited about our new global headquarters in Midtown Atlanta.’ – HBT President and CEO Terrence Hahn

General Electric

Type of Facility: North American IT Headquarters

Where: Midtown

The Details: The San Ramon, California-based company will, over time, add more than 400 jobs in Midtown Atlanta as it shutters the former Information Technology headquarters in Fairfield, Connecticut, and consolidates work from around the U.S. Announced in June, the $3 million, 250-job IT center will be GE’s IT headquarters in North America. As part of GE Digital, the IT business is part of a larger effort to bring together digital capabilities from across GE in a single organization, providing customers with industrial solutions and software needed to solve real-world problems.

‘GE is excited to leverage the top talent in Atlanta and the inclusive business environment across the state to deliver innovation through IT services and operations across GE. These new positions will join the growing IT organization within GE Digital that is helping GE become the premier digital industrial company.’ – GE Digital VP and Chief Technology Officer Chris Drumgoole