Convenience store operator sentenced for untaxed cigarette sales
SHARE Hazam Ali Ahmed

FBI snared Hazam Ali Ahmed by supplying smokes in terror probe

By Jamie Satterfield of the Knoxville News Sentinel

Mouth, meet wallet.

It is an introduction Northwest Knoxville convenience store operator and cigarette smuggling ringleader Hazam Ali Ahmed was wishing Tuesday he had made long ago.

Ahmed, a 38-year-old Yemen native and naturalized U.S. citizen, was one of a slew of cigarette smugglers caught up in a multistate FBI-led probe of convenience store operators who were buying what they thought were stolen untaxed smokes, reselling them and pocketing the difference between the taxed and untaxed cost.

The cigarettes, it turned out, weren't stolen at all but instead were being supplied by the FBI and partnering state law enforcers in hopes of catching cigarette tax evaders. Most suspects were rounded up after making just enough buys to build a federal case.

But Ahmed, who ran the Central Convenience Store on Keith Avenue and was supplying convenience stores in East Knoxville and Michigan with what he thought were untaxed cigarettes, did more than talk cigarette smuggling with the FBI informant employed in his case. He talked terrorism.

Prior court hearings have shown that Ahmed boasted of ties to al-Qaida and chatted up the idea of blowing up a mall as an act of holy war. That drew the attention of the Knoxville branch of the FBI's Joint Terrorism Task Force.

While other cigarette smugglers were being rounded up in other states fairly quickly - limiting just how much they would eventually owe the tax man - the feds kept supplying smokes to Ahmed in hopes of capturing on wiretaps proof of terroristic intent. They didn't. Ahmed later would pass a polygraph examination to prove his terroristic talk was nothing more than braggadocio.

So, when Ahmed was finally arrested, the bill for tobacco taxes owed Tennessee and Michigan had grown to more than $400,000.

"(The figure) greatly exceeds the amount of profits he made from this criminal enterprise," attorney Scott Green said as he and fellow defense attorney Greg Harrison sought to win Ahmed a sentencing break.

Green didn't deny that Ahmed, already convicted in New York of cigarette smuggling, deserved some jail time as a local leader. But he noted that most co-conspirators were walking away with little punishment while Ahmed had already served "18 months of hard time" awaiting Tuesday's sentencing and needed his freedom to start paying back the tax man.

The difference between what Green proposed as punishment and Assistant U.S. Attorney Jeff Theodore wanted was, in the end, a matter of months, not years, as cigarette smuggling - in today's world of violent drug trafficking - is considered almost quaint.

Green won, with U.S. District Judge Tom Varlan imposing a 28-month prison term as opposed to the 30 months or slightly more Theodore advocated.

Jamie Satterfield may be reached at 865-342-6308. Follow her on Twitter at http://twitter.com/jamiescoop.