Nevada Democrats fight allegations of unfairness
Nevada State Democratic Convention organizers are shooting back against allegations that they unfairly disqualified some would-be Bernie Sanders delegates.

The controversy comes after Hillary Clinton took seven of the 12 delegates up for grabs at the Saturday convention. She won by 33 delegates in a field of nearly 3,400.

A member of the convention credentials committee presented a "minority report" after the announcement, criticizing the committee's decision to disqualify nearly 60 potential Sanders delegates and saying it didn't align with Democratic values.

Party officials said the ineligible Sanders supporters weren't registered as Democrats by a May 1 deadline or didn't provide necessary personal information. They said eight would-be Clinton supporters were also disqualified.

The state party said it abided by rules adopted by Clinton and Sanders supporters alike.

6:32 p.m. update:

Hillary Clinton will keep her comfortable delegate lead in Nevada after turning out more supporters than Bernie Sanders at the Nevada State Democratic Convention.

Clinton won seven of the 12 delegates up for grabs at the raucous convention on Saturday, while Sanders won five. Party officials say 1,695 Clinton-supporting delegates and 1,662 Sanders-supporting delegates showed up to the event.

Clinton won the Nevada caucuses on Feb. 20 and locked in 13 delegates as a result. Sanders locked in 10 delegates from the caucuses.

Nevada will send 43 delegates to the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia in July. Twenty of those will be Clinton supporters, and 15 will be backing Sanders.

Eight "superdelegates" can choose whomever they'd like in Philadelphia, but most have said they'll back Clinton.

___

3:50 p.m. update:

Hillary Clinton delegates slightly outnumber those backing Bernie Sanders at the Nevada State Democratic Convention.

Party officials say 1,693 Clinton-supporting delegates and 1,662 Sanders-supporting delegates registered Saturday at the Paris casino in Las Vegas. Four people were uncommitted.

The numbers could change because delegates had about an hour after the announcement to switch to another candidate if they wanted.

State-level delegates will vote later on Saturday for 12 delegates that will attend the Democratic National Convention. The turnout advantage for the Clinton camp suggests she'll take the majority.

Nevada is sending 43 delegates to the national convention. Hillary Clinton picked up 13 when she won the Feb. 20 caucuses, while Bernie Sanders got 10.

Eight Nevada "superdelegates" can choose whomever they want at the convention, although most favor Clinton.

Original story:

Thousands of Nevada Democrats are converging on the Paris casino in Las Vegas to help decide the party's presidential nominee.

The outcome of Saturday's all-day event will decide twelve of the 43 delegates Nevada will send to the Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia in July.

Candidates already locked in some of their delegates based on the results of Nevada's Democratic caucuses on Feb. 20. Hillary Clinton won the popular vote and has 13 delegates, while Bernie Sanders gets 10.

Eight prominent Nevada Democrats are considered "superdelegates" and can choose whomever they want at the convention, although most favor Clinton.

Clinton is widely expected to keep her lead through the national convention, even though Sanders won at Nevada's county-level conventions last month.

(Copyright 2016 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.)