UTB Prepares Warning System For Mexico Violence
POSTED: Wednesday, November 17, 2010

As expected, the next time rapid gunfire and explosions echo across the Rio Grande from neighboring Matamoros, Mexico, University of Texas police at the Brownsville campus will send out text warnings to 8,000 students, faculty and staff.

The new texting system is in response to the Nov. 5 all-out assault by the Mexican military that killed Gulf Cartel leader Ezequiel Cardenas-Guillen.

UTB spokeswoman Letty Fernandez said the university is testing the new system next Tuesday.

In the meantime, "we are asking folks to update their contact information," Fernandez said.

Once that is done and next week's test is successful, she said the warning texts will be added to the school's other measures including sirens sounding on campus, e-mails and phone calls.

That day when the ominous sounds of Mexico's war could be heard across the university's golf course and athletic fields closest to the Rio Grande, UTB police stopped a men's soccer match between Our Lady of the Lake University of San Antonio and Huston-Tillotson in Austin.

The public address system directed players and people in the stands to leave the area and get indoors.

"Nice little jog back to the dorms. We didn't want to stay around here," said Jean-Paul Piacente, a UTB freshmen and member of its soccer team.

He, his fellow players and their coach were in the bleachers scouting both teams.

"We were playing the winner the next day," said Dan Balaguero, UTB's head soccer coach.

The match was moved indoors, where OLLU lost.

Fernandez also said the school's homecoming events that weekend were canceled and later rescheduled because the campus was closed.

It is located within easy walking distance of the river that divides Texas and Mexico.

"Life on the border," said Paicente, who is from Toronto, Canada.

UTB Police Chief Don Cardoza said like its sister campus, UT-El Paso at the other end of Texas, "both of us have unfortunately received bullets landing on our campus."

Cardoza said no one has been injured over the past year when three bullets in separate incidents flew more than a mile, striking a campus building, the back windshield of a parked vehicle and the campus courtyard.

To determine where they came from, Cardoza said forensics were used along with Google maps and information about where occurred shootings on those days in Matamoros.

The chief said the Nov. 5 day-long confrontation that led to the demise of a notorious cartel figure was much the same in that "there was no information to forewarn us."

In spite of the continued threat in Matamoros, Paicente said safety is not a concern because the university has a security response in place.

Copyright 2010 by KSAT.com All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Still thinking back to sudden evacuation a few weeks ago, he said "I've never seen anything like it before."