Bernie Sanders supporters hold protest day after Nevada Democratic Convention
LAS VEGAS (KTNV) - Dozens of Bernie Sanders supporters held a protest on the Las Vegas Strip Sunday, the day after the Nevada Democratic Convention.

They are upset over the way the convention ended at the Paris hotel-casino and were concerned that certain Sanders delegates were not being counted. The rally Sunday was held across the Strip in front of Bellagio hotel-casino.



There had been a controversy for hours Saturday evening concerning the validity of 64 Sanders delegates and alternates.



The Nevada State Democratic Party said these delegates were not registered Democratic voters in the state by May 1 and their contact information could not be found or identified. The state party said these people did not respond to requests to correct the information.



Of these 64 delegate and alternates, six were allowed to be seated after the information was provided and 58 were denied.



Ultimately, Hillary Clinton received 1,695 delegates to Sanders' 1,662, meaning the former secretary of state will take 20 delegates to the national convention in July compared to 15 for the Vermont senator.



Convention organizers said they had to end the convention after it went several hours longer than anticipated and security became an issue.



The director of security for the Paris informed the state party and representatives of both campaigns around 10 p.m. Saturday that the property could no longer provide "the necessary security under conditions made unruly and unpredictable." Paris hotel security requested a prompt conclusion to the event.



According to the Nevada State Democratic Party statement, "therefore, recognizing the business still to be conducted by the convention, the State Party Chairwoman accepted a motion to agree to the Party Leader and Elected Official (PLEO) and At-Large Delegate slates as submitted by the presidential campaigns. She also accepted a motion to adopt and elect the State Central Committee pursuant to the rules and as submitted by the county party chairs. This allowed the State Party to properly adjourn the State Convention.”