Nevada politician receiving hundreds of death threats, insults after Democratic Convention
A Nevada politician has received hundreds of death threats following the Democratic convention this past weekend.

Roberta Lange, the state's Democratic Party chairwoman, has been bombarded with voicemails, texts and social media messages that say things like "I don't know how you sleep at night. You are a sick, twisted piece of s***," and "I hope you burn for this. I hope people find you."

"I've never seen anything like this ever before in the politics where I've been involved in in this state," Lange said.

There have been hundreds of threats and insults the last few days. One text message mentioned Lange's children and grandchildren. Another called her a cancer.

A significant number of the threats are from Bernie Sanders supporters.

At the Nevada Democratic Convention Saturday, Sanders' campaign got fewer delegates than expected, hurting his nomination chances.

Lange says there were death threats being yelled at her while she was speaking on stage, and she had to take security to the bathroom.

Riley Snyder, a reporter for Politifact Nevada, says Sanders supporters are taking out their frustration on Lange.

"They're using her as a punching bag," Snyder said. "She's an easy scapegoat."

Lange's place of work hasn't escaped the backlash. She's a manager at Porchlight Grille and the restaurant has received dozens of abusive calls.

"They just go off and they say all kinds of crazy things and threats and just really nasty stuff," said Tom Gallagher, the owner.

Sanders released a statement on the harassment Tuesday.

"Party leaders in Nevada claim that the Sanders campaign has a 'penchant for violence,'" he said. "That is nonsense...It goes without saying that I condemn any and all forms of violence."

Lange says she will continue to fight for what she believes is right.

She's changed her personal cell phone number, but is still dealing with a barrage of abuse on social media.

Lange says Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department officers are aware of these attacks, and they are investigating.

WATCH THE FULL INTERVIEW WITH ROBERTA LANGE BELOW.