Anthony D. Cotton
Tony was born in Waukesha, Wisconsin. He went to Catholic Memorial High School, graduating in 1998. Upon graduation, Tony attended the University of Wisconsin-Whitewater for two years before transferring to UW-Madison. At Madison, Tony majored in Political Science and was twice elected to student government while remaining heavily involved in other student organizations. Tony graduated in four years, and was accepted to Marquette for law school.

At Marquette, Tony focused heavily on criminal and international law. During his second year of law school Tony was awarded a grant from the Public Interest Law Society so that he could investigate human rights abuses in Eritrea, East Africa. In the summer of 2004, Tony lived there for the summer. During this time, Tony traveled throughout the country to interview civilians and prepare claims for people who had suffered damages as a result of the Eritrean-Ethiopian war. This experience solidified Tony’s desire to help those in need.

While still in law school, Tony secured an internship with the Federal Defender’s Office in Milwaukee. AS a law clerk, Tony helped draft a habeas brief to the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals and he was invited to Washington, D.C. to help the attorneys prepare arguments for one of the most significant criminal cases in United States history – United States vs. Booker (2005).

Tony began working at Kuchler & Cotton immediately upon his graduation in 2005. He has made a career out of working for the underdog and for those who might otherwise not have a voice. All of Tony’s practice involves defending those accused of crimes.

Tony has developed a reputation as an attorney who works hard and fights hard for each and every client. Tony has obtained not guilty verdicts and dismissals on charges of First Degree Intentional Homicide, Reckless Homicide, Second Degree Sexual Assault, Reckless Endangerment, Battery, Substantial Battery, Carrying a Concealed Weapon, Felon in Possession of a Firearm, Illegal Alien in Possession of a Firearm, Heroin Dealing, Voter Fraud, Obstructing an Officer, Resisting Arrest, Burglary, Robbery, Hit & Run, Cocaine Delivery, Bail Jumping, Child Neglect, Physical Abuse of a Child, Theft by Contractor, Disorderly Conduct and many others. Tony has secured not guilty verdicts in Federal Court (one count of bank robbery, one count of witness intimidation, and one count of discharging a firearm in furtherance of a crime).

Juries have found Tony’s clients not guilty in cases where his clients have confessed to the crimes and in cases where the evidence seems utterly overwhelming. In one case, despite the client confessing to the crime, a judge agreed, mid-trial, to dismiss a gun charge given the lack of corroborating evidence.

Tony has been successful in getting evidence suppressed. In Milwaukee, Tony has had confessions and other physical evidence suppressed, resulting in dismissals of gun charges, drug charges and bail jumpings. In 2012 a Milwaukee Circuit Court judge suppressed four pounds of marijuana and $12,000 in cash because of an illegal police intrusion into the client’s home. In Waukesha, judges have suppressed statements, confessions and evidence of drug dealing. In one case, felony marijuana manufacturing charges were dismissed after Tony filed a motion and brief challenging the search of his client’s house. Tony has won motions in virtually every jurisdiction he practices in. In federal court, Tony has gotten charges of heroin delivery, voter fraud, illegal alien in possession of a firearm, and marijuana conspiracy, dismissed outright. Tony is one of the younger attorneys to ever receive federal appointments and has quickly earned a reputation as an aggressive, hard-working attorney.

At the age of 26 Tony was elected to the Board of Directors of the Wisconsin Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers (WACDL). He takes over as President of the organization in July, 2015. At 28 he was elected to the Board of Directors of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers (NACDL). In 2010 Tony became a Life Member of NACDL. In 2012 he was re-elected to another 3 year term on the NACDL Board of Directors. Tony is also heavily involved in the local community. In June, 2009 Tony was chosen as President of 180 Juvenile Diversion, an organization helping divert criminal charges for youthful offenders. He served as President until 2012.

Tony is highly committed to his work and he spends countless hours working for and defending his clients. Tony’s hard work has been recognized by Super Lawyers, every year since 2008. Tony has been selected as a “Rising Star” in 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. In 2014 and 2015 Tony was selected as a “Super Lawyer” a distinction offered to only 5% of lawyers in Wisconsin. The Wisconsin Law Journal recognized Tony’s work in 2010 when he was selected as an “Up and Coming Lawyer,” an award given to only twenty attorneys in the state. After receiving this award, Tony was asked to write a monthly column for the Wisconsin Law Journal, which he still does to this day. as one 20 lawyers chosen as the State’s Up and Coming Lawyers. In 2012 Judge William Domina selected Tony to be one of his two Supplemental Court Commissioners.

Tony also helps run training programs for other criminal defense lawyers. He has structured numerous continuing legal education programs throughout the State on behalf of the Wisconsin Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers. Tony travels around the country attending regular seminars so that he is up to speed on every major development in criminal law.

Tony believes that there is nothing more honorable than defending the Constitution and the Bill of Rights. He works tirelessly for his clients, and leaves no stone un-turned. His results speak for themselves. In countless cases, Tony has secured life changing results for his clients. Feel free to read his reviews on avvo.com where dozens of former clients have attested to his passion, commitment and work ethic: