Doggett refuses debate with Campbell
AUSTIN (KXAN) - Congressman Lloyd Doggett's campaign says the incumbent Democrat will not debate his Republican challenger, Dr. Donna Campbell . Doggett's staff says it is a gimmicky last-minute attempt, but Campbell insists the invitation is still open.

Keep in mind, these two candidates for District 25, which covers part of Austin, shared a stage with their Libertarian opponent Jim Stutsman on Tuesday in Bastrop at a candidate forum. But after speaking with Doggett and Campbell, it sounds like there is still a lot left unsaid.

Campbell took the opportunity to explain her position on education funding when sitting down with KXAN on Friday. Doggett is currently airing a television ad saying she wants to end federal funding for education.

“You know, I have to laugh because of all issues for him to take me to task on, he's the one who's our Texas representative and put an amendment that singled out Texas which successfully blocked $830 million of education funding that was destined for our schools,” Campbell said.

As close to a debate as can be, before sitting down with Campbell, we caught up with Doggett to ask him about the amendment that keeps popping back up in this race. Campbell said he is playing politics with school children by requiring Texas to make an impossible guarantee to get money from the Education Jobs Fund Bill. Even the governor says that violates the Texas Constitution.

"As far as Gov. Perry, if he hadn't taken $3.2 billion of federal education money last year and diverted it to other purposes, my amendment would not be necessary,” said Doggett. “I am tired of seeing federal aid for education dollars being spent somewhere else by the state of Texas.”

Doggett said he wants voters to know he is simply looking out for the money Texas schools are due.

"This isn't about too much spending,” said Doggett. “It's about accountability for our education dollars."

As far as him saying Campbell wants no federal education funding, she said she simply wants to see the money Texas has stay where it is.

"Monies that arise from Texas from our taxes should stay in Texas to fund Texas schools, not be sent to Washington D.C. to redistribute that education money,” Campbell said. “Leave it in Texas."