Poultry plants linked to outbreak won't be closed
For years, Foster Farms wanted consumers to know its poultry was farm fresh, all natural and, most important, safe to eat.

But the ongoing salmonella outbreak linked to three of its central California processing plants is threatening to tarnish the company's image and raising hard questions about gaps in the nation's food safety laws.

Considered among the industry's leading producers with state-of-the-art facilities, Foster Farms is an example of how salmonella has become an increasingly potent threat to consumer safety.

Foster Farms: An article in the Oct. 11 Section A about a salmonella outbreak linked to poultry from Foster Farms said that Livingston, Calif., had a population of 250,000. The city's population is about 13,500.

"This is not your grandmother's salmonella anymore," said Caroline Smith DeWaal, food safety director for the Center for Science in the Public Interest. "It's a new salmonella, much more potent, and modified with the use of antibiotics on the farm."

At least 278 people reportedly have been sickened in 18 states since March by a strain of Salmonella Heidelberg that has shown signs of resistance to antibiotics. That may explain why rates of hospitalization are nearly double that of typical salmonella outbreaks.

That prompted the U.S. Department of Agriculture this week to threaten Foster Farms with closure of its two plants in Fresno and another in Livingston, Calif., where the company is headquartered.

That threat was lifted Thursday after Foster Farms met a deadline to show plans to improve conditions in the three problem plants. The USDA's Food Safety and Inspection Service did not mandate a recall of chicken from those facilities. It deemed the company's poultry safe to eat as long as it's cooked to a minimum of 165 degrees Fahrenheit.

Still, Foster Farms faces a challenge restoring faith in its products.

In a letter to the company that's now circulating on the Internet, the USDA admonished the nation's 10th-largest poultry producer for unsanitary conditions at those plants and cited a dozen instances this year in which fecal material was found on carcasses.

"Your establishment has failed to demonstrate that it has adequate controls in place to address salmonella in your poultry products," the letter said.

Kroger Co., the nation's largest grocery chain, has already recalled chicken from the three Foster Farms facilities tied to the outbreak.

The chicken in question can be identified in supermarkets with USDA marks of inspection P6137, P6137A or P7632.

Officials at Foster Farms have not granted interviews, but in a written statement released late Wednesday, President and Chief Executive Ron Foster apologized for the illnesses and pledged to take steps to ensure the safety of its chicken.

The family-owned company had otherwise been considered a stalwart in the nation's $45-billion chicken industry.

"We have a 75-year history for excellence because of our commitment to continuous advancement in food safety," Foster said in his prepared statement. "We are putting every resource we have toward the continued safety of our fresh chicken."

Some who track the poultry industry agreed, saying Foster Farms had put in place stringent food safety measures.

"The company's reputation up until lately has been spotless," said Thomas E. Elam, president of farming consulting company FarmEcon in Carmel, Ind. "They've had an incredibly good safety record. They have been a really innovative company, jumping on top of the natural, eco-friendly, California themes."