Letter of Support for Delaying Individual and Employer Mandates

Dear Representatives Todd Young and Tim Griffin:

On behalf of more than two million Americans for Prosperity activists in all 50 states, I applaud you for introducing legislation to postpone the harmful health insurance mandates in the President’s health care law for one year. The Authority for Mandate Delay Act (H.R. 2667) would delay the mandate for employers and the Fairness for American Families Act (H.R. 2668) would delay the mandate for individuals.

Even though the Supreme Court upheld that the federal government has the power to require all Americans to buy health insurance and tax them if they don’t comply, the individual mandate has myriad additional problems, both in policy and in principle. The burden of this so-called tax will overwhelmingly fall on the middle-income individuals and families who continue to struggle in the down economy.

The employer mandate is similarly unworkable for American businesses. Under the President’s health care law, if an employer has more than 50 employees and fails to provide them with insurance, the employer must pay a $2,000 per employee fine to the IRS. This mandate will lead many of the nation’s employers to hire fewer workers, scale back hours, or drop their current health insurance coverage completely. Delaying the employer mandate even has the support of President Obama; last week, he announced that his administration will delay enforcing this onerous provision until 2015.

These mandates should be repealed entirely because they will have such onerous effects on American individuals and businesses, but delaying them is a strong step in the right direction. Americans for Prosperity is proud to support H.R. 2668 and H.R. 2667, your legislation to delay the employer and individual mandates. I urge your colleagues to support their passage, and I look forward to working with you in the future.

Sincerely,

Christine Harbin Hanson

Policy Analyst

Americans for Prosperity

Like this post? Chip in $5 to AFP.