A guide to every Russia investigation happening right now
Who is leaking classified information

Ties between Trump associates and Russian officials

Russian meddling in the 2016 election

Mueller still answers to Rosenstein, who in turn answers to the president. This means Trump has the authority to fire the special counsel for any reason if he doesn’t like the way the investigation is going. However, such a move is highly unlikely because of the political ramifications for Trump, who faced intense criticism when he fired FBI Director James Comey.

Under the authority of Rosenstein, Mueller will have a greater degree of autonomy to conduct investigations and prosecutions than congressional committees, which often are partisan.

What special counsel can't do

What a special counsel can do

○ Possible obstruction of justice by President Trump and financial crimes among Trump associates, according to the Washington Post

○ Potential ties between Trump associates and Russian officials

○ Russian meddling in the 2016 election

What are they investigating?

When did the investigation start?

Former FBI director led the Justice Department's investigation until Trump fired him on May 9.

The Justice Department's special counsel was appointed by Rosenstein on May 17. Mueller was the former FBI director for Presidents George W. Bush and Obama.

Deputy attorney general leads the Justice Department's investigation since Sessions' recusal.

Attorney general and head of the Justice Department. He recused himself from the department's investigation into Russia on March 2 because of his close ties to the Trump campaign.

The department was in charge of the FBI's criminal investigation into Russia, which was led by James Comey until he was fired by President Trump. Robert Mueller now leads the investigation.

Congress

Congress can launch its own investigations through various committees and hearings. Unlike the Justice Department, Congress cannot criminally prosecute anyone.

A handful of committees in the House and Senate can launch their own investigations. Four have already done so. Each committee has the ability to decide what to pursue and set the scope of their investigation:

Actively investigatingCould possibly launch investigation HOUSE COMMITEES SENATE COMMITTEES Agriculture Aging Appropriations Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry Armed Services Appropriations Budget Armed Services Education and the Workforce Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs Energy and Commerce Budget Ethics Commerce, Science, and Transportation Financial Services Energy and Natural Resources Foreign Affairs Environment and Public Works Homeland Security Ethics House Administration Finance Intelligence Foreign Relations Judiciary Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Natural Resources Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Oversight and Government Reform Indian Affairs Rules Intelligence Science, Space, and Technology Judiciary (subcommittee on crime and terrorism) Small Business Rules and Administration Transportation and Infrastructure Small Business and Entrepreneurship Veterans' Affairs Senate Caucus on International Narcotics Control Ways and Means Veterans' Affairs

Key players Sen. Charles E. Grassley Chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee Sen. Dianne Feinstein Ranking member of the Senate Judiciary Committee Sen. Richard M. Burr Chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee Sen. Mark R. Warner Ranking member of the Senate Intelligence Committee Rep. Jason Chaffetz Chairman of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee Rep. Elijah E. Cummings Ranking member of the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee Rep. Devin Nunes Chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, who stepped away from leading the investigation amid allegations of improperly handling classified information. Rep. Adam B. Schiff Ranking member of the House Intelligence Committee

What Congress can do Interview people of interest and invite them to testify

Interview people of interest and invite them to testify Subpoena documents or witnesses

Subpoena documents or witnesses Schedule closed and open hearings

Schedule closed and open hearings Bring and vote on impeachment charges (requires a majority vote in the House and two-thirds vote in the Senate) What Congress can't do Bring criminal charges

Pros of a congressional investigation Ongoing congressional investigations are often more public than those done by the Justice Department. Cons of a congressional investigation Congressional hearings are inherently political. Republicans are in the majority in the House and Senate, which means they control the agenda of each committee, setting the course on everything from hearing schedules to witnesses called.

Investigations taking place in both the Senate and House: Senate Intelligence Committee When did the investigation start? What are they investigating? ○ Russian meddling in the 2016 election ○ Former national security advisor Michael T.Flynn's ties with Russian officials ○ Ties between Trump associates and Russian officials ○ Who is leaking classified information ○ Reports that Trump allegedly disclosed classified information to Russian officials ○ The firing of FBI Director James Comey ○ The existence of any Comey memos or Trump tapes relating to the FBI’s investigation of Trump’s associates and Russia, or the Clinton email investigation ○ Any collusion between Atty. Gen. Sessions and Russians during the election Who's on the committee? Majority members (Republicans) Richard M. Burr, chairman (N.C.) Jim Risch (Idaho) Marco Rubio (Fla.) Susan Collins (Maine) Roy Blunt (Miss.) James Lankford (Okla.) Tom Cotton (Ark.) John Cornyn (Texas) Minority members (Democrats) Mark Warner, Vice Chairman (Va.) Dianne Feinstein (Calif.) Ron Wyden (Ore.) Martin Heinrich (N.M.) Angus King* (Maine) Joe Manchin (West Va.) Kamala Harris (Calif.) *King is an Independent who caucuses with Democrats

Senate Judiciary subcommittee on crime and terrorism When did the investigation start? What are they investigating? ○ Russian meddling in the 2016 election ○ Former national security adviser Michael Flynn's ties with Russian officials ○ The Justice Department's ongoing investigation of Flynn ○ Who is leaking classified information ○ How to prevent and deter foreign interference on U.S. elections ○ The existence of any Comey memos or Trump tapes relating to the FBI’s investigation of Trump’s associates and Russia, or the Clinton email investigation Who's on the committee? Majority members (Republicans) Lindsey Graham, chairman (S.C.) John Cornyn (Texas) Ted Cruz (Texas) Ben Sasse (Neb.) John Kennedy (La.) Minority members (Democrats) Sheldon Whitehouse, ranking member (R.I.) Dick Durbin (Ill.) Amy Klobuchar (Minn.) Christopher Coons (Del.)

House Intelligence Committee When did the investigation start? What are they investigating? ○ Russian meddling in the 2016 election ○ Russian media's attempts to spread fake news during the 2016 election ○ The U.S. government's response to Russia's interference in the election ○ Former national security advisor Michael Flynn's ties with Russian officials ○ Broader ties between Trump associates and Russian officials ○ Who is leaking classified information Who's on the committee? Majority members (Republicans) Devin Nunes, chairman (Calif.) Mike K. Conaway (Texas) Peter T. King (N.Y.) Frank A. LoBiondo (N.J.) Tom Rooney (Fla.) Ileana Ros-Lehtinen (Fla.) Michael R. Turner (Ohio) Brad Wenstrup (Ohio) Chris Stewart (Utah) Rick Crawford (Ark.) Trey Gowdy (S.C.) Elise Stefanik (N.Y.) Will Hurd (Texas) Minority members (Democrats) Adam B. Schiff, ranking member (Calif.) Jim Himes (Conn.) Terri Sewell (Ala.) Andre Carson (Ind.) Jackie Speier (Calif.) Mike Quigley (Ill.) Eric Swalwell (Iowa) Joaquin Castro (Texas) Denny Heck (Wash.)