Firefighters union officers asked to resign
Local firefighter union leaders are asking officers of their state labor organization to resign after they claimed expenses for union meetings that never happened.

Lance Hanson, an Eau Claire Fire Department lieutenant and an executive board member of the Professional Fire Fighters of Wisconsin, is among 11 state union leaders who reportedly filed false expense claims for the purpose of being reimbursed for political donations made to lobbyists, according to the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel.

"This issue is embarrassing to our local organization, our state organization, and at the international level," Eau Claire Local 487 President Chris Bell wrote in an e-mail to the Leader-Telegram. "I believe that all three levels have failed in some form as to addressing the severity of this issue."

Six of seven local union presidents in the Indianhead District called in spring for all board members, including Hanson, who took the fraudulent reimbursements to resign their leadership posts in the state union.

Professional Fire Fighters of Wisconsin investigated the fraudulent reimbursements, concluding that the practice was illegal, prompting the 11 board members to reimburse the union for a combined $17,146 by June 1. No taxpayer money was involved in the falsified reimbursements.

Daniel Bice, an investigative columnist with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, reported on Dec. 12 that the false meeting reimbursements corresponded to political donations made to the lobbying arm of the International Association of Firefighters, commonly known as FirePac. The practice has gone on for at least seven years, he wrote.

In a follow-up column Monday, Bice noted three of the board members, including Hanson, were actually on duty at their respective fire departments on at least some days they sought reimbursements for union meetings.

In Hanson's case, he claimed $827 for gas, lodging, meals and other expenses for union events on March 28 and 30, 2005, and Feb. 5, 2008, according to the Journal Sentinel.

Dale Peters, city of Eau Claire human resources director, consulted the Fire Department's roster list, which recorded that Hanson was on duty on those days.

"Our records indicate Lt. Hanson was working those three days," Peters said.

Hanson, union President Michael Woodzicka of Appleton and Vice President Robert Baird of Brookfield sought reimbursement for many other meetings between 2005 and 2008 when they weren't working at their respective departments. But Bice wrote that "it was not clear which were phantom meetings and which ones actually took place."

Hanson could not be reached for comment Monday. He was not scheduled to work, and a message left at his home was not returned.

Hanson was president of Local 487, the union that represents Eau Claire firefighters, from 2006 to 2009. Bell has been president since the beginning of this year.

The reimbursement issue came up at a meeting of Local 487 earlier this year. Bell said members are split on how to deal with the issue; some felt that board members paying back the money was good enough, while others pushed for further action.

An Eau Claire firefighter filed charges with the International Association of Firefighters against five board members who held onto their posts even after the six others named in the scandal resigned. A pre-trial review board tossed out the case, arguing that the money was repaid, the individuals did not know what they were doing was wrong and that action was only being sought against five members, not all 11.

After its investigation, the state union said it would provide additional oversight on financial issues and review laws related to reimbursement and campaign finance.

Bell said he believes the practice has been stopped in Wisconsin, but it's hard to say the extent of falsified reimbursements elsewhere.

A Dec. 15 news release from the International Association of Fire Fighters stated that more than $5 million had been donated nationwide to FirePac for the most recent election cycle. It was the most raised for an election in the political action committee's 32-year history.

Dowd can be reached at 715-833-9204, 800-236-7077 or andrew.dowd@ecpc.com. The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel contributed to this report.