Laws, Acts, and Legislation
Return to Laws Page HB 176

As Passed by House View Full Text

with Line Numbers



(.pdf format)



(.html format) View Publications Associated with this Bill



Bill Analyses



Synopsis of Committee Amendments



Conference Committee Synopsis



Fiscal Notes



Status Report of Legislation



Votes



Bill Sponsors



REPRESENTATIVES:

Stewart McGregor Skindell Celeste Letson Garland Blair Foley Yuko Heard Williams, S. Harris Harwood Carney Chandler Boyd Hagan Ujvagi Koziura Winburn Luckie Williams, B. Mallory Sykes Yates Brown Driehaus Gerberry Lundy Bolon Dyer Garrison Murray Otterman Pillich Slesnick Szollosi Weddington



Other Versions of Bill and Associated Reports



As Reported by House Committee



As Introduced



HELP - Field Definitions for this Page The online versions of legislation provided on this website are not official. Enrolled bills are the final version passed by the Ohio General Assembly and presented to the Governor for signature. The official version of acts signed by the Governor are available from the Secretary of State's Office in the Continental Plaza, 180 East Broad St., Columbus. Am. Sub. H. B. No. 176 As Passed by the House As Passed by the House

128th General Assembly Regular Session 2009-2010 Am. Sub. H. B. No. 176



Representatives Stewart, McGregor Cosponsors: Representatives Skindell, Celeste, Letson, Garland, Blair, Foley, Yuko, Heard, Williams, S., Harris, Harwood, Carney, Chandler, Boyd, Hagan, Ujvagi, Koziura, Winburn, Luckie, Williams, B., Mallory, Sykes, Yates, Brown, Driehaus, Gerberry, Lundy, Bolon, Dyer, Garrison, Murray, Otterman, Pillich, Slesnick, Szollosi, Weddington

A BILL To amend sections 9.03, 124.93, 125.111, 340.12, 511.03, 717.01, 1501.012, 1751.18, 2927.03, 3113.36, 3301.53, 3304.14, 3304.50, 3313.481, 3314.06, 3332.09, 3721.13, 3905.55, 4111.17, 4112.01, 4112.02, 4112.021, 4112.04, 4112.05, 4112.08, 4117.19, 4735.16, 4735.55, 4757.07, 4758.16, 4765.18, 5104.09, 5107.26, 5111.31, 5119.61, 5123.351, 5126.07, 5515.08, and 5709.832 of the Revised Code to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity.

BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF OHIO: Section 1. That sections 9.03, 124.93, 125.111, 340.12, 511.03, 717.01, 1501.012, 1751.18, 2927.03, 3113.36, 3301.53, 3304.14, 3304.50, 3313.481, 3314.06, 3332.09, 3721.13, 3905.55, 4111.17, 4112.01, 4112.02, 4112.021, 4112.04, 4112.05, 4112.08, 4117.19, 4735.16, 4735.55, 4757.07, 4758.16, 4765.18, 5104.09, 5107.26, 5111.31, 5119.61, 5123.351, 5126.07, 5515.08, and 5709.832 of the Revised Code be amended to read as follows: Sec. 9.03. (A) As used in this section, "political subdivision" means any body corporate and politic, except a municipal corporation that has adopted a charter under Section 7 of Article XVIII, Ohio Constitution, and except a county that has adopted a charter under Sections 3 and 4 of Article X, Ohio Constitution, to which both of the following apply: (1) It is responsible for governmental activities only in a geographic area smaller than the state. (2) It is subject to the sovereign immunity of the state. (B) Except as otherwise provided in division (C) of this section, the governing body of a political subdivision may use public funds to publish and distribute newsletters, or to use any other means, to communicate information about the plans, policies, and operations of the political subdivision to members of the public within the political subdivision and to other persons who may be affected by the political subdivision. (C) Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(7) of section 340.03 or division (A)(12) of section 340.033 of the Revised Code, no governing body of a political subdivision shall use public funds to do any of the following: (1) Publish, distribute, or otherwise communicate information that does any of the following: (a) Contains defamatory, libelous, or obscene matter; (b) Promotes alcoholic beverages, cigarettes or other tobacco products, or any illegal product, service, or activity; (c) Promotes illegal discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, race, color, religion, national origin, handicap, age, or ancestry; (d) Supports or opposes any labor organization or any action by, on behalf of, or against any labor organization; (e) Supports or opposes the nomination or election of a candidate for public office, the investigation, prosecution, or recall of a public official, or the passage of a levy or bond issue. (2) Compensate any employee of the political subdivision for time spent on any activity to influence the outcome of an election for any of the purposes described in division (C)(1)(e) of this section. Division (C)(2) of this section does not prohibit the use of public funds to compensate an employee of a political subdivision for attending a public meeting to present information about the political subdivision's finances, activities, and governmental actions in a manner that is not designed to influence the outcome of an election or the passage of a levy or bond issue, even though the election, levy, or bond issue is discussed or debated at the meeting. (D) Nothing in this section prohibits or restricts any political subdivision from sponsoring, participating in, or doing any of the following: (1) Charitable or public service advertising that is not commercial in nature; (2) Advertising of exhibitions, performances, programs, products, or services that are provided by employees of a political subdivision or are provided at or through premises owned or operated by a political subdivision; (3) Licensing an interest in a name or mark that is owned or controlled by the political subdivision. (E) As used in this section, "cigarettes" and "tobacco product" have the same meanings as in section 5743.01 of the Revised Code. Sec. 124.93. (A) As used in this section, "physician" means any person who holds a valid certificate to practice medicine and surgery or osteopathic medicine and surgery issued under Chapter 4731. of the Revised Code. (B) No health insuring corporation that, on or after July 1, 1993, enters into or renews a contract with the department of administrative services under section 124.82 of the Revised Code, because of a physician's race, color, religion, sex, or national origin , ; disability , sexual orientation, gender identity, or military status as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code , ; age , ; or ancestry, shall refuse to contract with that physician for the provision of health care services under section 124.82 of the Revised Code. Any health insuring corporation that violates this division is deemed to have engaged in an unlawful discriminatory practice as defined in section 4112.02 of the Revised Code and is subject to Chapter 4112. of the Revised Code. (C) Each health insuring corporation that, on or after July 1, 1993, enters into or renews a contract with the department of administrative services under section 124.82 of the Revised Code and that refuses to contract with a physician for the provision of health care services under that section shall provide that physician with a written notice that clearly explains the reason or reasons for the refusal. The notice shall be sent to the physician by regular mail within thirty days after the refusal. Any health insuring corporation that fails to provide notice in compliance with this division is deemed to have engaged in an unfair and deceptive act or practice in the business of insurance as defined in section 3901.21 of the Revised Code and is subject to sections 3901.19 to 3901.26 of the Revised Code. Sec. 125.111. (A) Every contract for or on behalf of the state or any of its political subdivisions for any purchase shall contain provisions similar to those required by section 153.59 of the Revised Code in the case of construction contracts by which the contractor agrees to both of the following: (1) That, in the hiring of employees for the performance of work under the contract or any subcontract, no contractor or subcontractor, by reason of race, color, religion, sex, or age , ; disability , sexual orientation, gender identity, or military status , as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code , ; national origin , ; or ancestry, shall discriminate against any citizen of this state in the employment of a person qualified and available to perform the work to which the contract relates; (2) That no contractor, subcontractor, or person acting on behalf of any contractor or subcontractor, in any manner, shall discriminate against, intimidate, or retaliate against any employee hired for the performance of work under the contract on account of race, color, religion, sex, or age , ; disability , sexual orientation, gender identity, or military status , as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code , ; national origin , ; or ancestry. (B) All contractors from whom the state or any of its political subdivisions make purchases shall have a written affirmative action program for the employment and effective utilization of economically disadvantaged persons, as referred to in division (E)(1) of section 122.71 of the Revised Code. Annually, each such contractor shall file a description of the affirmative action program and a progress report on its implementation with the equal employment opportunity office of the department of administrative services. Sec. 340.12. No board of alcohol, drug addiction, and mental health services or any agency, corporation, or association under contract with such a board shall discriminate in the provision of services under its authority, in employment, or contract on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, race, color, sex, creed, disability, or national origin. Each board, each community mental health agency, and each alcohol and drug addiction program shall have a written affirmative action program. The affirmative action program shall include goals for the employment and effective utilization of, including contracts with, members of economically disadvantaged groups as defined in division (E)(1) of section 122.71 of the Revised Code in percentages reflecting as nearly as possible the composition of the alcohol, drug addiction, and mental health service district served by the board. Each board, agency, and program shall file a description of the affirmative action program and a progress report on its implementation with the department of mental health or the department of alcohol and drug addiction services. Sec. 511.03. After an affirmative vote in an election held under sections 511.01 and 511.02 of the Revised Code, the board of township trustees may make all contracts necessary for the purchase of a site, and the erection, improvement, or enlargement of such building. The board shall have control of any town hall belonging to the township, and it may rent or lease all or part of any hall, lodge, or recreational facility belonging to the township, to any person or organization under terms the board considers proper, for which all rent shall be paid in advance or fully secured. In establishing the terms of any rental agreement or lease pursuant to this section, the board of township trustees may give preference to persons who are residents of or organizations that are headquartered in the township or that are charitable or fraternal in nature. All persons or organizations shall be treated on a like or similar basis, and no differentiation shall be made on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, race, color, religion, national origin, sex, or political affiliation. The rents received for such facilities may be used for their repair or improvement, and any balance shall be used for general township purposes. Sec. 717.01. Each municipal corporation may do any of the following: (A) Acquire by purchase or condemnation real estate with or without buildings on it, and easements or interests in real estate; (B) Extend, enlarge, reconstruct, repair, equip, furnish, or improve a building or improvement that it is authorized to acquire or construct; (C) Erect a crematory or provide other means for disposing of garbage or refuse, and erect public comfort stations; (D) Purchase turnpike roads and make them free; (E) Construct wharves and landings on navigable waters; (F) Construct infirmaries, workhouses, prisons, police stations, houses of refuge and correction, market houses, public halls, public offices, municipal garages, repair shops, storage houses, and warehouses; (G) Construct or acquire waterworks for supplying water to the municipal corporation and its inhabitants and extend the waterworks system outside of the municipal corporation limits; (H) Construct or purchase gas works or works for the generation and transmission of electricity, for the supplying of gas or electricity to the municipal corporation and its inhabitants; (I) Provide grounds for cemeteries or crematories, enclose and embellish them, and construct vaults or crematories; (J) Construct sewers, sewage disposal works, flushing tunnels, drains, and ditches; (K) Construct free public libraries and reading rooms, and free recreation centers; (L) Establish free public baths and municipal lodging houses; (M) Construct monuments or memorial buildings to commemorate the services of soldiers, sailors, and marines of the state and nation; (N) Provide land for and improve parks, boulevards, and public playgrounds; (O) Construct hospitals and pesthouses; (P) Open, construct, widen, extend, improve, resurface, or change the line of any street or public highway; (Q) Construct and improve levees, dams, waterways, waterfronts, and embankments and improve any watercourse passing through the municipal corporation; (R) Construct or improve viaducts, bridges, and culverts; (S)(1) Construct any building necessary for the police or fire department; (2) Purchase fire engines or fire boats; (3) Construct water towers or fire cisterns; (4) Place underground the wires or signal apparatus of any police or fire department. (T) Construct any municipal ice plant for the purpose of manufacturing ice for the citizens of a municipal corporation; (U) Construct subways under any street or boulevard or elsewhere; (V) Acquire by purchase, gift, devise, bequest, lease, condemnation proceedings, or otherwise, real or personal property, and thereon and thereof to establish, construct, enlarge, improve, equip, maintain, and operate airports, landing fields, or other air navigation facilities, either within or outside the limits of a municipal corporation, and acquire by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation proceedings rights-of-way for connections with highways, waterways, and electric, steam, and interurban railroads, and improve and equip such facilities with structures necessary or appropriate for such purposes. No municipal corporation may take or disturb property or facilities belonging to any public utility or to a common carrier engaged in interstate commerce, which property or facilities are required for the proper and convenient operation of the utility or carrier, unless provision is made for the restoration, relocation, or duplication of the property or facilities elsewhere at the sole cost of the municipal corporation. (W) Provide by agreement with any regional airport authority, created under section 308.03 of the Revised Code, for the making of necessary surveys, appraisals, and examinations preliminary to the acquisition or construction of any airport or airport facility and pay the portion of the expense of the surveys, appraisals, and examinations as set forth in the agreement; (X) Provide by agreement with any regional airport authority, created under section 308.03 of the Revised Code, for the acquisition, construction, maintenance, or operation of any airport or airport facility owned or to be owned and operated by the regional airport authority or owned or to be owned and operated by the municipal corporation and pay the portion of the expense of it as set forth in the agreement; (Y) Acquire by gift, purchase, lease, or condemnation, land, forest, and water rights necessary for conservation of forest reserves, water parks, or reservoirs, either within or without the limits of the municipal corporation, and improve and equip the forest and water parks with structures, equipment, and reforestation necessary or appropriate for any purpose for the utilization of any of the forest and water benefits that may properly accrue therefrom to the municipal corporation; (Z) Acquire real property by purchase, gift, or devise and construct and maintain on it public swimming pools, either within or outside the limits of the municipal corporation; (AA) Construct or rehabilitate, equip, maintain, operate, and lease facilities for housing of elderly persons and for persons of low and moderate income, and appurtenant facilities. No municipal corporation shall deny housing accommodations to or withhold housing accommodations from elderly persons or persons of low and moderate income because of race, color, religion, or sex , ; familial status as defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code , military status as defined in that section , disability as defined in that section , or sexual orientation, or gender identity, as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code; ancestry , ; or national origin. Any elderly person or person of low or moderate income who is denied housing accommodations or has them withheld by a municipal corporation because of race, color, religion, or sex , ; familial status as defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code , military status as defined in that section , disability as defined in that section , sexual orientation, or gender identity, as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code; ancestry , ; or national origin may file a charge with the Ohio civil rights commission as provided in Chapter 4112. of the Revised Code. (BB) Acquire, rehabilitate, and develop rail property or rail service, and enter into agreements with the Ohio rail development commission, boards of county commissioners, boards of township trustees, legislative authorities of other municipal corporations, with other governmental agencies or organizations, and with private agencies or organizations in order to achieve those purposes; (CC) Appropriate and contribute money to a soil and water conservation district for use under Chapter 1515. of the Revised Code; (DD) Authorize the board of county commissioners, pursuant to a contract authorizing the action, to contract on the municipal corporation's behalf for the administration and enforcement within its jurisdiction of the state building code by another county or another municipal corporation located within or outside the county. The contract for administration and enforcement shall provide for obtaining certification pursuant to division (E) of section 3781.10 of the Revised Code for the exercise of administration and enforcement authority within the municipal corporation seeking those services and shall specify which political subdivision is responsible for securing that certification. (EE) Expend money for providing and maintaining services and facilities for senior citizens. "Airport," "landing field," and "air navigation facility," as defined in section 4561.01 of the Revised Code, apply to division (V) of this section. As used in divisions (W) and (X) of this section, "airport" and "airport facility" have the same meanings as in section 308.01 of the Revised Code. As used in division (BB) of this section, "rail property" and "rail service" have the same meanings as in section 4981.01 of the Revised Code. Sec. 1501.012. (A) The director of natural resources may lease lands in state parks, as defined in section 1501.07 of the Revised Code, and contract for the construction and operation of public service facilities, as mentioned in that section, and for major renovation or remodeling of existing public service facilities by the lessees on those lands. If the director determines that doing so would be consistent with long-range planning of the department of natural resources and in the best interests of the department and the division of parks and recreation in the department, the director shall negotiate and execute a lease and contract for those purposes in accordance with this chapter except as otherwise provided in this section. (B) With the approval of the recreation and resources council created under section 1501.04 of the Revised Code, the director shall draft a statement of intent describing any public service facility that the department wishes to have constructed in accordance with this section and establishing a procedure for the submission of proposals for providing the facility, including, but not limited to, a requirement that each prospective bidder or lessee of land shall submit with the proposal a completed questionnaire and financial statement, on forms prescribed and furnished by the department, to enable the department to ascertain the person's financial worth and experience in maintaining and operating facilities similar or related to the public service facility in question. The completed questionnaire and financial statement shall be verified under oath by the prospective bidder or lessee. Questionnaires and financial statements submitted under this division are confidential and are not open to public inspection. Nothing in this division shall be construed to prevent use of or reference to questionnaires and financial statements in a civil action or criminal prosecution commenced by the state. The director shall publish the statement of intent in at least three daily newspapers of general circulation in the state at least once each week for four consecutive weeks. The director then shall accept proposals in response to the statement of intent for at least thirty days following the final publication of the statement. At the end of the period during which proposals may be submitted under this division, the director shall select the proposal that the director determines best complies with the statement of intent and may negotiate a lease and contract with the person that submitted that proposal. (C) Any lease and contract negotiated under this section shall include in its terms and conditions all of the following: (1) The legal description of the leasehold; (2) The duration of the lease and contract, which shall not exceed forty years, and a requirement that the lease and contract be nonrenewable; (3) A requirement that the lessee maintain in full force and effect during the term of the lease and contract comprehensive liability insurance for injury, death, or loss to persons or property and fire casualty insurance for the public service facility and all its structures in an amount established by the director and naming the department as an additional insured; (4) A requirement that the lessee maintain in full force and effect suitable performance bonds or other adequate security pertaining to the construction and operation of the public service facility; (5) Detailed plans and specifications controlling the construction of the public service facility that shall include all of the following: (a) The size and capacity of the facility; (b) The type and quality of construction; (c) Other criteria that the department considers necessary and advisable. (6) The manner of rental payment; (7) A stipulation that the director shall have control and supervision over all of the following: (a) The operating season of the public service facility; (b) The facility's hours of operation; (c) The maximum rates to be charged guests using the facility; (d) The facility's sanitary conditions; (e) The quality of food and service furnished the guests of the facility; (f) The lessee's general and structural maintenance responsibilities at the facility. (8) The disposition of the leasehold and improvements at the expiration of the lease and contract; (9) A requirement that the public service facility be available to all members of the public without regard to sex, race, color, creed, ancestry, or national origin , ; or disability , sexual orientation, or gender identity, as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code; (10) Other terms and conditions that the director considers necessary and advisable to carry out the purposes of this section. (D) The attorney general shall approve the form of the lease and contract prior to its execution by the director. (E) The authority granted in this section to the director is in addition and supplemental to any other authority granted the director under state law. Sec. 1751.18. (A)(1) No health insuring corporation shall cancel or fail to renew the coverage of a subscriber or enrollee because of any health status-related factor in relation to the subscriber or enrollee, the subscriber's or enrollee's requirements for health care services, or for any other reason designated under rules adopted by the superintendent of insurance. (2) Unless otherwise required by state or federal law, no health insuring corporation, or health care facility or provider through which the health insuring corporation has made arrangements to provide health care services, shall discriminate against any individual with regard to enrollment, disenrollment, or the quality of health care services rendered, on the basis of the individual's race, color, sex, age, religion, military status , sexual orientation, or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, or status as a recipient of medicare or medicaid, or any health status-related factor in relation to the individual. However, a health insuring corporation shall not be required to accept a recipient of medicare or medical assistance, if an agreement has not been reached on appropriate payment mechanisms between the health insuring corporation and the governmental agency administering these programs. Further, except during a period of open enrollment under section 1751.15 of the Revised Code, a health insuring corporation may reject an applicant for nongroup enrollment on the basis of any health status-related factor in relation to the applicant. (B) A health insuring corporation may cancel or decide not to renew the coverage of an enrollee if the enrollee has performed an act or practice that constitutes fraud or intentional misrepresentation of material fact under the terms of the coverage and if the cancellation or nonrenewal is not based, either directly or indirectly, on any health status-related factor in relation to the enrollee. (C) An enrollee may appeal any action or decision of a health insuring corporation taken pursuant to section 2742(b) to (e) of the "Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996," Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1955, 42 U.S.C.A. 300gg-42, as amended. To appeal, the enrollee may submit a written complaint to the health insuring corporation pursuant to section 1751.19 of the Revised Code. The enrollee may, within thirty days after receiving a written response from the health insuring corporation, appeal the health insuring corporation's action or decision to the superintendent. (D) As used in this section, "health status-related factor" means any of the following: (1) Health status; (2) Medical condition, including both physical and mental illnesses; (3) Claims experience; (4) Receipt of health care; (5) Medical history; (6) Genetic information; (7) Evidence of insurability, including conditions arising out of acts of domestic violence; (8) Disability. Sec. 2927.03. (A) No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to injure, intimidate, or interfere with, any of the following: (1) Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or ancestry; or familial status as defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, national origin , military status as defined in that section , disability as defined in that section , gender identity, or ancestry sexual orientation, as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, and because that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying, contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting housing accommodations; (2) Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing, either of the following: (a) Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or ancestry; or familial status as defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, national origin , military status as defined in that section , disability as defined in that section , gender identity, or ancestry, sexual orientation, as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section; (b) Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or protection so to participate. (3) Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, or ancestry; or familial status as defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, national origin , military status as defined in that section , disability as defined in that section , gender identity, or ancestry, sexual orientation, as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, in any of the activities, services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity to so participate. (B) Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Sec. 3113.36. (A) To qualify for funds under section 3113.35 of the Revised Code, a shelter for victims of domestic violence shall meet all of the following requirements: (1) Be incorporated in this state as a nonprofit corporation; (2) Have trustees who represent the racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic diversity of the community to be served, including at least one person who is or has been a victim of domestic violence; (3) Receive at least twenty-five per cent of its funds from sources other than funds distributed pursuant to section 3113.35 of the Revised Code. These other sources may be public or private, and may include funds distributed pursuant to section 3113.37 of the Revised Code, and contributions of goods or services, including materials, commodities, transportation, office space, or other types of facilities or personal services. (4) Provide residential service or facilities for children when accompanied by a parent, guardian, or custodian who is a victim of domestic violence and who is receiving temporary residential service at the shelter; (5) Require persons employed by or volunteering services to the shelter to maintain the confidentiality of any information that would identify individuals served by the shelter. (B) A shelter for victims of domestic violence does not qualify for funds if it discriminates in its admissions or provision of services on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, race, religion, color, age, marital status, national origin, or ancestry. A shelter does not qualify for funds in the second half of any year if its application projects the provision of residential service and such service has not been provided in the first half of that year; such a shelter does not qualify for funds in the following year. Sec. 3301.53. (A) The state board of education, in consultation with the director of job and family services, shall formulate and prescribe by rule adopted under Chapter 119. of the Revised Code minimum standards to be applied to preschool programs operated by school district boards of education, county MR/DD boards, or eligible nonpublic schools. The rules shall include the following: (1) Standards ensuring that the preschool program is located in a safe and convenient facility that accommodates the enrollment of the program, is of the quality to support the growth and development of the children according to the program objectives, and meets the requirements of section 3301.55 of the Revised Code; (2) Standards ensuring that supervision, discipline, and programs will be administered according to established objectives and procedures; (3) Standards ensuring that preschool staff members and nonteaching employees are recruited, employed, assigned, evaluated, and provided inservice education without discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, age, color, national origin, race, or sex; and that preschool staff members and nonteaching employees are assigned responsibilities in accordance with written position descriptions commensurate with their training and experience; (4) A requirement that boards of education intending to establish a preschool program demonstrate a need for a preschool program prior to establishing the program; (5) Requirements that children participating in preschool programs have been immunized to the extent considered appropriate by the state board to prevent the spread of communicable disease; (6) Requirements that the parents of preschool children complete the emergency medical authorization form specified in section 3313.712 of the Revised Code. (B) The state board of education in consultation with the director of job and family services shall ensure that the rules adopted by the state board under sections 3301.52 to 3301.58 of the Revised Code are consistent with and meet or exceed the requirements of Chapter 5104. of the Revised Code with regard to child day-care centers. The state board and the director of job and family services shall review all such rules at least once every five years. (C) The state board of education, in consultation with the director of job and family services, shall adopt rules for school child programs that are consistent with and meet or exceed the requirements of the rules adopted for school child day-care centers under Chapter 5104. of the Revised Code. Sec. 3304.14. The governor shall appoint an administrator of the rehabilitation services commission to serve at the pleasure of the governor and shall fix the administrator's compensation. The administrator shall devote the administrator's entire time to the duties of the administrator's office, shall hold no other office or position of trust and profit, and shall engage in no other business during the administrator's term of office. The governor may grant the administrator the authority to appoint, remove, and discipline without regard to sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, sex, race, creed, color, age, or national origin, such other professional, administrative, and clerical staff members as are necessary to carry out the functions and duties of the commission. Sec. 3304.50. The Ohio independent living council established and appointed by the governor under the authority of section 107.18 of the Revised Code and pursuant to the "Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1992," 106 Stat. 4344, 29 U.S.C.A. 796d, shall appoint an executive director to serve at the pleasure of the council and shall fix his the executive director's compensation. The executive director shall not be considered a public employee for purposes of Chapter 4117. of the Revised Code. The council may delegate to the executive director the authority to appoint, remove, and discipline, without regard to sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, sex, race, creed, color, age, or national origin, such other professional, administrative, and clerical staff members as are necessary to carry out the functions and duties of the council. Sec. 3313.481. (A) With the approval of the department of education, a board of education of a city, exempted village, local, or joint vocational school district may operate any of its schools on a schedule other than that required by section 3313.48 of the Revised Code in order to do any of the following: (1) To provide a flexible school day during which may be held parent-teacher conferences and reporting periods involving time in excess of that permitted to be credited toward fulfillment of the minimum school year under section 3313.48 of the Revised Code; (2) To establish and maintain a calendar of quarters, trimesters, or pentamesters; (3) To provide staggered attendance schedules if it receives approval to do so from the department of education. (B) A school district operating a school under this section shall have such school open for instruction for each pupil enrolled in that school for at least nine hundred ten hours during the school year. For purposes of determining whether a school that is on a staggered attendance schedule is in compliance with this section in any school year, the department of education may include days the school was open for instruction with pupils in attendance for not more than the first seventy days of the ensuing school year provided such days are not considered as days the school was open for instruction during such ensuing school year. The following shall be considered as time during which the schools are open for instruction for a pupil enrolled in such a school, or for a pupil enrolled in a school that is not on a staggered attendance schedule but that operates under this section: (1) Morning and afternoon recess periods of not more than fifteen minutes duration per period for a pupil in grades one through six; (2) Ten hours during which the pupil would otherwise be in attendance but when he is not required to attend school in order to provide time for individualized parent-teacher conferences and reporting periods; (3) Ten hours during which the pupil would otherwise be in attendance but is not required to attend school in order to provide time for teachers to attend professional meetings; (4) The number of hours pupils would otherwise be in attendance but are not required to attend because school is closed as a result of a public calamity as provided in section 3317.01 of the Revised Code. (C) No board of education shall discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, sex, race, religion, or national origin when assigning pupils to attendance schedules pursuant to this section. Sec. 3314.06. The governing authority of each community school established under this chapter shall adopt admission procedures that specify the following: (A) That except as otherwise provided in this section, admission to the school shall be open to any individual age five to twenty-two entitled to attend school pursuant to section 3313.64 or 3313.65 of the Revised Code in a school district in the state. (B)(1) That admission to the school may be limited to students who have attained a specific grade level or are within a specific age group; to students that meet a definition of "at-risk," as defined in the contract; to residents of a specific geographic area within the district, as defined in the contract; or to separate groups of autistic students and nondisabled students, as authorized in section 3314.061 of the Revised Code and as defined in the contract. (2) For purposes of division (B)(1) of this section, "at-risk" students may include those students identified as gifted students under section 3324.03 of the Revised Code. (C) Whether enrollment is limited to students who reside in the district in which the school is located or is open to residents of other districts, as provided in the policy adopted pursuant to the contract. (D)(1) That there will be no discrimination in the admission of students to the school on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, race, creed, color, disability, or sex except that: (a) The governing authority may establish single-gender schools for the purpose described in division (G) of this section provided comparable facilities and learning opportunities are offered for both boys and girls. Such comparable facilities and opportunities may be offered for each sex at separate locations. (b) The governing authority may establish a school that simultaneously serves a group of students identified as autistic and a group of students who are not disabled, as authorized in section 3314.061 of the Revised Code. However, unless the total capacity established for the school has been filled, no student with any disability shall be denied admission on the basis of that disability. (2) That upon admission of any student with a disability, the community school will comply with all federal and state laws regarding the education of students with disabilities. (E) That the school may not limit admission to students on the basis of intellectual ability, measures of achievement or aptitude, or athletic ability, except that a school may limit its enrollment to students as described in division (B) of this section. (F) That the community school will admit the number of students that does not exceed the capacity of the school's programs, classes, grade levels, or facilities. (G) That the purpose of single-gender schools that are established shall be to take advantage of the academic benefits some students realize from single-gender instruction and facilities and to offer students and parents residing in the district the option of a single-gender education. (H) That, except as otherwise provided under division (B) of this section or section 3314.061 of the Revised Code, if the number of applicants exceeds the capacity restrictions of division (F) of this section, students shall be admitted by lot from all those submitting applications, except preference shall be given to students attending the school the previous year and to students who reside in the district in which the school is located. Preference may be given to siblings of students attending the school the previous year. Notwithstanding divisions (A) to (H) of this section, in the event the racial composition of the enrollment of the community school is violative of a federal desegregation order, the community school shall take any and all corrective measures to comply with the desegregation order. Sec. 3332.09. The state board of career colleges and schools may limit, suspend, revoke, or refuse to issue or renew a certificate of registration or program authorization or may impose a penalty pursuant to section 3332.091 of the Revised Code for any one or combination of the following causes: (A) Violation of any provision of sections 3332.01 to 3332.09 of the Revised Code, the board's minimum standards, or any rule made by the board; (B) Furnishing of false, misleading, deceptive, altered, or incomplete information or documents to the board; (C) The signing of an application or the holding of a certificate of registration by a person who has pleaded guilty or has been found guilty of a felony or has pleaded guilty or been found guilty of a crime involving moral turpitude; (D) The signing of an application or the holding of a certificate of registration by a person who is addicted to the use of any controlled substance, or who is found to be mentally incompetent; (E) Violation of any commitment made in an application for a certificate of registration or program authorization; (F) Presenting to prospective students, either at the time of solicitation or enrollment, or through advertising, mail circulars, or phone solicitation, misleading, deceptive, false, or fraudulent information relating to any program, employment opportunity, or opportunities for enrollment in accredited institutions of higher education after entering or completing programs offered by the holder of a certificate of registration; (G) Failure to provide or maintain premises or equipment for offering programs in a safe and sanitary condition; (H) Refusal by an agent to display the agent's permit upon demand of a prospective student or other interested person; (I) Failure to maintain financial resources adequate for the satisfactory conduct of programs as presented in the plan of operation or to retain a sufficient number and qualified staff of instruction, except that nothing in this chapter requires an instructor to be licensed by the state board of education or to hold any type of post-high school degree; (J) Offering training or programs other than those presented in the application, except that schools may offer special courses adapted to the needs of individual students when the special courses are in the subject field specified in the application; (K) Discrimination in the acceptance of students upon the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, race, color, religion, sex, or national origin; (L) Accepting the services of an agent not holding a valid permit issued under section 3332.10 or 3332.11 of the Revised Code; (M) The use of monetary or other valuable consideration by the school's agents or representatives to induce prospective students to enroll in the school, or the practice of awarding monetary or other valuable considerations without board approval to students in exchange for procuring the enrollment of others; (N) Failure to provide at the request of the board, any information, records, or files pertaining to the operation of the school or recruitment and enrollment of students. If the board modifies or adopts additional minimum standards or rules pursuant to section 3332.031 of the Revised Code, all schools and agents shall have sixty days from the effective date of the modifications or additional standards or rules to comply with such modifications or additions. Sec. 3721.13. (A) The rights of residents of a home shall include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) The right to a safe and clean living environment pursuant to the medicare and medicaid programs and applicable state laws and regulations prescribed by the public health council; (2) The right to be free from physical, verbal, mental, and emotional abuse and to be treated at all times with courtesy, respect, and full recognition of dignity and individuality; (3) Upon admission and thereafter, the right to adequate and appropriate medical treatment and nursing care and to other ancillary services that comprise necessary and appropriate care consistent with the program for which the resident contracted. This care shall be provided without regard to considerations such as sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, race, color, religion, national origin, age, or source of payment for care. (4) The right to have all reasonable requests and inquiries responded to promptly; (5) The right to have clothes and bed sheets changed as the need arises, to ensure the resident's comfort or sanitation; (6) The right to obtain from the home, upon request, the name and any specialty of any physician or other person responsible for the resident's care or for the coordination of care; (7) The right, upon request, to be assigned, within the capacity of the home to make the assignment, to the staff physician of the resident's choice, and the right, in accordance with the rules and written policies and procedures of the home, to select as the attending physician a physician who is not on the staff of the home. If the cost of a physician's services is to be met under a federally supported program, the physician shall meet the federal laws and regulations governing such services. (8) The right to participate in decisions that affect the resident's life, including the right to communicate with the physician and employees of the home in planning the resident's treatment or care and to obtain from the attending physician complete and current information concerning medical condition, prognosis, and treatment plan, in terms the resident can reasonably be expected to understand; the right of access to all information in the resident's medical record; and the right to give or withhold informed consent for treatment after the consequences of that choice have been carefully explained. When the attending physician finds that it is not medically advisable to give the information to the resident, the information shall be made available to the resident's sponsor on the resident's behalf, if the sponsor has a legal interest or is authorized by the resident to receive the information. The home is not liable for a violation of this division if the violation is found to be the result of an act or omission on the part of a physician selected by the resident who is not otherwise affiliated with the home. (9) The right to withhold payment for physician visitation if the physician did not visit the resident; (10) The right to confidential treatment of personal and medical records, and the right to approve or refuse the release of these records to any individual outside the home, except in case of transfer to another home, hospital, or health care system, as required by law or rule, or as required by a third-party payment contract; (11) The right to privacy during medical examination or treatment and in the care of personal or bodily needs; (12) The right to refuse, without jeopardizing access to appropriate medical care, to serve as a medical research subject; (13) The right to be free from physical or chemical restraints or prolonged isolation except to the minimum extent necessary to protect the resident from injury to self, others, or to property and except as authorized in writing by the attending physician for a specified and limited period of time and documented in the resident's medical record. Prior to authorizing the use of a physical or chemical restraint on any resident, the attending physician shall make a personal examination of the resident and an individualized determination of the need to use the restraint on that resident. Physical or chemical restraints or isolation may be used in an emergency situation without authorization of the attending physician only to protect the resident from injury to self or others. Use of the physical or chemical restraints or isolation shall not be continued for more than twelve hours after the onset of the emergency without personal examination and authorization by the attending physician. The attending physician or a staff physician may authorize continued use of physical or chemical restraints for a period not to exceed thirty days, and at the end of this period and any subsequent period may extend the authorization for an additional period of not more than thirty days. The use of physical or chemical restraints shall not be continued without a personal examination of the resident and the written authorization of the attending physician stating the reasons for continuing the restraint. If physical or chemical restraints are used under this division, the home shall ensure that the restrained resident receives a proper diet. In no event shall physical or chemical restraints or isolation be used for punishment, incentive, or convenience. (14) The right to the pharmacist of the resident's choice and the right to receive pharmaceutical supplies and services at reasonable prices not exceeding applicable and normally accepted prices for comparably packaged pharmaceutical supplies and services within the community; (15) The right to exercise all civil rights, unless the resident has been adjudicated incompetent pursuant to Chapter 2111. of the Revised Code and has not been restored to legal capacity, as well as the right to the cooperation of the home's administrator in making arrangements for the exercise of the right to vote; (16) The right of access to opportunities that enable the resident, at the resident's own expense or at the expense of a third-party payer, to achieve the resident's fullest potential, including educational, vocational, social, recreational, and habilitation programs; (17) The right to consume a reasonable amount of alcoholic beverages at the resident's own expense, unless not medically advisable as documented in the resident's medical record by the attending physician or unless contradictory to written admission policies; (18) The right to use tobacco at the resident's own expense under the home's safety rules and under applicable laws and rules of the state, unless not medically advisable as documented in the resident's medical record by the attending physician or unless contradictory to written admission policies; (19) The right to retire and rise in accordance with the resident's reasonable requests, if the resident does not disturb others or the posted meal schedules and upon the home's request remains in a supervised area, unless not medically advisable as documented by the attending physician; (20) The right to observe religious obligations and participate in religious activities; the right to maintain individual and cultural identity; and the right to meet with and participate in activities of social and community groups at the resident's or the group's initiative; (21) The right upon reasonable request to private and unrestricted communications with the resident's family, social worker, and any other person, unless not medically advisable as documented in the resident's medical record by the attending physician, except that communications with public officials or with the resident's attorney or physician shall not be restricted. Private and unrestricted communications shall include, but are not limited to, the right to: (a) Receive, send, and mail sealed, unopened correspondence; (b) Reasonable access to a telephone for private communications; (c) Private visits at any reasonable hour. (22) The right to assured privacy for visits by the spouse, or if both are residents of the same home, the right to share a room within the capacity of the home, unless not medically advisable as documented in the resident's medical record by the attending physician; (23) The right upon reasonable request to have room doors closed and to have them not opened without knocking, except in the case of an emergency or unless not medically advisable as documented in the resident's medical record by the attending physician; (24) The right to retain and use personal clothing and a reasonable amount of possessions, in a reasonably secure manner, unless to do so would infringe on the rights of other residents or would not be medically advisable as documented in the resident's medical record by the attending physician; (25) The right to be fully informed, prior to or at the time of admission and during the resident's stay, in writing, of the basic rate charged by the home, of services available in the home, and of any additional charges related to such services, including charges for services not covered under the medicare or medicaid program. The basic rate shall not be changed unless thirty days notice is given to the resident or, if the resident is unable to understand this information, to the resident's sponsor. (26) The right of the resident and person paying for the care to examine and receive a bill at least monthly for the resident's care from the home that itemizes charges not included in the basic rates; (27)(a) The right to be free from financial exploitation; (b) The right to manage the resident's own personal financial affairs, or, if the resident has delegated this responsibility in writing to the home, to receive upon written request at least a quarterly accounting statement of financial transactions made on the resident's behalf. The statement shall include: (i) A complete record of all funds, personal property, or possessions of a resident from any source whatsoever, that have been deposited for safekeeping with the home for use by the resident or the resident's sponsor; (ii) A listing of all deposits and withdrawals transacted, which shall be substantiated by receipts which shall be available for inspection and copying by the resident or sponsor. (28) The right of the resident to be allowed unrestricted access to the resident's property on deposit at reasonable hours, unless requests for access to property on deposit are so persistent, continuous, and unreasonable that they constitute a nuisance; (29) The right to receive reasonable notice before the resident's room or roommate is changed, including an explanation of the reason for either change. (30) The right not to be transferred or discharged from the home unless the transfer is necessary because of one of the following: (a) The welfare and needs of the resident cannot be met in the home. (b) The resident's health has improved sufficiently so that the resident no longer needs the services provided by the home. (c) The safety of individuals in the home is endangered. (d) The health of individuals in the home would otherwise be endangered. (e) The resident has failed, after reasonable and appropriate notice, to pay or to have the medicare or medicaid program pay on the resident's behalf, for the care provided by the home. A resident shall not be considered to have failed to have the resident's care paid for if the resident has applied for medicaid, unless both of the following are the case: (i) The resident's application, or a substantially similar previous application, has been denied by the county department of job and family services. (ii) If the resident appealed the denial pursuant to division (C) of section 5101.35 of the Revised Code, the director of job and family services has upheld the denial. (f) The home's license has been revoked, the home is being closed pursuant to section 3721.08, sections 5111.35 to 5111.62, or section 5155.31 of the Revised Code, or the home otherwise ceases to operate. (g) The resident is a recipient of medicaid, and the home's participation in the medicaid program is involuntarily terminated or denied. (h) The resident is a beneficiary under the medicare program, and the home's participation in the medicare program is involuntarily terminated or denied. (31) The right to voice grievances and recommend changes in policies and services to the home's staff, to employees of the department of health, or to other persons not associated with the operation of the home, of the resident's choice, free from restraint, interference, coercion, discrimination, or reprisal. This right includes access to a residents' rights advocate, and the right to be a member of, to be active in, and to associate with persons who are active in organizations of relatives and friends of nursing home residents and other organizations engaged in assisting residents. (32) The right to have any significant change in the resident's health status reported to the resident's sponsor. As soon as such a change is known to the home's staff, the home shall make a reasonable effort to notify the sponsor within twelve hours. (B) A sponsor may act on a resident's behalf to assure that the home does not deny the residents' rights under sections 3721.10 to 3721.17 of the Revised Code. (C) Any attempted waiver of the rights listed in division (A) of this section is void. Sec. 3905.55. (A) Except as provided in division (B) of this section, an agent may charge a consumer a fee if all of the following conditions are met: (1) The fee is disclosed to the consumer in a manner that separately identifies the fee and the premium. (2) The fee is not calculated as a percentage of the premium. (3) The fee is not refunded, forgiven, waived, offset, or reduced by any commission earned or received for any policy or coverage sold. (4) The amount of the fee, and the consumer's obligation to pay the fee, are not conditioned upon the occurrence of a future event or condition, such as the purchase, cancellation, lapse, declination, or nonrenewal of insurance. (5) The agent discloses to the consumer that the fee is being charged by the agent and not by the insurance company, that neither state law nor the insurance company requires the agent to charge the fee, and that the fee is not refundable. (6) The consumer consents to the fee. (7) The agent, in charging the fee, does not discriminate on the basis of race, sex, national origin, religion, disability, health status, age, marital status, military status , gender identity, or sexual orientation as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, or geographic location, and does not unfairly discriminate between persons of essentially the same class and of essentially the same hazard or expectation of life. (B) A fee may not be charged for taking or submitting an initial application for coverage with any one insurer or different programs with the same insurer, or processing a change to an existing policy, a cancellation, a claim, or a renewal, in connection with any of the following personal lines policies: (1) Private passenger automobile; (2) Homeowners, including coverage for tenants or condominium owners, owner-occupied fire or dwelling property coverage, personal umbrella liability, or any other personal lines-related coverage whether sold as a separate policy or as an endorsement to another personal lines policy; (3) Individual life insurance; (4) Individual sickness or accident insurance; (5) Disability income policies; (6) Credit insurance products. (C) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an agent may charge a fee for agent services in connection with a policy issued on a no-commission basis, if the agent provides the consumer with prior disclosure of the fee and of the services to be provided. (D) In the event of a dispute between an agent and a consumer regarding any disclosure required by this section, the agent has the burden of proving that the disclosure was made. (E)(1) No person shall fail to comply with this section. (2) Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is deemed to have engaged in an unfair and deceptive act or practice in the business of insurance under sections 3901.19 to 3901.26 of the Revised Code. (F) This section does not apply with respect to any expense fee charged by a surety bail bond agent to cover the costs incurred by the surety bail bond agent in executing the bail bond. Sec. 4111.17. (A) No employer, including the state and political subdivisions thereof, shall discriminate in the payment of wages on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, or ancestry by paying wages to any employee at a rate less than the rate at which the employer pays wages to another employee for equal work on jobs the performance of which requires equal skill, effort, and responsibility, and which are performed under similar conditions. (B) Nothing in this section prohibits an employer from paying wages to one employee at a rate different from that at which the employer pays another employee for the performance of equal work under similar conditions on jobs requiring equal skill, effort, and responsibility, when the payment is made pursuant to any of the following: (1) A seniority system; (2) A merit system; (3) A system which measures earnings by the quantity or quality of production; (4) A wage rate differential determined by any factor other than sexual orientation or gender identity as those terms are defined in section 4112.01 of the Revised Code, race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, or ancestry. (C) No employer shall reduce the wage rate of any employee in order to comply with this section. (D) The director of commerce shall carry out, administer, and enforce this section. Any employee discriminated against in violation of this section may sue in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover two times the amount of the difference between the wages actually received and the wages received by a person performing equal work for the employer, from the date of the commencement of the violation, and for costs, including attorney fees. The director may take an assignment of any such wage claim in trust for such employee and sue in the employee's behalf. In any civil action under this section, two or more employees of the same employer may join as co-plaintiffs in one action. The director may sue in one action for claims assigned to the director by two or more employees of the same employer. No agreement to work for a discriminatory wage constitutes a defense for any civil or criminal action to enforce this section. No employer shall discriminate against any employee because such employee makes a complaint or institutes, or testifies in, any proceeding under this section. (E) Any action arising under this section shall be initiated within one year after the date of violation. Sec. 4112.01. (A) As used in this chapter: (1) "Person" includes one or more individuals, partnerships, associations, organizations, corporations, legal representatives, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers, and other organized groups of persons. "Person" also includes, but is not limited to, any owner, lessor, assignor, builder, manager, broker, salesperson, appraiser, agent, employee, lending institution, and the state and all political subdivisions, authorities, agencies, boards, and commissions of the state. (2) "Employer" includes the state, any political subdivision of the state, any person employing four or more persons within the state, and any person acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer , except that for purposes of discrimination based upon sexual orientation or gender identity, "employer" includes the state, any political subdivision of the state, any person employing fifteen or more persons within the state, and any person acting directly or indirectly in the interest of an employer . (3) "Employee" means an individual employed by any employer but does not include any individual employed in the domestic service of any person. (4) "Labor organization" includes any organization that exists, in whole or in part, for the purpose of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning grievances, terms or conditions of employment, or other mutual aid or protection in relation to employment. (5) "Employment agency" includes any person regularly undertaking, with or without compensation, to procure opportunities to work or to procure, recruit, refer, or place employees. (6) "Commission" means the Ohio civil rights commission created by section 4112.03 of the Revised Code. (7) "Discriminate" includes segregate or separate. (8) "Unlawful discriminatory practice" means any act prohibited by section 4112.02, 4112.021, or 4112.022 of the Revised Code. (9) "Place of public accommodation" means any inn, restaurant, eating house, barbershop, public conveyance by air, land, or water, theater, store, other place for the sale of merchandise, or any other place of public accommodation or amusement of which the accommodations, advantages, facilities, or privileges are available to the public. (10) "Housing accommodations" includes any building or structure, or portion of a building or structure, that is used or occupied or is intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied as the home residence, dwelling, dwelling unit, or sleeping place of one or more individuals, groups, or families whether or not living independently of each other; and any vacant land offered for sale or lease. "Housing accommodations" also includes any housing accommodations held or offered for sale or rent by a real estate broker, salesperson, or agent, by any other person pursuant to authorization of the owner, by the owner, or by the owner's legal representative. (11) "Restrictive covenant" means any specification limiting the transfer, rental, lease, or other use of any housing accommodations because of race, color, religion, sex, military status, familial status, national origin, disability, or ancestry, or any limitation based upon affiliation with or approval by any person, directly or indirectly, employing race, color, religion, sex, military status, familial status, national origin, disability, or ancestry as a condition of affiliation or approval. (12) "Burial lot" means any lot for the burial of deceased persons within any public burial ground or cemetery, including, but not limited to, cemeteries owned and operated by municipal corporations, townships, or companies or associations incorporated for cemetery purposes. (13) "Disability" means a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities, including the functions of caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, learning, and working; a record of a physical or mental impairment; or being regarded as having a physical or mental impairment. (14) Except as otherwise provided in section 4112.021 of the Revised Code, "age" means at least forty years old. (15) "Familial status" means either of the following: (a) One or more individuals who are under eighteen years of age and who are domiciled with a parent or guardian having legal custody of the individual or domiciled, with the written permission of the parent or guardian having legal custody, with a designee of the parent or guardian; (b) Any person who is pregnant or in the process of securing legal custody of any individual who is under eighteen years of age. (16)(a) Except as provided in division (A)(16)(b) of this section, "physical or mental impairment" includes any of the following: (i) Any physiological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body systems: neurological; musculoskeletal; special sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular; reproductive; digestive; genito-urinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine; (ii) Any mental or psychological disorder, including, but not limited to, mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific learning disabilities; (iii) Diseases and conditions, including, but not limited to, orthopedic, visual, speech, and hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes, human immunodeficiency virus infection, mental retardation, emotional illness, drug addiction, and alcoholism. (b) "Physical or mental impairment" does not include any of the following: (i) Homosexuality and bisexuality; (ii) Transvestism, transsexualism, pedophilia, exhibitionism, voyeurism, gender identity disorders not resulting from physical impairments, or other sexual behavior disorders; (iii) Compulsive gambling, kleptomania, or pyromania; (iv) Psychoactive substance use disorders resulting from the current illegal use of a controlled substance or the current use of alcoholic beverages. (17) "Dwelling unit" means a single unit of residence for a family of one or more persons. (18) "Common use areas" means rooms, spaces, or elements inside or outside a building that are made available for the use of residents of the building or their guests, and includes, but is not limited to, hallways, lounges, lobbies, laundry rooms, refuse rooms, mail rooms, recreational areas, and passageways among and between buildings. (19) "Public use areas" means interior or exterior rooms or spaces of a privately or publicly owned building that are made available to the general public. (20) "Controlled substance" has the same meaning as in section 3719.01 of the Revised Code. (21) "Disabled tenant" means a tenant or prospective tenant who is a person with a disability. (22) "Military status" means a person's status in "service in the uniformed services" as defined in section 5923.05 of the Revised Code. (23) "Sexual orientation" means actual or perceived, heterosexuality, homosexuality, or bisexuality. (24) "Gender identity" means the gender-related identity, appearance, or mannerisms or other gender-related characteristics of an individual, with or without regard to the individual's designated sex at birth. (B) For the purposes of divisions (A) to (F) of section 4112.02 of the Revised Code, the terms "because of sex" and "on the basis of sex" include, but are not limited to, because of or on the basis of pregnancy, any illness arising out of and occurring during the course of a pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions. Women affected by pregnancy, childbirth, or related medical conditions shall be treated the same for all employment-related purposes, including receipt of benefits under fringe benefit programs, as other persons not so affected but similar in their ability or inability to work, and nothing in division (B) of section 4111.17 of the Revised Code shall be interpreted to permit otherwise. This division shall not be construed to require an employer to pay for health insurance benefits for abortion, except where the life of the mother would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term or except where medical complications have arisen from the abortion, provided that nothing in this division precludes an employer from providing abortion benefits or otherwise affects bargaining agreements in regard to abortion. Sec. 4112.02. It shall be an unlawful discriminatory practice: (A) For any employer, because of the race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry of any person, to discharge without just cause, to refuse to hire, or otherwise to discriminate against that person with respect to hire, tenure, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, or any matter directly or indirectly related to employment. (B) For an employment agency or personnel placement service, because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry, to do any of the following: (1) Refuse or fail to accept, register, classify properly, or refer for employment, or otherwise discriminate against any person; (2) Comply with a request from an employer for referral of applicants for employment if the request directly or indirectly indicates that the employer fails to comply with the provisions of sections 4112.01 to 4112.07 of the Revised Code. (C) For any labor organization to do any of the following: (1) Limit or classify its membership on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry; (2) Discriminate against, limit the employment opportunities of, or otherwise adversely affect the employment status, wages, hours, or employment conditions of any person as an employee because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry. (D) For any employer, labor organization, or joint labor-management committee controlling apprentice training programs to discriminate against any person because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, or ancestry in admission to, or employment in, any program established to provide apprentice training. (E) Except where based on a bona fide occupational qualification certified in advance by the commission, for any employer, employment agency, personnel placement service, or labor organization, prior to employment or admission to membership, to do any of the following: (1) Elicit or attempt to elicit any information concerning the race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry of an applicant for employment or membership; (2) Make or keep a record of the race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry of any applicant for employment or membership; (3) Use any form of application for employment, or personnel or membership blank, seeking to elicit information regarding race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry; but an employer holding a contract containing a nondiscrimination clause with the government of the United States, or any department or agency of that government, may require an employee or applicant for employment to furnish documentary proof of United States citizenship and may retain that proof in the employer's personnel records and may use photographic or fingerprint identification for security purposes; (4) Print or publish or cause to be printed or published any notice or advertisement relating to employment or membership indicating any preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination, based upon race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry; (5) Announce or follow a policy of denying or limiting, through a quota system or otherwise, employment or membership opportunities of any group because of the race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry of that group; (6) Utilize in the recruitment or hiring of persons any employment agency, personnel placement service, training school or center, labor organization, or any other employee-referring source known to discriminate against persons because of their race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry. (F) For any person seeking employment to publish or cause to be published any advertisement that specifies or in any manner indicates that person's race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry, or expresses a limitation or preference as to the race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry of any prospective employer. (G) For any proprietor or any employee, keeper, or manager of a place of public accommodation to deny to any person, except for reasons applicable alike to all persons regardless of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, national origin, disability, age, or ancestry, the full enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages, facilities, or privileges of the place of public accommodation. (H) For any person to do any of the following: (1) Refuse to sell, transfer, assign, rent, lease, sublease, or finance housing accommodations, refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of housing accommodations, or otherwise deny or make unavailable housing accommodations because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, ancestry, disability, or national origin; (2) Represent to any person that housing accommodations are not available for inspection, sale, or rental, when in fact they are available, because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, ancestry, disability, or national origin; (3) Discriminate against any person in the making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of housing accommodations, or any person in the making or purchasing of loans or the provision of other financial assistance that is secured by residential real estate, because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, ancestry, disability, or national origin or because of the racial composition of the neighborhood in which the housing accommodations are located, provided that the person, whether an individual, corporation, or association of any type, lends money as one of the principal aspects or incident to the person's principal business and not only as a part of the purchase price of an owner-occupied residence the person is selling nor merely casually or occasionally to a relative or friend; (4) Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of selling, transferring, assigning, renting, leasing, or subleasing any housing accommodations or in furnishing facilities, services, or privileges in connection with the ownership, occupancy, or use of any housing accommodations, including the sale of fire, extended coverage, or homeowners insurance, because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, ancestry, disability, or national origin or because of the racial composition of the neighborhood in which the housing accommodations are located; (5) Discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of any loan of money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of housing accommodations because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, ancestry, disability, or national origin or because of the racial composition of the neighborhood in which the housing accommodations are located; (6) Refuse to consider without prejudice the combined income of both husband and wife for the purpose of extending mortgage credit to a married couple or either member of a married couple; (7) Print, publish, or circulate any statement or advertisement, or make or cause to be made any statement or advertisement, relating to the sale, transfer, assignment, rental, lease, sublease, or acquisition of any housing accommodations, or relating to the loan of money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of housing accommodations, that indicates any preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination based upon race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, ancestry, disability, or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation, specification, or discrimination; (8) Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(8) or (17) of this section, make any inquiry, elicit any information, make or keep any record, or use any form of application containing questions or entries concerning race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, ancestry, disability, or national origin in connection with the sale or lease of any housing accommodations or the loan of any money, whether or not secured by mortgage or otherwise, for the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair, or maintenance of housing accommodations. Any person may make inquiries, and make and keep records, concerning race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, ancestry, disability, or national origin for the purpose of monitoring compliance with this chapter. (9) Include in any transfer, rental, or lease of housing accommodations any restrictive covenant, or honor or exercise, or attempt to honor or exercise, any restrictive covenant; (10) Induce or solicit, or attempt to induce or solicit, a housing accommodations listing, sale, or transaction by representing that a change has occurred or may occur with respect to the racial, religious, sexual, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, or ethnic composition of the block, neighborhood, or other area in which the housing accommodations are located, or induce or solicit, or attempt to induce or solicit, a housing accommodations listing, sale, or transaction by representing that the presence or anticipated presence of persons of any race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, ancestry, disability, or national origin, in the block, neighborhood, or other area will or may have results including, but not limited to, the following: (a) The lowering of property values; (b) A change in the racial, religious, sexual, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, or ethnic composition of the block, neighborhood, or other area; (c) An increase in criminal or antisocial behavior in the block, neighborhood, or other area; (d) A decline in the quality of the schools serving the block, neighborhood, or other area. (11) Deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or renting housing accommodations, or discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of that access, membership, or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, national origin, disability, or ancestry; (12) Coerce, intimidate, threaten, or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of that person's having exercised or enjoyed or having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by division (H) of this section; (13) Discourage or attempt to discourage the purchase by a prospective purchaser of housing accommodations, by representing that any block, neighborhood, or other area has undergone or might undergo a change with respect to its religious, racial, sexual, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, or ethnic composition; (14) Refuse to sell, transfer, assign, rent, lease, sublease, or finance, or otherwise deny or withhold, a burial lot from any person because of the race, color, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, age, ancestry, disability, or national origin of any prospective owner or user of the lot; (15) Discriminate in the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, housing accommodations to any buyer or renter because of a disability of any of the following: (a) The buyer or renter; (b) A person residing in or intending to reside in the housing accommodations after they are sold, rented, or made available; (c) Any individual associated with the person described in division (H)(15)(b) of this section. (16) Discriminate in the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale or rental of housing accommodations to any person or in the provision of services or facilities to any person in connection with the housing accommodations because of a disability of any of the following: (a) That person; (b) A person residing in or intending to reside in the housing accommodations after they are sold, rented, or made available; (c) Any individual associated with the person described in division (H)(16)(b) of this section. (17) Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(17) of this section, make an inquiry to determine whether an applicant for the sale or rental of housing accommodations, a person residing in or intending to reside in the housing accommodations after they are sold, rented, or made available, or any individual associated with that person has a disability, or make an inquiry to determine the nature or severity of a disability of the applicant or such a person or individual. The following inquiries may be made of all applicants for the sale or rental of housing accommodations, regardless of whether they have disabilities: (a) An inquiry into an applicant's ability to meet the requirements of ownership or tenancy; (b) An inquiry to determine whether an applicant is qualified for housing accommodations available only to persons with disabilities or persons with a particular type of disability; (c) An inquiry to determine whether an applicant is qualified for a priority available to persons with disabilities or persons with a particular type of disability; (d) An inquiry to determine whether an applicant currently uses a controlled substance in violation of section 2925.11 of the Revised Code or a substantively comparable municipal ordinance; (e) An inquiry to determine whether an applicant at any time has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any offense, an element of which is the illegal sale, offer to sell, cultivation, manufacture, other production, shipment, transportation, delivery, or other distribution of a controlled substance. (18)(a) Refuse to permit, at the expense of a person with a disability, reasonable modifications of existing housing accommodations that are occupied or to be occupied by the person with a disability, if the modifications may be necessary to afford the person with a disability full enjoyment of the housing accommodations. This division does not preclude a landlord of housing accommodations that are rented or to be rented to a disabled tenant from conditioning permission for a proposed modification upon the disabled tenant's doing one or more of the following: (i) Providing a reasonable description of the proposed modification and reasonable assurances that the proposed modification will be made in a workerlike manner and that any required building permits will be obtained prior to the commencement of the proposed modification; (ii) Agreeing to restore at the end of the tenancy the interior of the housing accommodations to the condition they were in prior to the proposed modification, but subject to reasonable wear and tear during the period of occupancy, if it is reasonable for the landlord to condition permission for the proposed modification upon the agreement; (iii) Paying into an interest-bearing escrow account that is in the landlord's name, over a reasonable period of time, a reasonable amount of money not to exceed the projected costs at the end of the tenancy of the restoration of the interior of the housing accommodations to the condition they were in prior to the proposed modification, but subject to reasonable wear and tear during the period of occupancy, if the landlord finds the account reasonably necessary to ensure the availability of funds for the restoration work. The interest earned in connection with an escrow account described in this division shall accrue to the benefit of the disabled tenant who makes payments into the account. (b) A landlord shall not condition permission for a proposed modification upon a disabled tenant's payment of a security deposit that exceeds the customarily required security deposit of all tenants of the particular housing accommodations. (19) Refuse to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices, or services when necessary to afford a person with a disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling unit, including associated public and common use areas; (20) Fail to comply with the standards and rules adopted under division (A) of section 3781.111 of the Revised Code; (21) Discriminate against any person in the selling, brokering, or appraising of real property because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, military status, familial status, ancestry, disability, or national origin; (22) Fail to design and construct covered multifamily dwellings for first occupancy on or after June 30, 1992, in accordance with the following conditions: (a) The dwellings shall have at least one building entrance on an accessible route, unless it is impractical to do so because of the terrain or unusual characteristics of the site. (b) With respect to dwellings that have a building entrance on an accessible route, all of the following apply: (i) The public use areas and common use areas of the dwellings shall be readily accessible to and usable by persons with a disability. (ii) All the doors designed to allow passage into and within all premises shall be sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons with a disability who are in wheelchairs. (iii) All premises within covered multifamily dwelling units shall contain an accessible route into and through the dwelling; all light switches, electrical outlets, thermostats, and other environmental controls within such units shall be in accessible locations; the bathroom walls within such units shall contain reinforcements to allow later installation of grab bars; and the kitchens and bathrooms within such units shall be designed and constructed in a manner that enables an individual in a wheelchair to maneuver about such rooms. For purposes of division (H)(22) of this section, "covered multifamily dwellings" means buildings consisting of four or more units if such buildings have one or more elevators and ground floor units in other buildings consisting of four or more units. (I) For any person to discriminate in any manner against any other person because that person has opposed any unlawful discriminatory practice defined in this section or because that person has made a charge, testified, assisted, or participated in any manner in any investigation, proceeding, or hearing under sections 4112.01 to 4112.07 of the Revised Code. (J) For any person to aid, abet, incite, compel, or coerce the doing of any act declared by this section to be an unlawful discriminatory practice, to obstruct or prevent any person from complying with this chapter or any order issued under it, or to attempt directly or indirectly to commit any act declared by this section to be an unlawful discriminatory practice. (K)(1) Nothing in division (H) of this section shall bar any religious or denominational institution or organization, or any nonprofit charitable or educational organization that is operated, supervised, or controlled by or in connection with a religious organization, from limiting the sale, rental, or occupancy of housing accommodations that it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same religion, or from giving preference in the sale, rental, or occupancy of such housing accommodations to persons of the same religion, unless membership in the religion is restricted on account of race, color, or national origin. (2) Nothing in division (H) of this section shall bar any bona fide private or fraternal organization that, incidental to its primary purpose, owns or operates lodgings for other than a commercial purpose, from limiting the rental or occupancy of the lodgings to its members or from giving preference to its members. (3) Nothing in division (H) of this section limits the applicability of any reasonable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy housing accommodations. Nothing in that division prohibits the owners or managers of housing accommodations from implementing reasonable occupancy standards based on the number and size of sleeping areas or bedrooms and the overall size of a dwelling unit, provided that the standards are not implemented to circumvent the purposes of this chapter and are formulated, implemented, and interpreted in a manner consistent with this chapter and any applicable local, state, or federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to occupy housing accommodations. (4) Nothing in division (H) of this section requires that housing accommodations be made available to an individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others. (5) Nothing in division (H) of this section pertaining to discrimination on the basis of familial status shall be construed to apply to any of the following: (a) Housing accommodations provided under any state or federal program that have been determined under the "Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988," 102 Stat. 1623, 42 U.S.C.A. 3607, as amended, to be specifically designed and operated to assist elderly persons; (b) Housing accommodations intended for and solely occupied by persons who are sixty-two years of age or older; (c) Housing accommodations intended and operated for occupancy by at least one person who is fifty-five years of age or older per unit, as determined under the "Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988," 102 Stat. 1623, 42 U.S.C.A. 3607, as amended. (L) Nothing in divisions (A) to (E) of this section shall be construed to require a person with a disability to be employed or trained under circumstances that would significantly increase the occupational hazards affecting either the person with a disability, other employees, the general public, or the facilities in which the work is to be performed, or to require the employment or training of a person with a disability in a job that requires the person with a disability routinely to undertake any task, the performance of which is substantially and inherently impaired by the person's disability. (M) Nothing in divisions (H)(1) to (18) of this section shall be construed to require any person selling or renting property to modify the property in any way or to exercise a higher degree of care for a person with a disability, to relieve any person with a disability of any obligation generally imposed on all persons regardless of disability in a written lease, rental agreement, or contract of purchase or sale, or to forbid distinctions based on the inability to fulfill the terms and conditions, including financial obligations, of the lease, agreement, or contract. (N) An aggrieved individual may enforce the individual's rights relative to discrimination on the basis of age as provided for in this section by instituting a civil action, within one hundred eighty days after the alleged unlawful discriminatory practice occurred, in any court with jurisdiction for any legal or equitable relief that will effectuate the individual's rights. A person who files a civil action under this division is barred, with respect to the practices complained of, from instituting a civil action under section 4112.14 of the Revised Code and from filing a charge with the commission under section 4112.05 of the Revised Code. (O) With regard to age, it shall not be an unlawful discriminatory practice and it shall not constitute a violation of division (A) of section 4112.14 of the Revised Code for any employer, employment agency, joint labor-management committee controlling apprenticeship training programs, or labor organization to do any of the following: (1) Establish bona fide employment qualifications reasonably related to the particular business or occupation that may include standards for skill, aptitude, physical capability, intelligence, education, maturation, and expe