Laws, Acts, and Legislation
Return to Laws Page HB 200

As Introduced View Full Text

with Line Numbers



(.pdf format)



(.html format) View Publications Associated with this Bill



Bill Analyses



Synopsis of Committee Amendments



Conference Committee Synopsis



Fiscal Notes



Status Report of Legislation



Votes



Bill Sponsors



REPRESENTATIVES:

Hood Beck Young Huffman Becker Terhar Hill Blessing Roegner Maag Hottinger Brenner Burkley Schuring Buchy Boose Hayes Adams, J. Butler Lynch Retherford Stautberg Thompson Wachtmann Blair Hall Henne McClain Rosenberger Slaby Sprague Johnson Smith Scherer Romanchuk



Other Versions of Bill and Associated Reports



HELP - Field Definitions for this Page The online versions of legislation provided on this website are not official. Enrolled bills are the final version passed by the Ohio General Assembly and presented to the Governor for signature. The official version of acts signed by the Governor are available from the Secretary of State's Office in the Continental Plaza, 180 East Broad St., Columbus. H. B. No. 200 As Introduced As Introduced

130th General Assembly Regular Session 2013-2014 H. B. No. 200



Representative Hood Cosponsors: Representatives Beck, Young, Huffman, Becker, Terhar, Hill, Blessing, Roegner, Maag, Hottinger, Brenner, Burkley, Schuring, Buchy, Boose, Hayes, Adams, J., Butler, Lynch, Retherford, Stautberg, Thompson, Wachtmann, Blair, Hall, Henne, McClain, Rosenberger, Slaby, Sprague, Johnson, Smith, Scherer, Romanchuk

A BILL To amend sections 2305.11, 2317.56, 2919.171, and 4731.22 and to repeal section 2317.561 of the Revised Code to modify the notification requirements given by a physician 48 hours prior to the performance or inducement of an abortion, to require the physician to perform an obstetric ultrasound examination 48 hours prior to the performance or inducement of an abortion, to modify the definition of medical emergency that applies to the law regulating abortion, and to eliminate medical necessity as a reason to perform an abortion without complying with the 48-hour notification requirements.

BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF OHIO: Section 1. That sections 2305.11, 2317.56, 2919.171, and 4731.22 of the Revised Code be amended to read as follows: Sec. 2305.11. (A) An action for libel, slander, malicious prosecution, or false imprisonment, an action for malpractice other than an action upon a medical, dental, optometric, or chiropractic claim, or an action upon a statute for a penalty or forfeiture shall be commenced within one year after the cause of action accrued, provided that an action by an employee for the payment of unpaid minimum wages, unpaid overtime compensation, or liquidated damages by reason of the nonpayment of minimum wages or overtime compensation shall be commenced within two years after the cause of action accrued. (B) A civil action for unlawful abortion pursuant to section 2919.12 of the Revised Code, a civil action authorized by division (H) (J) of section 2317.56 of the Revised Code, a civil action pursuant to division (B)(1) or (2) of section 2307.51 of the Revised Code for performing a dilation and extraction procedure or attempting to perform a dilation and extraction procedure in violation of section 2919.15 of the Revised Code, and a civil action pursuant to division (B) of section 2307.52 of the Revised Code for terminating or attempting to terminate a human pregnancy after viability in violation of division (A) of section 2919.17 of the Revised Code shall be commenced within one year after the performance or inducement of the abortion, within one year after the attempt to perform or induce the abortion in violation of division (A) of section 2919.17 of the Revised Code, within one year after the performance of the dilation and extraction procedure, or, in the case of a civil action pursuant to division (B)(2) of section 2307.51 of the Revised Code, within one year after the attempt to perform the dilation and extraction procedure. (C) As used in this section, "medical claim," "dental claim," "optometric claim," and "chiropractic claim" have the same meanings as in section 2305.113 of the Revised Code. Sec. 2317.56. (A) As used in this section: (1) "Medical emergency" means a condition of a pregnant woman that, in the reasonable judgment of the physician who is attending the woman, creates an immediate threat of serious risk to the life or physical health so complicates the medical condition of the woman from the continuation of that the death of the woman would result from the failure to immediately terminate the pregnancy necessitating the immediate performance or inducement of an abortion . (2) "Medical necessity" means a medical condition of a pregnant woman that, in the reasonable judgment of the physician who is attending the woman, so complicates the pregnancy that it necessitates the immediate performance or inducement of an abortion. (3) "Probable gestational age of the embryo or fetus" means the gestational age that, in the judgment of a physician, is, with reasonable probability, the gestational age of the embryo or fetus at the time that the physician informs a pregnant woman pursuant to division (B)(1)(b) of this section. (3) "Conflict of interest disclaimer" means a written statement divulging the gross income from the previous year of a physician who performs or induces an abortion or of a facility where an abortion is performed or induced, the percentage of that income that was obtained as fees for the performance of an abortion, and a statement concerning the monetary loss to the physician or facility that would result from the woman's decision to carry the woman's pregnancy to term. (4) "Viable pregnancy" means a pregnancy in which a fetal sac is located inside the pregnant woman's uterus and fetal cardiac activity is present within the fetal sac. (B) Except when there is a medical emergency or medical necessity , an abortion shall be performed or induced only if all of the following conditions are satisfied: (1) At least twenty-four forty-eight hours prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion, a physician meets with the pregnant woman in person in an individual, private setting and gives her an adequate opportunity to ask questions about the abortion that will be performed or induced. At this meeting, the physician shall inform the pregnant woman, verbally or, if she is hearing impaired, by other means of communication , and in writing of all of the following: (a) The nature and purpose of the particular abortion procedure to be used and the medical risks associated with that procedure , including the risk of infection, hemorrhage, cervical or uterine perforation, and infertility, the risk to subsequent pregnancies, and the increased risk of breast cancer ; (b) The probable gestational age of the embryo or fetus and the probable anatomical and physiological characteristics of the embryo or fetus at that age ; (c) The medical risks associated with the pregnant woman carrying the pregnancy to term. The meeting need not occur at the facility where the abortion is to be performed or induced, and the physician involved in the meeting need not be affiliated with that facility or with the physician who is scheduled to perform or induce the abortion. (2) At least twenty-four forty-eight hours prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion, one or more physicians or one or more agents of one or more physicians do each of the following in person , or by telephone , and by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by regular mail evidenced by a certificate of mailing: (a) Inform the pregnant woman of the name of the physician who is scheduled to perform or induce the abortion; (b) Give the pregnant woman copies of the published materials described in division (C) (D) of this section; (c) Inform the pregnant woman that the materials given pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of this section are published by the state and that they describe the embryo or fetus and list agencies that offer alternatives to abortion. The pregnant woman may choose to examine or not to examine the materials. A physician or an agent of a physician may choose to be disassociated from the materials and may choose to comment or not comment on the materials ; (d) Provide the pregnant woman with a conflict of interest disclaimer; (e) Perform an obstetric ultrasound examination that portrays the entire body of the embryo or fetus and provide the pregnant woman with all of the following: (i) A verbal description of all relevant features of the ultrasound, including an audible heartbeat, if present; (ii) Upon request and at no additional charge to the pregnant woman, a physical picture of the ultrasound image of the embryo or fetus of a quality consistent with current standard medical practice; (iii) A written document and verbal description stating whether or not the pregnant woman has a viable pregnancy, the location of the fetal sac, and the presence or absence of cardiac activity within the fetal sac. If the pregnancy is not a viable pregnancy, the physician shall advise the pregnant woman that the pregnant woman will suffer a miscarriage with no further intervention unless the physician has evidence to the contrary. (iv) A list of all known obstetric ultrasound providers within a ten-mile radius of the physician who intends to perform or induce the abortion or, if there is no obstetric ultrasound provider within that ten-mile radius, a list of all known obstetric ultrasound providers within a fifty-mile radius of the physician who intends to perform or induce the abortion. (f) Describe the development of nerve endings of the embryo or fetus and the ability of the embryo or fetus to feel pain at each stage of development; (g) Provide the pregnant woman with a statement that the pregnant woman is free to withhold or withdraw the pregnant woman's consent to the abortion at any time without affecting the pregnant woman's right to care or treatment in the future and without the loss of any state or federal benefits to which she may otherwise be entitled; (h) Provide the pregnant woman with any other medical or other information that a reasonable person would consider material to the decision of whether or not to have an abortion . (3) Nothing in this section prohibits a pregnant woman from refusing to listen to the sounds detected by a fetal heart monitor or from refusing to view the images displayed by the obstetric ultrasound examination. (4) Prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion, the pregnant woman signs a form consenting to the abortion and certifies both of the following on that form: (a) She has received the information and materials described in divisions (B)(1) and (2) of this section, and her questions about the abortion that will be performed or induced have been answered in a satisfactory manner. (b) She consents to the particular abortion voluntarily, knowingly, intelligently, and without coercion by any person, and she is not under the influence of any drug of abuse or alcohol. (4) (5) Prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion, the physician who is scheduled to perform or induce the abortion or the physician's agent receives a copy of the pregnant woman's signed form on which she consents to the abortion and that includes the certification required by division (B)(3) of this section ; (6) Prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion, the physician who is scheduled to perform or induce the abortion shall provide, under oath and under penalty of perjury, a signed statement that the physician has complied with the requirements of divisions (B)(2), (3), (4), and (5) of this section . (C) The information provided in divisions (B)(2), (3), (4), and (5) of this section shall be provided in a private room, and the pregnant woman shall be provided with sufficient time to ask questions and receive answers that the pregnant woman can understand. If the pregnant woman is unable to read any written materials provided to her, the materials shall be read to her and, if necessary, shall be explained in a way that is understandable to the pregnant woman. (D) The department of health shall publish in English and in Spanish, in a typeface large enough to be clearly legible, and in an easily comprehensible format, the following materials on the department's web site: (1) Materials that inform the pregnant woman about family planning information, of publicly funded agencies that are available to assist in family planning, and of public and private agencies and services that are available to assist her through the pregnancy, upon childbirth, and while the child is dependent, including, but not limited to, adoption agencies. The materials shall be geographically indexed; include a comprehensive list of the available agencies, a description of the services offered by the agencies, and the telephone numbers and addresses of the agencies; and inform the pregnant woman about available medical assistance benefits for prenatal care, childbirth, and neonatal care and about the support obligations of the father of a child who is born alive. The department shall ensure that the materials described in division (C) (D) (1) of this section are comprehensive and do not directly or indirectly promote, exclude, or discourage the use of any agency or service described in this division. (2) Materials , including color photographs, that inform the pregnant woman of the probable anatomical and physiological characteristics of the zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus at two-week gestational increments for the first sixteen weeks of pregnancy and at four-week gestational increments from the seventeenth week of pregnancy to full term, including any relevant information regarding the time at which the fetus possibly would be viable. The department shall cause these materials to be published only after it consults with the Ohio state medical association and the Ohio section of the American college of obstetricians and gynecologists relative to the probable anatomical and physiological characteristics of a zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus at the various gestational increments. The materials shall use language that is understandable by the average person who is not medically trained, shall be objective and nonjudgmental, and shall include only accurate scientific information about the zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus at the various gestational increments. If the materials use a pictorial, photographic, or other depiction to provide information regarding the zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus, the materials shall include, in a conspicuous manner, a scale or other explanation that is understandable by the average person and that can be used to determine the actual size of the zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus at a particular gestational increment as contrasted with the depicted size of the zygote, blastocyte, embryo, or fetus at that gestational increment. (D) (E) Upon the submission of a request to the department of health by any person, hospital, physician, or medical facility for one copy of the materials published in accordance with division (C) (D) of this section, the department shall make the requested copy of the materials available to the person, hospital, physician, or medical facility that requested the copy. (E) (F) If a medical emergency or medical necessity compels the performance or inducement of an abortion, the physician who will perform or induce the abortion, prior to its performance or inducement if possible, shall inform the pregnant woman of the medical indications supporting the physician's judgment that an immediate abortion is necessary. Any physician who performs or induces an abortion without the prior satisfaction of the conditions specified in division (B) of this section because of a medical emergency or medical necessity shall enter the reasons for the conclusion that a medical emergency or medical necessity exists in the medical record of the pregnant woman. (F) (G) If the conditions specified in division (B) of this section are satisfied, consent to an abortion shall be presumed to be valid and effective. (G) (H) The performance or inducement of an abortion without the prior satisfaction of the conditions specified in division (B) of this section does not constitute, and shall not be construed as constituting, a violation of division (A) of section 2919.12 of the Revised Code. The failure of a physician to satisfy the conditions of division (B) of this section prior to performing or inducing an abortion upon a pregnant woman may be the basis of both of the following: (1) A civil action for compensatory and exemplary damages as described in division (H) (J) of this section; (2) Disciplinary action under section 4731.22 of the Revised Code. (H) (I) Whoever violates this section or whoever performs or induces an abortion with reason to believe that the abortion was performed or induced in violation of this section is guilty of a felony of the first degree. Notwithstanding division (A)(3) of section 2929.18 of the Revised Code, the offender shall be fined up to one million dollars for a violation of this section or for performing or inducing an abortion with reason to believe that the abortion was performed or induced in violation of this section. (J) (1) Subject to divisions (H) (J) (2) and (3) of this section, any physician who performs or induces an abortion with actual knowledge that the conditions specified in division (B) of this section have not been satisfied or with a heedless indifference as to whether those conditions have been satisfied is liable in compensatory and exemplary damages in a civil action to any person, or the representative of the estate of any person, who sustains injury, death, or loss to person or property as a result of the failure to satisfy those conditions. In the civil action, the court additionally may enter any injunctive or other equitable relief that it considers appropriate. (2) The following shall be affirmative defenses in a civil action authorized by division (H) (J) (1) of this section: (a) The physician performed or induced the abortion under the circumstances described in division (E) (F) of this section. (b) The physician made a good faith effort to satisfy the conditions specified in division (B) of this section. (3) An employer or other principal is not liable in damages in a civil action authorized by division (H) (J) (1) of this section on the basis of the doctrine of respondeat superior unless either of the following applies: (a) The employer or other principal had actual knowledge or, by the exercise of reasonable diligence, should have known that an employee or agent performed or induced an abortion with actual knowledge that the conditions specified in division (B) of this section had not been satisfied or with a heedless indifference as to whether those conditions had been satisfied. (b) The employer or other principal negligently failed to secure the compliance of an employee or agent with division (B) of this section. (4) Notwithstanding division (E) of section 2919.12 of the Revised Code, the civil action authorized by division (H) (J) (1) of this section shall be the exclusive civil remedy for persons, or the representatives of estates of persons, who allegedly sustain injury, death, or loss to person or property as a result of a failure to satisfy the conditions specified in division (B) of this section. (I) (K) The department of job and family services shall prepare and conduct a public information program to inform women of all available governmental programs and agencies that provide services or assistance for family planning, prenatal care, child care, or alternatives to abortion. (L) No physician may accept payment nor legally or otherwise require a pregnant woman to make a payment for performing or inducing an abortion prior to the expiration of the forty-eight hour period before the physician's fulfillment of all of the requirements of divisions (B)(2), (3), (4), and (5) of this section. Sec. 2919.171. (A) A physician who performs or induces or attempts to perform or induce an abortion on a pregnant woman shall submit a report to the department of health in accordance with the forms, rules, and regulations adopted by the department that includes all of the information the physician is required to certify in writing or determine under sections 2919.17 and 2919.18 of the Revised Code: (B) By September 30 of each year, the department of health shall issue a public report that provides statistics for the previous calendar year compiled from all of the reports covering that calendar year submitted to the department in accordance with this section for each of the items listed in division (A) of this section. The report shall also provide the statistics for each previous calendar year in which a report was filed with the department pursuant to this section, adjusted to reflect any additional information that a physician provides to the department in a late or corrected report. The department shall ensure that none of the information included in the report could reasonably lead to the identification of any pregnant woman upon whom an abortion is performed. (C)(1) The physician shall submit the report described in division (A) of this section to the department of health within fifteen days after the woman is discharged. If the physician fails to submit the report more than thirty days after that fifteen-day deadline, the physician shall be subject to a late fee of five hundred dollars for each additional thirty-day period or portion of a thirty-day period the report is overdue. A physician who is required to submit to the department of health a report under division (A) of this section and who has not submitted a report or has submitted an incomplete report more than one year following the fifteen-day deadline may, in an action brought by the department of health, be directed by a court of competent jurisdiction to submit a complete report to the department of health within a period of time stated in a court order or be subject to contempt of court. (2) If a physician fails to comply with the requirements of this section, other than filing a late report with the department of health, or fails to submit a complete report to the department of health in accordance with a court order, the physician is subject to division (B) (41) (43) of section 4731.22 of the Revised Code. (3) No person shall falsify any report required under this section. Whoever violates this division is guilty of abortion report falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. (D) Within ninety days of the effective date of this section October 20, 2011 , the department of health shall adopt rules pursuant to section 111.15 of the Revised Code to assist in compliance with this section. Sec. 4731.22. (A) The state medical board, by an affirmative vote of not fewer than six of its members, may limit, revoke, or suspend an individual's certificate to practice, refuse to grant a certificate to an individual, refuse to register an individual, refuse to reinstate a certificate, or reprimand or place on probation the holder of a certificate if the individual or certificate holder is found by the board to have committed fraud during the administration of the examination for a certificate to practice or to have committed fraud, misrepresentation, or deception in applying for or securing any certificate to practice or certificate of registration issued by the board. (B) The board, by an affirmative vote of not fewer than six members, shall, to the extent permitted by law, limit, revoke, or suspend an individual's certificate to practice, refuse to register an individual, refuse to reinstate a certificate, or reprimand or place on probation the holder of a certificate for one or more of the following reasons: (1) Permitting one's name or one's certificate to practice or certificate of registration to be used by a person, group, or corporation when the individual concerned is not actually directing the treatment given; (2) Failure to maintain minimal standards applicable to the selection or administration of drugs, or failure to employ acceptable scientific methods in the selection of drugs or other modalities for treatment of disease; (3) Selling, giving away, personally furnishing, prescribing, or administering drugs for other than legal and legitimate therapeutic purposes or a plea of guilty to, a judicial finding of guilt of, or a judicial finding of eligibility for intervention in lieu of conviction of, a violation of any federal or state law regulating the possession, distribution, or use of any drug; (4) Willfully betraying a professional confidence. For purposes of this division, "willfully betraying a professional confidence" does not include providing any information, documents, or reports to a child fatality review board under sections 307.621 to 307.629 of the Revised Code and does not include the making of a report of an employee's use of a drug of abuse, or a report of a condition of an employee other than one involving the use of a drug of abuse, to the employer of the employee as described in division (B) of section 2305.33 of the Revised Code. Nothing in this division affects the immunity from civil liability conferred by that section upon a physician who makes either type of report in accordance with division (B) of that section. As used in this division, "employee," "employer," and "physician" have the same meanings as in section 2305.33 of the Revised Code. (5) Making a false, fraudulent, deceptive, or misleading statement in the solicitation of or advertising for patients; in relation to the practice of medicine and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, podiatric medicine and surgery, or a limited branch of medicine; or in securing or attempting to secure any certificate to practice or certificate of registration issued by the board. As used in this division, "false, fraudulent, deceptive, or misleading statement" means a statement that includes a misrepresentation of fact, is likely to mislead or deceive because of a failure to disclose material facts, is intended or is likely to create false or unjustified expectations of favorable results, or includes representations or implications that in reasonable probability will cause an ordinarily prudent person to misunderstand or be deceived. (6) A departure from, or the failure to conform to, minimal standards of care of similar practitioners under the same or similar circumstances, whether or not actual injury to a patient is established; (7) Representing, with the purpose of obtaining compensation or other advantage as personal gain or for any other person, that an incurable disease or injury, or other incurable condition, can be permanently cured; (8) The obtaining of, or attempting to obtain, money or anything of value by fraudulent misrepresentations in the course of practice; (9) A plea of guilty to, a judicial finding of guilt of, or a judicial finding of eligibility for intervention in lieu of conviction for, a felony; (10) Commission of an act that constitutes a felony in this state, regardless of the jurisdiction in which the act was committed; (11) A plea of guilty to, a judicial finding of guilt of, or a judicial finding of eligibility for intervention in lieu of conviction for, a misdemeanor committed in the course of practice; (12) Commission of an act in the course of practice that constitutes a misdemeanor in this state, regardless of the jurisdiction in which the act was committed; (13) A plea of guilty to, a judicial finding of guilt of, or a judicial finding of eligibility for intervention in lieu of conviction for, a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; (14) Commission of an act involving moral turpitude that constitutes a misdemeanor in this state, regardless of the jurisdiction in which the act was committed; (15) Violation of the conditions of limitation placed by the board upon a certificate to practice; (16) Failure to pay license renewal fees specified in this chapter; (17) Except as authorized in section 4731.31 of the Revised Code, engaging in the division of fees for referral of patients, or the receiving of a thing of value in return for a specific referral of a patient to utilize a particular service or business; (18) Subject to section 4731.226 of the Revised Code, violation of any provision of a code of ethics of the American medical association, the American osteopathic association, the American podiatric medical association, or any other national professional organizations that the board specifies by rule. The state medical board shall obtain and keep on file current copies of the codes of ethics of the various national professional organizations. The individual whose certificate is being suspended or revoked shall not be found to have violated any provision of a code of ethics of an organization not appropriate to the individual's profession. For purposes of this division, a "provision of a code of ethics of a national professional organization" does not include any provision that would preclude the making of a report by a physician of an employee's use of a drug of abuse, or of a condition of an employee other than one involving the use of a drug of abuse, to the employer of the employee as described in division (B) of section 2305.33 of the Revised Code. Nothing in this division affects the immunity from civil liability conferred by that section upon a physician who makes either type of report in accordance with division (B) of that section. As used in this division, "employee," "employer," and "physician" have the same meanings as in section 2305.33 of the Revised Code. (19) Inability to practice according to acceptable and prevailing standards of care by reason of mental illness or physical illness, including, but not limited to, physical deterioration that adversely affects cognitive, motor, or perceptive skills. In enforcing this division, the board, upon a showing of a possible violation, may compel any individual authorized to practice by this chapter or who has submitted an application pursuant to this chapter to submit to a mental examination, physical examination, including an HIV test, or both a mental and a physical examination. The expense of the examination is the responsibility of the individual compelled to be examined. Failure to submit to a mental or physical examination or consent to an HIV test ordered by the board constitutes an admission of the allegations against the individual unless the failure is due to circumstances beyond the individual's control, and a default and final order may be entered without the taking of testimony or presentation of evidence. If the board finds an individual unable to practice because of the reasons set forth in this division, the board shall require the individual to submit to care, counseling, or treatment by physicians approved or designated by the board, as a condition for initial, continued, reinstated, or renewed authority to practice. An individual affected under this division shall be afforded an opportunity to demonstrate to the board the ability to resume practice in compliance with acceptable and prevailing standards under the provisions of the individual's certificate. For the purpose of this division, any individual who applies for or receives a certificate to practice under this chapter accepts the privilege of practicing in this state and, by so doing, shall be deemed to have given consent to submit to a mental or physical examination when directed to do so in writing by the board, and to have waived all objections to the admissibility of testimony or examination reports that constitute a privileged communication. (20) Except when civil penalties are imposed under section 4731.225 or 4731.281 of the Revised Code, and subject to section 4731.226 of the Revised Code, violating or attempting to violate, directly or indirectly, or assisting in or abetting the violation of, or conspiring to violate, any provisions of this chapter or any rule promulgated by the board. This division does not apply to a violation or attempted violation of, assisting in or abetting the violation of, or a conspiracy to violate, any provision of this chapter or any rule adopted by the board that would preclude the making of a report by a physician of an employee's use of a drug of abuse, or of a condition of an employee other than one involving the use of a drug of abuse, to the employer of the employee as described in division (B) of section 2305.33 of the Revised Code. Nothing in this division affects the immunity from civil liability conferred by that section upon a physician who makes either type of report in accordance with division (B) of that section. As used in this division, "employee," "employer," and "physician" have the same meanings as in section 2305.33 of the Revised Code. (21) The violation of section 3701.79 of the Revised Code or of any abortion rule adopted by the public health council pursuant to section 3701.341 of the Revised Code; (22) Any of the following actions taken by an agency responsible for authorizing, certifying, or regulating an individual to practice a health care occupation or provide health care services in this state or another jurisdiction, for any reason other than the nonpayment of fees: the limitation, revocation, or suspension of an individual's license to practice; acceptance of an individual's license surrender; denial of a license; refusal to renew or reinstate a license; imposition of probation; or issuance of an order of censure or other reprimand; (23) The violation of section 2919.12 of the Revised Code or the performance or inducement of an abortion upon a pregnant woman with actual knowledge that the conditions specified in division (B) of section 2317.56 of the Revised Code have not been satisfied or with a heedless indifference as to whether those conditions have been satisfied, unless an affirmative defense as specified in division (H)(2) of that section would apply in a civil action authorized by division (H)(1) of that section; (24) The revocation, suspension, restriction, reduction, or termination of clinical privileges by the United States department of defense or department of veterans affairs or the termination or suspension of a certificate of registration to prescribe drugs by the drug enforcement administration of the United States department of justice; (25) Termination or suspension from participation in the medicare or medicaid programs by the department of health and human services or other responsible agency for any act or acts that also would constitute a violation of division (B)(2), (3), (6), (8), or (19) of this section; (26) Impairment of ability to practice according to acceptable and prevailing standards of care because of habitual or excessive use or abuse of drugs, alcohol, or other substances that impair ability to practice. For the purposes of this division, any individual authorized to practice by this chapter accepts the privilege of practicing in this state subject to supervision by the board. By filing an application for or holding a certificate to practice under this chapter, an individual shall be deemed to have given consent to submit to a mental or physical examination when ordered to do so by the board in writing, and to have waived all objections to the admissibility of testimony or examination reports that constitute privileged communications. If it has reason to believe that any individual authorized to practice by this chapter or any applicant for certification to practice suffers such impairment, the board may compel the individual to submit to a mental or physical examination, or both. The expense of the examination is the responsibility of the individual compelled to be examined. Any mental or physical examination required under this division shall be undertaken by a treatment provider or physician who is qualified to conduct the examination and who is chosen by the board. Failure to submit to a mental or physical examination ordered by the board constitutes an admission of the allegations against the individual unless the failure is due to circumstances beyond the individual's control, and a default and final order may be entered without the taking of testimony or presentation of evidence. If the board determines that the individual's ability to practice is impaired, the board shall suspend the individual's certificate or deny the individual's application and shall require the individual, as a condition for initial, continued, reinstated, or renewed certification to practice, to submit to treatment. Before being eligible to apply for reinstatement of a certificate suspended under this division, the impaired practitioner shall demonstrate to the board the ability to resume practice in compliance with acceptable and prevailing standards of care under the provisions of the practitioner's certificate. The demonstration shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: (a) Certification from a treatment provider approved under section 4731.25 of the Revised Code that the individual has successfully completed any required inpatient treatment; (b) Evidence of continuing full compliance with an aftercare contract or consent agreement; (c) Two written reports indicating that the individual's ability to practice has been assessed and that the individual has been found capable of practicing according to acceptable and prevailing standards of care. The reports shall be made by individuals or providers approved by the board for making the assessments and shall describe the basis for their determination. The board may reinstate a certificate suspended under this division after that demonstration and after the individual has entered into a written consent agreement. When the impaired practitioner resumes practice, the board shall require continued monitoring of the individual. The monitoring shall include, but not be limited to, compliance with the written consent agreement entered into before reinstatement or with conditions imposed by board order after a hearing, and, upon termination of the consent agreement, submission to the board for at least two years of annual written progress reports made under penalty of perjury stating whether the individual has maintained sobriety. (27) A second or subsequent violation of section 4731.66 or 4731.69 of the Revised Code; (28) Except as provided in division (N) of this section: (a) Waiving the payment of all or any part of a deductible or copayment that a patient, pursuant to a health insurance or health care policy, contract, or plan that covers the individual's services, otherwise would be required to pay if the waiver is used as an enticement to a patient or group of patients to receive health care services from that individual; (b) Advertising that the individual will waive the payment of all or any part of a deductible or copayment that a patient, pursuant to a health insurance or health care policy, contract, or plan that covers the individual's services, otherwise would be required to pay. (29) Failure to use universal blood and body fluid precautions established by rules adopted under section 4731.051 of the Revised Code; (30) Failure to provide notice to, and receive acknowledgment of the notice from, a patient when required by section 4731.143 of the Revised Code prior to providing nonemergency professional services, or failure to maintain that notice in the patient's file; (31) Failure of a physician supervising a physician assistant to maintain supervision in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 4730. of the Revised Code and the rules adopted under that chapter; (32) Failure of a physician or podiatrist to enter into a standard care arrangement with a clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse-midwife, or certified nurse practitioner with whom the physician or podiatrist is in collaboration pursuant to section 4731.27 of the Revised Code or failure to fulfill the responsibilities of collaboration after entering into a standard care arrangement; (33) Failure to comply with the terms of a consult agreement entered into with a pharmacist pursuant to section 4729.39 of the Revised Code; (34) Failure to cooperate in an investigation conducted by the board under division (F) of this section, including failure to comply with a subpoena or order issued by the board or failure to answer truthfully a question presented by the board in an investigative interview, an investigative office conference, at a deposition, or in written interrogatories, except that failure to cooperate with an investigation shall not constitute grounds for discipline under this section if a court of competent jurisdiction has issued an order that either quashes a subpoena or permits the individual to withhold the testimony or evidence in issue; (35) Failure to supervise an oriental medicine practitioner or acupuncturist in accordance with Chapter 4762. of the Revised Code and the board's rules for providing that supervision; (36) Failure to supervise an anesthesiologist assistant in accordance with Chapter 4760. of the Revised Code and the board's rules for supervision of an anesthesiologist assistant; (37) Assisting suicide as defined in section 3795.01 of the Revised Code; (38) Failure to comply with the requirements of section 2317.561 of the Revised Code; (39) Failure to supervise a radiologist assistant in accordance with Chapter 4774. of the Revised Code and the board's rules for supervision of radiologist assistants; (40) (39) Performing or inducing an abortion at an office or facility with knowledge that the office or facility fails to post the notice required under section 3701.791 of the Revised Code; (41) (40) Failure to comply with the standards and procedures established in rules under section 4731.054 of the Revised Code for the operation of or the provision of care at a pain management clinic; (42) (41) Failure to comply with the standards and procedures established in rules under section 4731.054 of the Revised Code for providing supervision, direction, and control of individuals at a pain management clinic; (43) (42) Failure to comply with the requirements of section 4729.79 of the Revised Code, unless the state board of pharmacy no longer maintains a drug database pursuant to section 4729.75 of the Revised Code; (44) (43) Failure to comply with the requirements of section 2919.171 of the Revised Code or failure to submit to the department of health in accordance with a court order a complete report as described in section 2919.171 of the Revised Code; (45) (44) Failure to supervise a genetic counselor holding a supervised practice license in accordance with Chapter 4778. of the Revised Code and the board's rules for supervision of the genetic counselor; (46) (45) Failure to fulfill the responsibilities of collaboration after entering into a collaborative agreement with a genetic counselor under division (B) of section 4778.11 of the Revised Code or failure to comply with the board's rules regarding such agreements. (47) (46) Practicing at a facility that is subject to licensure as a category III terminal distributor of dangerous drugs with a pain management clinic classification unless the person operating the facility has obtained and maintains the license with the classification; (48) (47) Owning a facility that is subject to licensure as a category III terminal distributor of dangerous drugs with a pain management clinic classification unless the facility is licensed with the classification. (C) Disciplinary actions taken by the board under divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall be taken pursuant to an adjudication under Chapter 119. of the Revised Code, except that in lieu of an adjudication, the board may enter into a consent agreement with an individual to resolve an allegation of a violation of this chapter or any rule adopted under it. A consent agreement, when ratified by an affirmative vote of not fewer than six members of the board, shall constitute the findings and order of the board with respect to the matter addressed in the agreement. If the board refuses to ratify a consent agreement, the admissions and findings contained in the consent agreement shall be of no force or effect. A telephone conference call may be utilized for ratification of a consent agreement that revokes or suspends an individual's certificate to practice. The telephone conference call shall be considered a special meeting under division (F) of section 121.22 of the Revised Code. If the board takes disciplinary action against an individual under division (B) of this section for a second or subsequent plea of guilty to, or judicial finding of guilt of, a violation of section 2919.123 of the Revised Code, the disciplinary action shall consist of a suspension of the individual's certificate to practice for a period of at least one year or, if determined appropriate by the board, a more serious sanction involving the individual's certificate to practice. Any consent agreement entered into under this division with an individual that pertains to a second or subsequent plea of guilty to, or judicial finding of guilt of, a violation of that section shall provide for a suspension of the individual's certificate to practice for a period of at least one year or, if determined appropriate by the board, a more serious sanction involving the individual's certificate to practice. (D) For purposes of divisions (B)(10), (12), and (14) of this section, the commission of the act may be established by a finding by the board, pursuant to an adjudication under Chapter 119. of the Revised Code, that the individual committed the act. The board does not have jurisdiction under those divisions if the trial court renders a final judgment in the individual's favor and that judgment is based upon an adjudication on the merits. The board has jurisdiction under those divisions if the trial court issues an order of dismissal upon technical or procedural grounds. (E) The sealing of conviction records by any court shall have no effect upon a prior board order entered under this section or upon the board's jurisdiction to take action under this section if, based upon a plea of guilty, a judicial finding of guilt, or a judicial finding of eligibility for intervention in lieu of conviction, the board issued a notice of opportunity for a hearing prior to the court's order to seal the records. The board shall not be required to seal, destroy, redact, or otherwise modify its records to reflect the court's sealing of conviction records. (F)(1) The board shall investigate evidence that appears to show that a person has violated any provision of this chapter or any rule adopted under it. Any person may report to the board in a signed writing any information that the person may have that appears to show a violation of any provision of this chapter or any rule adopted under it. In the absence of bad faith, any person who reports information of that nature or who testifies before the board in any adjudication conducted under Chapter 119. of the Revised Code shall not be liable in damages in a civil action as a result of the report or testimony. Each complaint or allegation of a violation received by the board shall be assigned a case number and shall be recorded by the board. (2) Investigations of alleged violations of this chapter or any rule adopted under it shall be supervised by the supervising member elected by the board in accordance with section 4731.02 of the Revised Code and by the secretary as provided in section 4731.39 of the Revised Code. The president may designate another member of the board to supervise the investigation in place of the supervising member. No member of the board who supervises the investigation of a case shall participate in further adjudication of the case. (3) In investigating a possible violation of this chapter or any rule adopted under this chapter, or in conducting an inspection under division (E) of section 4731.054 of the Revised Code, the board may question witnesses, conduct interviews, administer oaths, order the taking of depositions, inspect and copy any books, accounts, papers, records, or documents, issue subpoenas, and compel the attendance of witnesses and production of books, accounts, papers, records, documents, and testimony, except that a subpoena for patient record information shall not be issued without consultation with the attorney general's office and approval of the secretary and supervising member of the board. (a) Before issuance of a subpoena for patient record information, the secretary and supervising member shall determine whether there is probable cause to believe that the complaint filed alleges a violation of this chapter or any rule adopted under it and that the records sought are relevant to the alleged violation and material to the investigation. The subpoena may apply only to records that cover a reasonable period of time surrounding the alleged violation. (b) On failure to comply with any subpoena issued by the board and after reasonable notice to the person being subpoenaed, the board may move for an order compelling the production of persons or records pursuant to the Rules of Civil Procedure. (c) A subpoena issued by the board may be served by a sheriff, the sheriff's deputy, or a board employee designated by the board. Service of a subpoena issued by the board may be made by delivering a copy of the subpoena to the person named therein, reading it to the person, or leaving it at the person's usual place of residence, usual place of business, or address on file with the board. When serving a subpoena to an applicant for or the holder of a certificate issued under this chapter, service of the subpoena may be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the subpoena shall be deemed served on the date delivery is made or the date the person refuses to accept delivery. If the person being served refuses to accept the subpoena or is not located, service may be made to an attorney who notifies the board that the attorney is representing the person. (d) A sheriff's deputy who serves a subpoena shall receive the same fees as a sheriff. Each witness who appears before the board in obedience to a subpoena shall receive the fees and mileage provided for under section 119.094 of the Revised Code. (4) All hearings, investigations, and inspections of the board shall be considered civil actions for the purposes of section 2305.252 of the Revised Code. (5) A report required to be submitted to the board under this chapter, a complaint, or information received by the board pursuant to an investigation or pursuant to an inspection under division (E) of section 4731.054 of the Revised Code is confidential and not subject to discovery in any civil action. The board shall conduct all investigations or inspections and proceedings in a manner that protects the confidentiality of patients and persons who file complaints with the board. The board shall not make public the names or any other identifying information about patients or complainants unless proper consent is given or, in the case of a patient, a waiver of the patient privilege exists under division (B) of section 2317.02 of the Revised Code, except that consent or a waiver of that nature is not required if the board possesses reliable and substantial evidence that no bona fide physician-patient relationship exists. The board may share any information it receives pursuant to an investigation or inspection, including patient records and patient record information, with law enforcement agencies, other licensing boards, and other governmental agencies that are prosecuting, adjudicating, or investigating alleged violations of statutes or administrative rules. An agency or board that receives the information shall comply with the same requirements regarding confidentiality as those with which the state medical board must comply, notwithstanding any conflicting provision of the Revised Code or procedure of the agency or board that applies when it is dealing with other information in its possession. In a judicial proceeding, the information may be admitted into evidence only in accordance with the Rules of Evidence, but the court shall require that appropriate measures are taken to ensure that confidentiality is maintained with respect to any part of the information that contains names or other identifying information about patients or complainants whose confidentiality was protected by the state medical board when the information was in the board's possession. Measures to ensure confidentiality that may be taken by the court include sealing its records or deleting specific information from its records. (6) On a quarterly basis, the board shall prepare a report that documents the disposition of all cases during the preceding three months. The report shall contain the following information for each case with which the board has completed its activities: (a) The case number assigned to the complaint or alleged violation; (b) The type of certificate to practice, if any, held by the individual against whom the complaint is directed; (c) A description of the allegations contained in the complaint; (d) The disposition of the case. The report shall state how many cases are still pending and shall be prepared in a manner that protects the identity of each person involved in each case. The report shall be a public record under section 149.43 of the Revised Code. (G) If the secretary and supervising member determine both of the following, they may recommend that the board suspend an individual's certificate to practice without a prior hearing: (1) That there is clear and convincing evidence that an individual has violated division (B) of this section; (2) That the individual's continued practice presents a danger of immediate and serious harm to the public. Written allegations shall be prepared for consideration by the board. The board, upon review of those allegations and by an affirmative vote of not fewer than six of its members, excluding the secretary and supervising member, may suspend a certificate without a prior hearing. A telephone conference call may be utilized for reviewing the allegations and taking the vote on the summary suspension. The board shall issue a written order of suspension by certified mail or in person in accordance with section 119.07 of the Revised Code. The order shall not be subject to suspension by the court during pendency of any appeal filed under section 119.12 of the Revised Code. If the individual subject to the summary suspension requests an adjudicatory hearing by the board, the date set for the hearing shall be within fifteen days, but not earlier than seven days, after the individual requests the hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by both the board and the individual. Any summary suspension imposed under this division shall remain in effect, unless reversed on appeal, until a final adjudicative order issued by the board pursuant to this section and Chapter 119. of the Revised Code becomes effective. The board shall issue its final adjudicative order within seventy-five days after completion of its hearing. A failure to issue the order within seventy-five days shall result in dissolution of the summary suspension order but shall not invalidate any subsequent, final adjudicative order. (H) If the board takes action under division (B)(9), (11), or (13) of this section and the judicial finding of guilt, guilty plea, or judicial finding of eligibility for intervention in lieu of conviction is overturned on appeal, upon exhaustion of the criminal appeal, a petition for reconsideration of the order may be filed with the board along with appropriate court documents. Upon receipt of a petition of that nature and supporting court documents, the board shall reinstate the individual's certificate to practice. The board may then hold an adjudication under Chapter 119. of the Revised Code to determine whether the individual committed the act in question. Notice of an opportunity for a hearing shall be given in accordance with Chapter 119. of the Revised Code. If the board finds, pursuant to an adjudication held under this division, that the individual committed the act or if no hearing is requested, the board may order any of the sanctions identified under division (B) of this section. (I) The certificate to practice issued to an individual under this chapter and the individual's practice in this state are automatically suspended as of the date of the individual's second or subsequent plea of guilty to, or judicial finding of guilt of, a violation of section 2919.123 of the Revised Code, or the date the individual pleads guilty to, is found by a judge or jury to be guilty of, or is subject to a judicial finding of eligibility for intervention in lieu of conviction in this state or treatment or intervention in lieu of conviction in another jurisdiction for any of the following criminal offenses in this state or a substantially equivalent criminal offense in another jurisdiction: aggravated murder, murder, voluntary manslaughter, felonious assault, kidnapping, rape, sexual battery, gross sexual imposition, aggravated arson, aggravated robbery, or aggravated burglary. Continued practice after suspension shall be considered practicing without a certificate. The board shall notify the individual subject to the suspension by certified mail or in person in accordance with section 119.07 of the Revised Code. If an individual whose certificate is automatically suspended under this division fails to make a timely request for an adjudication under Chapter 119. of the Revised Code, the board shall do whichever of the following is applicable: (1) If the automatic suspension under this division is for a second or subsequent plea of guilty to, or judicial finding of guilt of, a violation of section 2919.123 of the Revised Code, the board shall enter an order suspending the individual's certificate to practice for a period of at least one year or, if determined appropriate by the board, imposing a more serious sanction involving the individual's certificate to practice. (2) In all circumstances in which division (I)(1) of this section does not apply, enter a final order permanently revoking the individual's certificate to practice. (J) If the board is required by Chapter 119. of the Revised Code to give notice of an opportunity for a hearing and if the individual subject to the notice does not timely request a hearing in accordance with section 119.07 of the Revised Code, the board is not required to hold a hearing, but may adopt, by an affirmative vote of not fewer than six of its members, a final order that contains the board's findings. In that final order, the board may order any of the sanctions identified under division (A) or (B) of this section. (K) Any action taken by the board under division (B) of this section resulting in a suspension from practice shall be accompanied by a written statement of the conditions under which the individual's certificate to practice may be reinstated. The board shall adopt rules governing conditions to be imposed for reinstatement. Reinstatement of a certificate suspended pursuant to division (B) of this section requires an affirmative vote of not fewer than six members of the board. (L) When the board refuses to grant a certificate to an applicant, revokes an individual's certificate to practice, refuses to register an applicant, or refuses to reinstate an individual's certificate to practice, the board may specify that its action is permanent. An individual subject to a permanent action taken by the board is forever thereafter ineligible to hold a certificate to practice and the board shall not accept an application for reinstatement of the certificate or for issuance of a new certificate. (M) Notwithstanding any other provision of the Revised Code, all of the following apply: (1) The surrender of a certificate issued under this chapter shall not be effective unless or until accepted by the board. A telephone conference call may be utilized for acceptance of the surrender of an individual's certificate to practice. The telephone conference call shall be considered a special meeting under division (F) of section 121.22 of the Revised Code. Reinstatement of a certificate surrendered to the board requires an affirmative vote of not fewer than six members of the board. (2) An application for a certificate made under the provisions of this chapter may not be withdrawn without approval of the board. (3) Failure by an individual to renew a certificate of registration in accordance with this chapter shall not remove or limit the board's jurisdiction to take any disciplinary action under this section against the individual. (4) At the request of the board, a certificate holder shall immediately surrender to the board a certificate that the board has suspended, revoked, or permanently revoked. (N) Sanctions shall not be imposed under division (B)(28) of this section against any person who waives deductibles and copayments as follows: (1) In compliance with the health benefit plan that expressly allows such a practice. Waiver of the deductibles or copayments shall be made only with the full knowledge and consent of the plan purchaser, payer, and third-party administrator. Documentation of the consent shall be made available to the board upon request. (2) For professional services rendered to any other person authorized to practice pursuant to this chapter, to the extent allowed by this chapter and rules adopted by the board. (O) Under the board's investigative duties described in this section and subject to division (F) of this section, the board shall develop and implement a quality intervention program designed to improve through remedial education the clinical and communication skills of individuals authorized under this chapter to practice medicine and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, and podiatric medicine and surgery. In developing and implementing the quality intervention program, the board may do all of the following: (1) Offer in appropriate cases as determined by the board an educational and assessment program pursuant to an investigation the board conducts under this section; (2) Select providers of educational and assessment services, including a quality intervention program panel of case reviewers; (3) Make referrals to educational and assessment service providers and approve individual educational programs recommended by those providers. The board shall monitor the progress of each individual undertaking a recommended individual educational program. (4) Determine what constitutes successful completion of an individual educational program and require further monitoring of the individual who completed the program or other action that the board determines to be appropriate; (5) Adopt rules in accordance with Chapter 119. of the Revised Code to further implement the quality intervention program. An individual who participates in an individual educational program pursuant to this division shall pay the financial obligations arising from that educational program. Section 2. That existing sections 2305.11, 2317.56, 2919.171, and 4731.22 and section 2317.561 of the Revised Code are hereby repealed. Section 3. Section 4731.22 of the Revised Code is presented in this act as a composite of the section as amended by both Sub. H.B. 251 and Sub. S.B. 301 of the 129th General Assembly. The General Assembly, applying the principle stated in division (B) of section 1.52 of the Revised Code that amendments are to be harmonized if reasonably capable of simultaneous operation, finds that the composite is the resulting version of the section in effect prior to the effective date of the section as presented in this act.