Enrolled version
AUTHOR'S / SPONSOR'S STATEMENT OF INTENT

S.B. 1476 seeks to establish a veteran entrepreneur program, which will perform outreach functions to improve veteran entrepreneurs' and business owners' awareness of federal and state benefits and services. In addition, S.B. 1476 will provide guidance to veteran entrepreneurs and business owners through conferences, seminars, and training workshops with federal and state agencies.

S.B. 1476 amends current law relating to the creation of the veteran entrepreneur program by the Texas Veterans Commission.

RULEMAKING AUTHORITY

Rulemaking authority is expressly granted to the Texas Veterans Commission in SECTION 1 (Section 434.022, Government Code) and SECTION 2 of this bill.

SECTION BY SECTION ANALYSIS

SECTION 1. Amends Subchapter A, Chapter 434, Government Code, by adding Section 434.022, as follows:

Sec. 434.022. VETERAN ENTREPRENEUR PROGRAM. (a) Defines, in this section, "veteran."

(b) Requires the Texas Veterans Commission (TVC) by rule to establish and implement the veteran entrepreneur program to foster and promote veteran entrepreneurship and business ownership.

(c) Requires that the program provide assistance to veteran entrepreneurs and business owners by:

(1) performing outreach functions to improve veteran entrepreneurs' and business owners' awareness of federal and state benefits and services available to those veterans;

(2) assessing the need for benefits and services among veteran entrepreneurs and business owners;

(3) reviewing and researching programs, projects, and initiatives designed to address the needs of veteran entrepreneurs and business owners;

(4) periodically evaluating the effectiveness of TVC's efforts to assist veteran entrepreneurs and business owners and making appropriate recommendations to the executive director of TVC to improve services and assistance provided to those veterans;

(5) incorporating issues concerning veteran entrepreneurs and business owners into TVC's plans for assisting veterans in securing benefits and services;

(6) advocating for veteran entrepreneurs and working to increase public awareness about the needs of veteran entrepreneurs and business owners;

(7) recommending legislative initiatives and policies at the local, state, and national levels to address the issues affecting veteran entrepreneurship and business ownership;

(8) collaborating with federal, state, and private agencies that provide services to veteran entrepreneurs and business owners to allow the veterans to make use of those services;

(9) monitoring and researching issues affecting the interests of veteran entrepreneurs and business owners;

(10) providing information about opportunities for veteran entrepreneurs and business owners in the commission's collaborative network of businesses and organizations;

(11) providing guidance to veteran entrepreneurs and business owners through conferences, seminars, and training workshops with federal, state, and private agencies; and

(12) promoting events and activities that recognize or honor veteran entrepreneurs and business owners.

(d) Requires the executive director of TVC to appoint a program coordinator to administer the program.

(e) Requires TVC to provide facilities as appropriate in support of the program to the extent funding is available for that purpose.

SECTION 2. Requires TVC, as soon as practicable after the effective date of this Act, but not later than January 1, 2014, to adopt rules establishing the veteran entrepreneur program required by Section 434.022, Government Code, as added by this Act.

SECTION 3. Effective date: upon passage or September 1, 2013.