Enrolled version
AN ACT

relating to the operation and funding of drug court programs.

BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:

SECTION 1. Section 469.001, Health and Safety Code, is

amended to read as follows:

Sec. 469.001. DRUG COURT PROGRAM DEFINED ; PROCEDURES FOR

CERTAIN DEFENDANTS . (a) In this chapter, "drug court program"

means a program that has the following essential characteristics:

(1) the integration of alcohol and other drug

treatment services in the processing of cases in the judicial

system;

(2) the use of a nonadversarial approach involving

prosecutors and defense attorneys to promote public safety and to

protect the due process rights of program participants;

(3) early identification and prompt placement of

eligible participants in the program;

(4) access to a continuum of alcohol, drug, and other

related treatment and rehabilitative services;

(5) monitoring of abstinence through weekly alcohol

and other drug testing;

(6) a coordinated strategy to govern program responses

to participants' compliance;

(7) ongoing judicial interaction with program

participants;

(8) monitoring and evaluation of program goals and

effectiveness;

(9) continuing interdisciplinary education to promote

effective program planning, implementation, and operations; and

(10) development of partnerships with public agencies

and community organizations.

(b) If a defendant successfully completes a drug court

program, regardless of whether the defendant was convicted of the

offense for which the defendant entered the program or whether the

court deferred further proceedings without entering an

adjudication of guilt, after notice to the state and a hearing on

whether the defendant is otherwise entitled to the petition and

whether issuance of the order is in the best interest of justice,

the court shall enter an order of nondisclosure under Section

411.081, Government Code, as if the defendant had received a

discharge and dismissal under Section 5(c), Article 42.12, Code of

Criminal Procedure, with respect to all records and files related

to the defendant's arrest for the offense for which the defendant

entered the program if the defendant:

(1) has not been previously convicted of a felony

offense; and

(2) is not convicted for any other felony offense

before the second anniversary of the defendant's successful

completion of the program.

(c) Notwithstanding Subsection (b), a defendant is not

entitled to petition the court for an order of nondisclosure

following successful completion of a drug court program if the

defendant's entry into the program arose as the result of a

conviction for an offense involving the operation of a motor

vehicle while intoxicated.

SECTION 2. Section 469.002, Health and Safety Code, is

amended to read as follows:

Sec. 469.002. AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH PROGRAM. The [ Except

as provided by Section 469.006, the ] commissioners court of a

county or governing body of a municipality may establish the

following types of [ a ] drug court programs:

(1) drug courts for [ program for ] persons arrested

for, charged with, or convicted of:

(A) [ (1) ] an offense in which an element of the

offense is the use or possession of alcohol or the use, possession,

or sale of a controlled substance, a controlled substance analogue,

or marihuana; or

(B) [ (2) ] an offense in which the use of alcohol

or a controlled substance is suspected to have significantly

contributed to the commission of the offense and the offense did not

involve:

(i) [ (A) ] carrying, possessing, or using a

firearm or other dangerous weapon;

(ii) [ (B) ] the use of force against the

person of another; or

(iii) [ (C) ] the death of or serious bodily

injury to another ;

(2) drug courts for juveniles detained for, taken into

custody for, or adjudicated as having engaged in:

(A) delinquent conduct, including habitual

felony conduct, or conduct indicating a need for supervision in

which an element of the conduct is the use or possession of alcohol

or the use, possession, or sale of a controlled substance, a

controlled substance analogue, or marihuana; or

(B) delinquent conduct, including habitual

felony conduct, or conduct indicating a need for supervision in

which the use of alcohol or a controlled substance is suspected to

have significantly contributed to the commission of the conduct and

the conduct did not involve:

(i) carrying, possessing, or using a

firearm or other dangerous weapon;

(ii) the use of force against the person of

another; or

(iii) the death of or serious bodily injury

to another;

(3) reentry drug courts for persons with a

demonstrated history of using alcohol or a controlled substance who

may benefit from a program designed to facilitate the person's

transition and reintegration into the community on release from a

state or local correctional facility;

(4) family dependency drug treatment courts for family

members involved in a suit affecting the parent-child relationship

in which a parent's use of alcohol or a controlled substance is a

primary consideration in the outcome of the suit; or

(5) programs for other persons not precisely described

by Subdivisions (1)-(4) who may benefit from a program that has the

essential characteristics described by Section 469.001 .

SECTION 3. Section 469.003, Health and Safety Code, is

amended to read as follows:

Sec. 469.003. OVERSIGHT. (a) The lieutenant governor and

the speaker of the house of representatives may assign to

appropriate legislative committees duties relating to the

oversight of drug court programs established under this chapter

[ Section 469.002 ].

(b) A legislative committee or the governor may request the

state auditor to perform a management, operations, or financial or

accounting audit of a drug court program established under this

chapter [ Section 469.002 ].

(c) A drug court program established under this chapter

shall:

(1) notify the criminal justice division of the

governor's office before or on implementation of the program; and

(2) provide information regarding the performance of

the program to the division on request.

SECTION 4. Section 469.004, Health and Safety Code, is

amended to read as follows:

Sec. 469.004. FEES. (a) A drug court program established

under this chapter [ Section 469.002 ] may collect from a participant

in the program:

(1) a reasonable program fee not to exceed $1,000[ ,

which may be paid on a periodic basis or on a deferred payment

schedule at the discretion of the judge, magistrate, or program

director administering the program ]; and

(2) an alcohol or controlled substance [ a urinalysis ]

testing , [ and ] counseling , and treatment fee[ :

[ (A) based on the participant's ability to pay;

and

[ (B) ] in an amount necessary to cover the costs

of the testing , [ and ] counseling , and treatment .

(b) Fees collected under this section may be paid on a

periodic basis or on a deferred payment schedule at the discretion

of the judge, magistrate, or program director administering the

program. The fees must be:

(1) [ A drug court program may require a participant to

pay all treatment costs incurred while participating in the

program, ] based on the participant's ability to pay ; and

(2) used only for purposes specific to the program .

SECTION 5. Section 469.006, Health and Safety Code, is

amended to read as follows:

Sec. 469.006. PROGRAM IN CERTAIN COUNTIES MANDATORY. (a)

The commissioners court of a county with a population of more than

200,000 [ 550,000 ] shall establish a drug court program under

Subdivision (1) of Section 469.002.

(b) [ A drug court program required under this section to be

established must have at least 100 participants during the first

four months in which the program is operating.

[ (c) ] A county required under this section to establish a

drug court program shall apply for [ to the ] federal and state

[ government for any ] funds available to pay the costs of the

program. The criminal justice division of the governor's office

may assist a county in applying for federal funds as required by

this subsection[ , including providing financial assistance to the

county ].

(c) Notwithstanding Subsection (a), a county is required to

establish a drug court program under this section only if the county

receives federal or state funding, including funding under Article

102.0178, Code of Criminal Procedure, specifically for that

purpose.

(d) A county that does not establish a drug court program as

required by this section and maintain the program is ineligible to

receive from the state:

(1) funds for a community supervision and corrections

department; and

(2) grants for substance abuse treatment programs

administered by the criminal justice division of the governor's

office.

SECTION 6. Section 469.007, Health and Safety Code, is

amended to read as follows:

Sec. 469.007. USE OF OTHER DRUG AND ALCOHOL AWARENESS

PROGRAMS. In addition to using a drug court program established

under this chapter [ Section 469.002 ], the commissioners court of a

county or a court may use other drug awareness or drug and alcohol

driving awareness programs to treat persons convicted of drug or

alcohol related offenses.

SECTION 7. Chapter 469, Health and Safety Code, is amended

by adding Sections 469.0025, 469.005, 469.008, and 469.009 to read

as follows:

Sec. 469.0025. ESTABLISHMENT OF REGIONAL PROGRAM. (a) The

commissioners courts of three or more counties, or the governing

bodies of three or more municipalities, may elect to establish a

regional drug court program under this chapter for the

participating counties or municipalities.

(b) For purposes of this chapter, each county or

municipality that elects to establish a regional drug court program

under this section is considered to have established the program

and is entitled to retain fees under Article 102.0178, Code of

Criminal Procedure, in the same manner as if the county or

municipality had established a drug court program without

participating in a regional program.

Sec. 469.005. DRUG COURT PROGRAMS EXCLUSIVELY FOR CERTAIN

INTOXICATION OFFENSES. (a) The commissioners court of a county may

establish under this chapter a drug court program exclusively for

persons arrested for, charged with, or convicted of an offense

involving the operation of a motor vehicle while intoxicated.

(b) A county that establishes a drug court program under

this chapter but does not establish a separate program under this

section must employ procedures designed to ensure that a person

arrested for, charged with, or convicted of a second or subsequent

offense involving the operation of a motor vehicle while

intoxicated participates in the county's existing drug court

program.

Sec. 469.008. SUSPENSION OR DISMISSAL OF COMMUNITY SERVICE

REQUIREMENT. (a) Notwithstanding Sections 13 and 16, Article

42.12, Code of Criminal Procedure, to encourage participation in a

drug court program established under this chapter, the judge or

magistrate administering the program may suspend any requirement

that, as a condition of community supervision, a participant in the

program work a specified number of hours at a community service

project or projects.

(b) On a participant's successful completion of a drug court

program, a judge or magistrate may excuse the participant from any

condition of community supervision previously suspended under

Subsection (a).

Sec. 469.009. OCCUPATIONAL DRIVER'S LICENSE.

Notwithstanding Section 521.242, Transportation Code, if a

participant's driver's license has been suspended as a result of an

alcohol-related or drug-related enforcement contact, as defined by

Section 524.001, Transportation Code, or as a result of a

conviction under Section 49.04, 49.07, or 49.08, Penal Code, the

judge or magistrate administering a drug court program under this

chapter may order that an occupational license be issued to the

participant. An order issued under this section is subject to

Sections 521.248-521.252, Transportation Code, except that any

reference to a petition under Section 521.242 of that code does not

apply.

SECTION 8. Subchapter A, Chapter 102, Code of Criminal

Procedure, is amended by adding Article 102.0178 to read as

follows:

Art. 102.0178. COSTS ATTENDANT TO CERTAIN INTOXICATION AND

DRUG CONVICTIONS. (a) In addition to other costs on conviction

imposed by this chapter, a person shall pay $50 as a court cost on

conviction of an offense punishable as a Class B misdemeanor or any

higher category of offense under:

(1) Chapter 49, Penal Code; or

(2) Chapter 481, Health and Safety Code.

(b) For purposes of this article, a person is considered to

have been convicted if:

(1) a sentence is imposed; or

(2) the defendant receives community supervision or

deferred adjudication.

(c) Court costs under this article are collected in the same

manner as other fines or costs. An officer collecting the costs

shall keep separate records of the funds collected as costs under

this article and shall deposit the funds in the county treasury, as

appropriate.

(d) The custodian of a county treasury shall:

(1) keep records of the amount of funds on deposit

collected under this article; and

(2) except as provided by Subsection (e), send to the

comptroller before the last day of the first month following each

calendar quarter the funds collected under this article during the

preceding quarter.

(e) A county is entitled to:

(1) if the custodian of the county treasury complies

with Subsection (d), retain 10 percent of the funds collected under

this article by an officer of the county during the calendar quarter

as a service fee; and

(2) if the county has established a drug court program

or establishes a drug court program before the expiration of the

calendar quarter, retain in addition to the 10 percent authorized

by Subdivision (1) another 50 percent of the funds collected under

this article by an officer of the county during the calendar quarter

to be used exclusively for the development and maintenance of drug

court programs operated within the county.

(f) If no funds due as costs under this article are

deposited in a county treasury in a calendar quarter, the custodian

of the treasury shall file the report required for the quarter in

the regular manner and must state that no funds were collected.

(g) The comptroller shall deposit the funds received under

this article to the credit of the drug court account in the general

revenue fund to help fund drug court programs established under

Chapter 469, Health and Safety Code. The legislature shall

appropriate money from the account solely to the criminal justice

division of the governor's office for distribution to drug court

programs that apply for the money.

(h) Funds collected under this article are subject to audit

by the comptroller.

SECTION 9. Chapter 54, Government Code, is amended by

adding Subchapter GG to read as follows:

SUBCHAPTER GG. MAGISTRATES FOR DRUG COURT PROGRAMS

Sec. 54.1801. DEFINITION. In this subchapter, "drug court"

has the meaning assigned by Section 469.001, Health and Safety

Code.

Sec. 54.1802. APPLICABILITY OF SUBCHAPTER. This subchapter

applies to each district court and statutory county court with

criminal jurisdiction in this state. If a provision of this

subchapter conflicts with a specific provision for a particular

district court or statutory county court, the specific provision

controls.

Sec. 54.1803. APPOINTMENT. (a) The judges of the district

courts of a county hearing criminal cases and the judges of the

statutory county courts with criminal jurisdiction in a county,

with the consent and approval of the commissioners court of the

county, may appoint the number of magistrates set by the

commissioners court to perform the duties associated with the

administration of drug courts as authorized by this subchapter.

(b) Each magistrate's appointment must be made with the

approval of the majority of the district court or statutory county

court judges described in Subsection (a), as applicable.

(c) A magistrate appointed under this section serves at the

will of a majority of the appointing judges.

Sec. 54.1804. QUALIFICATIONS. A magistrate must:

(1) be a resident of this state and of the county in

which the magistrate is appointed to serve under this subchapter;

and

(2) have been licensed to practice law in this state

for at least four years.

Sec. 54.1805. COMPENSATION. A magistrate is entitled to

the salary determined by the county commissioners court.

Sec. 54.1806. JUDICIAL IMMUNITY. A magistrate has the same

judicial immunity as a judge of a district court or statutory county

court appointing the magistrate.

Sec. 54.1807. PROCEEDINGS THAT MAY BE REFERRED. (a) A

district judge or judge of a statutory county court with criminal

jurisdiction may refer to a magistrate a criminal case for drug

court proceedings.

(b) A magistrate may not preside over a contested trial on

the merits, regardless of whether the trial is before a jury.

Sec. 54.1808. ORDER OF REFERRAL. (a) To refer one or more

cases to a drug court magistrate, a district judge or judge of a

statutory county court with criminal jurisdiction must issue an

order of referral specifying the magistrate's duties.

(b) An order of referral may:

(1) limit the powers of the magistrate and direct the

magistrate to report on specific issues and perform particular

acts;

(2) set the time and place for the hearing;

(3) provide a date for filing the magistrate's

findings;

(4) designate proceedings for more than one case over

which the magistrate shall preside; and

(5) set forth general powers and limitations of

authority of the magistrate applicable to any case referred.

Sec. 54.1809. POWERS. Except as limited by an order of

referral, a magistrate to whom a drug court case is referred may

perform any act and take any measure necessary and proper for the

efficient performance of the duties assigned by the district or

statutory county court judge.

SECTION 10. Subchapter B, Chapter 102, Government Code, is

amended by adding Section 102.0215 to read as follows:

Sec. 102.0215. ADDITIONAL COURT COSTS ON CONVICTION: CODE

OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE. A person convicted of an offense shall pay

under the Code of Criminal Procedure, in addition to all other

costs, costs attendant to convictions under Chapter 49, Penal Code,

and under Chapter 481, Health and Safety Code, to help fund drug

court programs established under Chapter 469, Health and Safety

Code (Art. 102.0178, Code of Criminal Procedure) . . . $50.

SECTION 11. (a) Except as otherwise provided by this

section, the change in law made by this Act in amending Chapter 469,

Health and Safety Code, applies to a defendant who enters a drug

court program under Chapter 469, Health and Safety Code, regardless

of whether the defendant committed the offense for which the

defendant enters the program before, on, or after the effective

date of this Act.

(b) The commissioners court of a county required under

Section 469.006(a), Health and Safety Code, as amended by this Act,

to establish a drug court program shall establish the program not

later than the later of:

(1) September 1, 2008; or

(2) the first anniversary of the initial date on which

the federal census indicates that the county's population exceeds

200,000.

(c) The change in law made by this Act in adding Article

102.0178, Code of Criminal Procedure, and Section 102.0215,

Government Code, applies only to an offense committed on or after

the effective date of this Act. An offense committed before the

effective date of this Act is governed by the law in effect when the

offense was committed, and the former law is continued in effect for

that purpose. For purposes of this subsection, an offense was

committed before the effective date of this Act if any element of

the offense was committed before that date.

SECTION 12. This Act takes effect immediately if it

receives a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each

house, as provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution.

If this Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate

effect, this Act takes effect September 1, 2007.

______________________________ ______________________________

President of the Senate Speaker of the House

I certify that H.B. No. 530 was passed by the House on April

25, 2007, by the following vote: Yeas 145, Nays 0, 1 present, not

voting; and that the House concurred in Senate amendments to H.B.

No. 530 on May 21, 2007, by the following vote: Yeas 139, Nays 0, 2

present, not voting.

______________________________

Chief Clerk of the House

I certify that H.B. No. 530 was passed by the Senate, with

amendments, on May 17, 2007, by the following vote: Yeas 31, Nays

0.

______________________________

Secretary of the Senate

APPROVED: __________________

Date

__________________