Enrolled version
AN ACT

relating to reorganizing certain state institutions that provide

financing for cancer research, including creating the Cancer

Prevention and Research Institute of Texas, and information about

certain cancer treatments; granting authority to issue bonds.

BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:

SECTION 1. The heading to Chapter 86, Health and Safety

Code, is amended to read as follows:

CHAPTER 86. BREAST CANCER AND LUNG CANCER

SECTION 2. Chapter 86, Health and Safety Code, is amended by

adding Subchapter C to read as follows:

SUBCHAPTER C. INFORMATION ON ALTERNATIVE TREATMENTS FOR LUNG CANCER

Sec. 86.101. PURPOSE. It is the intent of the legislature

that lung cancer patients have access to a standardized written

summary, as provided under this subchapter, of medically

efficacious and viable alternative treatments for lung cancer,

which may include surgical, radiological, or chemotherapeutic

treatment or combinations of those treatments.

Sec. 86.102. STANDARDIZED WRITTEN SUMMARY. (a) The

department shall publish a standardized written summary, in

language a patient can understand, of the advantages,

disadvantages, risks, and descriptions of all medically

efficacious and viable alternatives for the treatment of lung

cancer.

(b) The department shall update the summary annually, if

necessary, to reflect changes in the treatment of lung cancer.

(c) The advisory council shall develop the summary.

Sec. 86.103. ADVISORY COUNCIL. (a) The lung cancer

advisory council is appointed by the executive commissioner of the

Health and Human Services Commission.

(b) The lung cancer advisory council consists of the

following three members:

(1) one member who is a physician active in the

treatment of lung cancer;

(2) one member who is an advocate for lung cancer

patients; and

(3) one member of the public who is a survivor of lung

cancer.

Sec. 86.104. DISTRIBUTION OF SUMMARY. (a) Not later than

the 90th day after the date the department receives the

standardized written summary from the advisory council, the

department shall print and make available to all physicians in the

state sufficient copies of the summary.

(b) A physician may distribute the summary to a patient when

the physician determines in the physician's professional judgment

that it is in the best interest of the patient to receive a copy of

the summary.

Sec. 86.105. FUNDING. (a) The department may not expend

general revenue funds for the publication or distribution of the

standardized written summary.

(b) The department may provide technical assistance to the

advisory council to aid in the development of the summary.

(c) The department may accept grants, donations of money or

materials, and other forms of assistance from private and public

sources to be used solely for the development and distribution of

the summary.

SECTION 3. Section 86.003(b), Health and Safety Code, is

amended to read as follows:

(b) The advisory council shall include at least one of each

of the following:

(1) a representative of a statewide nonprofit

organization that is an advocate for breast cancer patients;

(2) a representative of a statewide professional

organization representing the full spectrum of physicians;

(3) a physician associated with an institution of

higher education who specializes in the treatment of breast cancer;

and

(4) a representative of the Cancer Prevention and

Research Institute of Texas [ Cancer Council ].

SECTION 4. Chapter 102, Health and Safety Code, is amended

to read as follows:

CHAPTER 102. [ TEXAS ] CANCER PREVENTION AND RESEARCH INSTITUTE OF

TEXAS [ COUNCIL ]

SUBCHAPTER A. GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sec. 102.001. DEFINITIONS [ DEFINITION ]. In this chapter :

(1) "Institute" means the Cancer Prevention and

Research Institute of Texas.

(2) "Oversight committee" means the Cancer Prevention

and Research Institute of Texas Oversight Committee.

(3) "Research and prevention programs committee"

means the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas

Scientific Research and Prevention Programs Committee [ , "council"

means the Texas Cancer Council ].

Sec. 102.002. PURPOSES [ TEXAS CANCER COUNCIL ]. The [ Texas ]

Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas is established

to:

(1) create and expedite innovation in the area of

cancer research and in enhancing the potential for a medical or

scientific breakthrough in the prevention of cancer and cures for

cancer;

(2) attract, create, or expand research capabilities

of public or private institutions of higher education and other

public or private entities that will promote a substantial increase

in cancer research and in the creation of high-quality new jobs in

this state; and

(3) develop [ Council shall develop ] and [ work to ]

implement the Texas Cancer Plan.

Sec. 102.003. SUNSET PROVISION. The Cancer Prevention and

Research Institute of Texas [ Cancer Council ] is subject to Chapter

325, Government Code (Texas Sunset Act). Unless continued in

existence as provided by that chapter, the institute [ council ] is

abolished and this chapter expires September 1, 2021 [ 2009 ].

SUBCHAPTER B. POWERS AND DUTIES OF INSTITUTE

Sec. 102.051. POWERS AND DUTIES. (a) The institute may:

(1) make grants to provide funds to public or private

persons to implement the Texas Cancer Plan, and may make grants to

institutions of learning and to advanced medical research

facilities and collaborations in this state for:

(A) research into the causes of and cures for all

types of cancer in humans;

(B) facilities for use in research into the

causes of and cures for cancer;

(C) research, including translational research,

to develop therapies, protocols, medical pharmaceuticals, or

procedures for the cure or substantial mitigation of all types of

cancer in humans; and

(D) cancer prevention and control programs in

this state to mitigate the incidence of all types of cancer in

humans;

(2) support institutions of learning and advanced

medical research facilities and collaborations in this state in all

stages in the process of finding the causes of all types of cancer

in humans and developing cures, from laboratory research to

clinical trials and including programs to address the problem of

access to advanced cancer treatment;

(3) establish the appropriate standards and oversight

bodies to ensure the proper use of funds authorized under this

chapter for cancer research and facilities development;

(4) employ an executive director as determined by the

oversight committee;

(5) employ necessary staff to provide administrative

support; and

(6) monitor contracts and agreements authorized by

this chapter.

(b) The institute shall work to implement the Texas Cancer

Plan and continually monitor and revise the Texas Cancer Plan as

necessary.

Sec. 102.052. ANNUAL PUBLIC REPORT. (a) The institute

shall issue an annual public report outlining the institute's

activities, grants awarded, grants in progress, research

accomplishments, and future program directions. The report must

include:

(1) the number and dollar amounts of research and

facilities grants;

(2) identification of the grant recipients for the

reported year;

(3) the institute's administrative expenses;

(4) an assessment of the availability of funding for

cancer research from sources other than the institute;

(5) a summary of findings of research funded by the

institute, including promising new research areas;

(6) an assessment of the relationship between the

institute's grants and the overall strategy of its research

program;

(7) a statement of the institute's strategic research

and financial plans; and

(8) an estimate of how much cancer has cost the state

during the year, including the amounts spent by the state relating

to cancer by the child health program, the Medicaid program, the

Teacher Retirement System of Texas, and the Employees Retirement

System of Texas.

(b) The institute shall submit the annual public report to

the governor and the legislature.

Sec. 102.053. INDEPENDENT FINANCIAL AUDIT FOR REVIEW BY

COMPTROLLER. (a) The institute shall annually commission an

independent financial audit of its activities from a certified

public accounting firm. The institute shall provide the audit to

the comptroller. The comptroller shall review and evaluate the

audit and annually issue a public report of that review. The

comptroller shall make recommendations concerning the institute's

financial practices and performance.

(b) The oversight committee shall review the annual

financial audit, the comptroller's report and evaluation of that

audit, and the financial practices of the institute.

Sec. 102.054. GIFTS AND GRANTS. The institute may solicit

and accept gifts and grants from any source for the purposes of this

chapter.

Sec. 102.055. QUARTERLY MEETINGS. The oversight committee

shall hold a public meeting at least once in each quarter of the

calendar year, with appropriate notice and with a formal public

comment period.

SUBCHAPTER C. OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE

Sec. 102.101 [ 102.004 ]. COMPOSITION OF OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE

[ COUNCIL ]. (a) The Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of

Texas Oversight Committee is the governing body of the institute.

(b) The oversight committee [ council ] is composed of the

following 11 members :

(1) three members appointed by the governor [ the

chairman of the Texas Board of Health, or a representative

appointed by the chairman, who serves as an ex officio nonvoting

member ];

(2) three members appointed by the lieutenant [ one

physician active in the treatment of cancer, appointed by the ]

governor;

(3) three members appointed by the speaker of the

house of representatives [ one physician active in the treatment of

cancer, appointed by the lieutenant governor ];

(4) the comptroller or the comptroller's designee [ one

physician active in the treatment of cancer, appointed by the

speaker of the house of representatives ]; and

(5) the attorney general or the attorney general's

designee [ one representative of a voluntary health organization

interested in cancer, appointed by the governor;

[ (6) one representative of a voluntary health

organization interested in cancer, appointed by the lieutenant

governor;

[ (7) one representative of a voluntary health

organization interested in cancer, appointed by the speaker of the

house of representatives;

[ (8) one representative of a licensed health care

facility that treats a significant number of cancer patients,

appointed by the governor;

[ (9) one representative of a licensed health care

facility that treats a significant number of cancer patients,

appointed by the lieutenant governor;

[ (10) one representative of a licensed health care

facility that treats a significant number of cancer patients,

appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives;

[ (11) one member of the public, appointed by the

governor;

[ (12) one member of the public, appointed by the

lieutenant governor;

[ (13) one member of the public, appointed by the

speaker of the house of representatives;

[ (14) one licensed health care professional active in

the treatment or control of cancer, other than a physician,

appointed by the governor;

[ (15) one licensed health care professional active in

the treatment or control of cancer, other than a physician,

appointed by the lieutenant governor; and

[ (16) one licensed health care professional active in

the treatment or control of cancer, other than a physician,

appointed by the speaker of the house of representatives ].

(c) The members of the oversight committee must represent

the geographic and cultural diversity of the state.

(d) [ (b) ] In making appointments to the oversight committee

[ council ], the governor, lieutenant governor, and speaker of the

house of representatives should attempt to include cancer survivors

and family members of cancer patients if possible.

(e) [ Sec. 102.0041. QUALIFICATIONS OF COUNCIL MEMBERS AND

EMPLOYEES. (a) In this section, "Texas trade association" means a

cooperative and voluntarily joined association of business or

professional competitors in this state designed to assist its

members and its industry or profession in dealing with mutual

business or professional problems and in promoting their common

interest. The term does not include a voluntary health

organization.

[ (b) ] A person may not be a [ public ] member of the oversight

committee [ council ] if the person or the person's spouse:

(1) is employed by or participates in the management

of a business entity or other organization receiving money from the

institute [ council ];

(2) owns or controls, directly or indirectly, more

than a five [ 10 ] percent interest in a business entity or other

organization receiving money from the institute [ council ]; or

(3) uses or receives a substantial amount of tangible

goods, services, or money from the institute [ council ], other than

[ compensation or ] reimbursement authorized by this chapter [ law ]

for oversight committee [ council ] membership, attendance, or

expenses.

[ (c) A person may not be a member of the council and may not

be a council employee employed in a "bona fide executive,

administrative, or professional capacity," as that phrase is used

for purposes of establishing an exemption to the overtime

provisions of the federal Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29

U.S.C. Section 201 et seq.) and its subsequent amendments if:

[ (1) the person is an officer, employee, or paid

consultant of a Texas trade association in the field of cancer

control; or

[ (2) the person's spouse is an officer, manager, or

paid consultant of a Texas trade association in the field of cancer

control.

[ (d) A person may not be a member of the council or act as

the general counsel to the council or the council's staff if the

person is required to register as a lobbyist under Chapter 305,

Government Code, because of the person's activities for

compensation on behalf of a profession related to the operation of

the council.

[ (e) Appointments to the council shall be made without

regard to the race, color, disability, sex, religion, age, or

national origin of the appointees. ]

Sec. 102.102. REMOVAL. (a) [ (f) ] It is a ground for

removal from the oversight committee [ council ] that a member:

(1) [ does not have at the time of taking office the

qualifications required by Section 102.004;

[ (2) does not maintain during service on the council

the qualifications required by Section 102.004;

[ (3) ] is ineligible for membership under Section

102.101(e) [ Subsections (b)-(d) ];

(2) [ (4) ] cannot, because of illness or disability,

discharge the member's duties for a substantial part of the member's

term; or

(3) [ (5) ] is absent from more than half of the

regularly scheduled oversight committee [ council ] meetings that

the member is eligible to attend during a calendar year without an

excuse approved by a majority vote of the committee [ council ].

(b) [ (g) ] The validity of an action of the oversight

committee [ council ] is not affected by the fact that it is taken

when a ground for removal of a committee [ council ] member exists.

(c) [ (h) ] If the executive director has knowledge that a

potential ground for removal exists, the executive director shall

notify the presiding officer of the oversight committee [ council ]

of the potential ground. The presiding officer shall then notify

the appointing authority and the attorney general that a potential

ground for removal exists. If the potential ground for removal

involves the presiding officer, the executive director shall notify

the next highest ranking officer of the oversight committee

[ council ], who shall then notify the appointing authority and the

attorney general that a potential ground for removal exists.

Sec. 102.103 [ 102.005 ]. TERMS; VACANCY. (a) Oversight

committee [ Except for the ex officio member of the council,

council ] members appointed by the governor, lieutenant governor,

and speaker of the house serve four-year [ for staggered six-year ]

terms[ , with the terms of five members expiring February 1 of each

even-numbered year ].

(b) Not later than the 30th day after the date an oversight

committee member's term expires, the appropriate appointing

authority shall appoint a replacement.

(c) If a vacancy occurs on the oversight committee , the

appropriate appointing authority shall appoint a successor , in the

same manner as the original appointment, [ a person ] to serve for the

remainder of the unexpired term. The appropriate appointing

authority shall appoint the successor not later than the 30th day

after the date the vacancy occurs.

Sec. 102.104 [ 102.006 ]. OFFICERS. The oversight committee

[ governor ] shall select a [ designate a member of the council, other

than the ex officio member, as the ] presiding officer from among its

members [ of the council to serve in that capacity at the pleasure of

the governor ].

Sec. 102.105 [ 102.007 ]. EXPENSES [ COMPENSATION ]. [ (a) ] A

member of the oversight committee [ council ] is not entitled to

compensation but is entitled to reimbursement for actual and

necessary expenses incurred in attending meetings of the committee

or performing other official [ council ] duties authorized by the

presiding officer .

[ (b) A member of the legislature shall be reimbursed from

the appropriate fund of the legislature. A representative of a

state agency shall be reimbursed from the funds of the agency the

person represents. Other members shall be reimbursed from council

funds. ]

Sec. 102.106. CONFLICT OF INTEREST. The oversight

committee shall adopt conflict-of-interest rules, based on

standards applicable to members of scientific review committees of

the National Institutes of Health, to govern members of the

oversight committee.

Sec. 102.107. POWERS AND DUTIES. The oversight committee

shall hire an executive director.

SUBCHAPTER D. RESEARCH AND PREVENTION PROGRAMS COMMITTEE

Sec. 102.151. SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND PREVENTION PROGRAMS

COMMITTEE. (a) The Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of

Texas Scientific Research and Prevention Programs Committee is

composed of the following 18 members:

(1) one voting member appointed by the governor who is

a physician or licensed health care professional active in the

treatment of cancer;

(2) one voting member appointed by the lieutenant

governor who is a physician or licensed health care professional

active in the treatment of cancer;

(3) one voting member appointed by the speaker of the

house of representatives who is a physician or licensed health care

professional active in the treatment of cancer;

(4) one voting member appointed by the governor who is

a representative of a licensed health care facility that treats a

significant number of cancer patients;

(5) one voting member appointed by the lieutenant

governor who is a representative of a licensed health care facility

that treats a significant number of cancer patients;

(6) one voting member appointed by the speaker of the

house of representatives who is a representative of a licensed

health care facility that treats a significant number of cancer

patients;

(7) one voting member appointed by the governor who is

a representative of a voluntary health organization interested in

cancer;

(8) one voting member appointed by the lieutenant

governor who is a representative of a voluntary health organization

interested in cancer;

(9) one voting member appointed by the speaker of the

house of representatives who is a representative of a voluntary

health organization interested in cancer;

(10) two nonvoting members appointed by the governor

representing private or independent institutions of higher

education in this state that have demonstrated success and

leadership in cancer research;

(11) two nonvoting ex officio members appointed by the

chancellor of The University of Texas System to represent:

(A) The University of Texas Southwestern Medical

Center at Dallas;

(B) The University of Texas Medical Branch at

Galveston;

(C) The University of Texas Health Science Center

at Houston;

(D) The University of Texas Health Science Center

at San Antonio;

(E) The University of Texas Health Center at

Tyler; or

(F) The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer

Center;

(12) one nonvoting ex officio member appointed by the

chancellor of The Texas A&M University System to represent:

(A) The Texas A&M University System Health

Science Center; or

(B) the teaching hospital for The Texas A&M

Health Science Center College of Medicine;

(13) one nonvoting ex officio member appointed by the

chancellor of the Texas Tech University System to represent the

Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center;

(14) one nonvoting ex officio member appointed by the

chancellor of the University of Houston System to represent the

system;

(15) one nonvoting ex officio member appointed by the

chancellor of the Texas State University System to represent the

system; and

(16) one nonvoting ex officio member appointed by the

chancellor of the University of North Texas System to represent the

system.

(b) Individuals appointed to the research and prevention

programs committee may be residents of another state.

(c) The members of the research and prevention programs

committee must represent the geographic and cultural diversity of

the state.

Sec. 102.152. TERMS OF RESEARCH AND PREVENTION PROGRAMS

COMMITTEE MEMBERS. Members of the research and prevention programs

committee serve four-year terms.

Sec. 102.153. EXPENSES. Members of the research and

prevention programs committee serve without compensation but are

entitled to reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses in

attending meetings of the committee or performing other official

duties authorized by the presiding officer.

SUBCHAPTER E. CANCER PREVENTION AND RESEARCH FUND

Sec. 102.201. CANCER PREVENTION AND RESEARCH FUND. (a) The

cancer prevention and research fund is a dedicated account in the

general revenue fund.

(b) The cancer prevention and research fund consists of:

(1) patent, royalty, and license fees and other income

received under a contract entered into as provided by Section

102.255;

(2) appropriations of money to the fund by the

legislature;

(3) gifts, grants, including grants from the federal

government, and other donations received for the fund; and

(4) interest earned on the investment of money in the

fund.

(c) The fund may be used only to pay for:

(1) grants for cancer research and for cancer research

facilities in this state to realize therapies, protocols, and

medical procedures for the cure or substantial mitigation of all

types of cancer in humans;

(2) the purchase, subject to approval by the

institute, of laboratory facilities by or on behalf of a state

agency or grant recipient;

(3) grants to public or private persons to implement

the Texas Cancer Plan;

(4) the operation of the institute; and

(5) grants for cancer prevention and control programs

in this state to mitigate the incidence of all types of cancer in

humans.

Sec. 102.202. ISSUANCE OF GENERAL OBLIGATION BONDS. (a)

The institute may request the Texas Public Finance Authority to

issue and sell general obligation bonds of the state as authorized

by Section 67, Article III, Texas Constitution.

(b) The Texas Public Finance Authority may not issue and

sell general obligation bonds authorized by this section before

January 1, 2008, and may not issue and sell more than $300 million

in general obligation bonds authorized by this section in a state

fiscal year.

(c) The institute shall determine, and include in its

request for issuing bonds, the amount, exclusive of costs of

issuance, of the bonds to be issued and the preferred time for

issuing the bonds.

(d) The Texas Public Finance Authority shall issue the bonds

in accordance with and subject to Chapter 1232, Government Code,

and Texas Public Finance Authority rules. The bonds may be issued

in installments.

(e) Proceeds of the bonds issued under this section shall be

deposited in separate funds or accounts, in the state treasury, as

shall be set out in the proceedings authorizing the bonds.

(f) The proceeds of the bonds may be used only to:

(1) make grants authorized by Section 67, Article III,

Texas Constitution;

(2) purchase laboratory facilities approved by the

institute;

(3) pay costs of operating the institute; or

(4) pay the costs of issuing the bonds and related bond

administration costs of the Texas Public Finance Authority.

Sec. 102.203. AUTHORIZED USE OF FUNDS. (a) A person

awarded money from the cancer prevention and research fund or from

bond proceeds under this subchapter may use the money for research

consistent with the purpose of this chapter and in accordance with a

contract between the person and the institute.

(b) Except as otherwise provided by this section, money

awarded under this subchapter may be used for authorized expenses,

including honoraria, salaries and benefits, travel, conference

fees and expenses, consumable supplies, other operating expenses,

contracted research and development, capital equipment, and

construction or renovation of state or private facilities.

(c) A person receiving money under this subchapter may not

spend more than five percent of the money for indirect costs.

(d) Not more than five percent of the money awarded under

this subchapter may be used for facility construction purposes

during any year.

(e) Not more than 10 percent of the money awarded under this

subchapter may be used for cancer prevention and control programs

during any year.

Sec. 102.204. PREFERENCE FOR TEXAS BUSINESSES. If the

Texas Public Finance Authority contracts with a private entity to

issue the bonds under this subchapter, the Texas Public Finance

Authority shall consider contracting with an entity that has its

principal place of business in this state and shall include using a

historically underutilized business as defined by Section

2161.001, Government Code.

SUBCHAPTER F. PROCEDURE FOR MAKING AWARDS

Sec. 102.251. DUTIES OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH AND PREVENTION

PROGRAMS COMMITTEE. (a) The research and prevention programs

committee shall review grant applications and make recommendations

to the oversight committee regarding the award of research, therapy

development, and clinical trial grants.

(b) The ex officio members of the research and prevention

programs committee may participate in the review and discussion of

grant applications but may not vote on recommendations to the

oversight committee. In making recommendations to the oversight

committee, the research and prevention programs committee shall

give priority to proposals that:

(1) could lead to immediate or long-term medical and

scientific breakthroughs in the area of cancer prevention or cures

for cancer;

(2) strengthen and enhance fundamental science in

cancer research;

(3) ensure a comprehensive coordinated approach to

cancer research;

(4) are interdisciplinary or interinstitutional;

(5) address federal or other major research sponsors'

priorities in emerging scientific or technology fields in the area

of cancer prevention or cures for cancer;

(6) are matched with funds available by a private or

nonprofit entity and institution or institutions of higher

education;

(7) are collaborative between any combination of

private and nonprofit entities, public or private agencies or

institutions in this state, and public or private institutions

outside this state;

(8) have a demonstrable economic development benefit

to this state;

(9) enhance research superiority at institutions of

higher education in this state by creating new research

superiority, attracting existing research superiority from

institutions not located in this state and other research entities,

or enhancing existing research superiority by attracting from

outside this state additional researchers and resources; and

(10) expedite innovation and commercialization,

attract, create, or expand private sector entities that will drive

a substantial increase in high-quality jobs, and increase higher

education applied science or technology research capabilities.

(c) A member of the research and prevention programs

committee may not attempt to use the committee member's official

position to influence a decision to approve or award a grant or

contract to the committee member's employer.

Sec. 102.252. OVERRIDING RESEARCH AND PREVENTION PROGRAMS

COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS. The oversight committee must follow the

funding recommendations of the research and prevention programs

committee unless two-thirds of the members of the oversight

committee vote to disregard a recommendation.

Sec. 102.253. MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF ANNUAL AWARDS. The

oversight committee may not award more than $300 million in grants

under Subchapter E in a fiscal year.

Sec. 102.254. PERIOD FOR AWARDS. The oversight committee

may not award money under Subchapter E before January 1, 2008, or

after August 31, 2020.

Sec. 102.255. CONTRACT TERMS. (a) The oversight committee

shall negotiate on behalf of the state regarding awarding, by

grant, money under this chapter.

(b) Before awarding a grant under Subchapter E, the

committee shall enter into a written contract with the grant

recipient. The contract may specify that:

(1) if all or any portion of the amount of the grant is

used to build a capital improvement:

(A) the state retains a lien or other interest in

the capital improvement in proportion to the percentage of the

grant amount used to pay for the capital improvement; and

(B) the grant recipient shall, if the capital

improvement is sold:

(i) repay to the state the grant money used

to pay for the capital improvement, with interest at the rate and

according to the other terms provided by the contract; and

(ii) share with the state a proportionate

amount of any profit realized from the sale; and

(2) if, as of a date specified in the contract, the

grant recipient has not used grant money awarded under Subchapter E

for the purposes for which the grant was intended, the recipient

shall repay that amount and any related interest applicable under

the contract to the state at the agreed rate and on the agreed

terms.

(c) The contract must include terms relating to

intellectual property rights consistent with the standards

developed by the oversight committee under Section 102.256.

(d) Before the oversight committee may make any grant of any

proceeds of the bonds issued under Subchapter E, the recipient of

the grant must have an amount of funds equal to one-half of the

grant dedicated to the research that is the subject of the grant

request.

Sec. 102.256. PATENT ROYALTIES AND LICENSE REVENUES PAID TO

STATE. (a) The oversight committee shall establish standards that

require all grant awards to be subject to an intellectual property

agreement that allows the state to collect royalties, income, and

other benefits realized as a result of projects undertaken with

money awarded under Subchapter E.

(b) In determining the state's interest in any intellectual

property rights, the oversight committee shall balance the

opportunity of the state to benefit from the patents, royalties,

licenses, and other benefits that result from basic research,

therapy development, and clinical trials with the need to ensure

that essential medical research is not unreasonably hindered by the

intellectual property agreement and that the agreement does not

unreasonably remove the incentive on the part of the individual

researcher, research team, or institution.

Sec. 102.257. MULTIYEAR PROJECTS. The oversight committee

may grant funds for a multiyear project. All the money needed to

fund a multiyear project must be awarded in the state fiscal year

that the project is approved by the research and prevention

programs committee. The institute shall distribute only the money

that will be expended during that fiscal year. The remaining money

shall be maintained in an escrow account to be distributed by the

institute in subsequent years of the project.

Sec. 102.258. PREFERENCE FOR TEXAS SUPPLIERS. The

oversight committee shall establish standards to ensure that grant

recipients purchase goods and services from suppliers in this state

to the extent reasonably possible, in a good faith effort to achieve

a goal of more than 50 percent of such purchases from suppliers in

this state.

Sec. 102.259. HISTORICALLY UNDERUTILIZED BUSINESSES. The

oversight committee shall establish standards to ensure that grant

recipients purchase goods and services from historically

underutilized businesses as defined by Chapter 2161, Government

Code, and any other applicable state law.

Sec. 102.260. PEER REVIEW. The research and prevention

programs committee shall require a peer review progress oversight

review of each grant recipient to ensure compliance with the terms

of the award and to ensure the scientific merit of the research.

The research and prevention programs committee shall report to the

oversight committee any recommendations for subsequent actions.

Sec. 102.261. MEDICAL ETHICS. Any research project that

receives money under Subchapter E must:

(1) be conducted with full consideration for the

ethical and medical implications of the research; and

(2) comply with all federal and state laws regarding

the conduct of research.

[ Sec. 102.008. MEETINGS. (a) The council shall meet at the

call of the presiding officer.

[ (b) The council shall develop and implement policies that

provide the public with a reasonable opportunity to appear before

the council and to speak on any issue under the jurisdiction of the

council.

[ Sec. 102.009. POWERS AND DUTIES OF COUNCIL. (a) The

council shall:

[ (1) work to implement the Texas Cancer Plan;

[ (2) continually monitor and revise the Texas Cancer

Plan as necessary;

[ (3) promote the development and coordination of

effective and efficient statewide public and private policies,

programs, and services related to cancer; and

[ (4) encourage cooperative, comprehensive, and

complementary planning among the public, private, and volunteer

sectors involved in cancer research, prevention, detection, and

treatment.

[ (b) The council may:

[ (1) employ an executive director;

[ (2) appoint advisory committees necessary to

implement the Texas Cancer Plan and employ necessary staff to

provide administrative support;

[ (3) monitor contracts and agreements for cancer

programs authorized by this chapter;

[ (4) conduct necessary studies and surveys;

[ (5) accept, transfer, and spend funds made available

by the federal or state government or by any other public or private

source, subject to limitations and conditions prescribed by

legislative appropriation; and

[ (6) use the existing staff of an appointed official

or agency to assist the council in performing its duties under this

chapter.

[ (c) The Texas Cancer Council and/or its contracted

projects shall maintain for physicians a listing of available

continuing medical education courses in pain treatment offered by

accredited Texas medical and osteopathic schools, hospitals,

health care facilities, or professional societies or associations

for physicians.

[ Sec. 102.010. GRANT PROGRAM. (a) If funds are available,

the council may establish a grant program to provide funds to public

or private persons to implement the Texas Cancer Plan.

[ (b) The council shall adopt rules governing the submission

and approval of grant requests and the cancellation of grants.

[ (c) To receive a grant, a person whose grant request is

approved must execute an interagency agreement or a contract with

the council. The contract must require the person receiving the

grant to perform the services as stated in the approved grant

request. The contract must contain appropriate provisions for

program and fiscal monitoring.

[ Sec. 102.011. STANDARDS OF CONDUCT. The executive

director or the executive director's designee shall provide to

members of the council and to council employees, as often as

necessary, information regarding the requirements for office or

employment under this chapter, including information regarding a

person's responsibilities under applicable laws relating to

standards of conduct for state officers or employees.

[ Sec. 102.012. CANCER RESOURCE FUND. (a) The cancer

resource fund is an account of the general revenue fund.

[ (b) The legislature may appropriate money deposited to the

credit of the cancer resource fund only to the council for cancer

prevention, cancer research, and medical care for cancer victims.

[ (c) The council shall develop a policy governing the award

of funds for clinical research that follows scientific peer review

and approval by the National Cancer Institute of the National

Institutes of Health or that follows other review procedures that

are designed to distribute those funds on the basis of scientific

merit.

[ (d) Interest earned from the investment of the cancer

resource fund shall be deposited to the credit of the fund.

[ Sec. 102.013. TRAINING. (a) A person who is appointed to

and qualifies for office as a member of the council may not vote,

deliberate, or be counted as a member in attendance at a meeting of

the council until the person completes a training program that

complies with this section.

[ (b) The training program must provide the person with

information regarding:

[ (1) the legislation that created the council;

[ (2) the programs operated by the council;

[ (3) the role and functions of the council;

[ (4) the rules of the council, with an emphasis on the

rules that relate to disciplinary and investigatory authority;

[ (5) the current budget for the council;

[ (6) the results of the most recent formal audit of the

council;

[ (7) the requirements of:

[ (A) the open meetings law, Chapter 551,

Government Code;

[ (B) the public information law, Chapter 552,

Government Code;

[ (C) the administrative procedure law, Chapter

2001, Government Code; and

[ (D) other laws relating to public officials,

including conflict of interest laws; and

[ (8) any applicable ethics policies adopted by the

council or the Texas Ethics Commission.

[ (c) A person appointed to the council is entitled to

reimbursement, as provided by the General Appropriations Act, for

the travel expenses incurred in attending the training program

regardless of whether the attendance at the program occurs before

or after the person qualifies for office.

[ Sec. 102.014. SEPARATION OF RESPONSIBILITIES. The council

shall develop and implement policies that clearly separate the

policymaking responsibilities of the council and the management

responsibilities of the executive director and the staff of the

council.

[ Sec. 102.015. COMPLAINTS. (a) The council shall maintain

a file on each written complaint filed with the council. The file

must include:

[ (1) the name of the person who filed the complaint;

[ (2) the date the complaint is received by the

council;

[ (3) the subject matter of the complaint;

[ (4) the name of each person contacted in relation to

the complaint;

[ (5) a summary of the results of the review or

investigation of the complaint; and

[ (6) an explanation of the reason the file was closed,

if the council closed the file without taking action other than to

investigate the complaint.

[ (b) The council shall provide to the person filing the

complaint and to each person who is a subject of the complaint a

copy of the council's policies and procedures relating to complaint

investigation and resolution.

[ (c) The council, at least quarterly until final

disposition of the complaint, shall notify the person filing the

complaint and each person who is a subject of the complaint of the

status of the investigation unless the notice would jeopardize an

undercover investigation.

[ Sec. 102.016. EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY. (a) The

executive director or the executive director's designee shall

prepare and maintain a written policy statement that implements a

program of equal employment opportunity to ensure that all

personnel decisions are made without regard to race, color,

disability, sex, religion, age, or national origin.

[ (b) The policy statement must include:

[ (1) personnel policies, including policies relating

to recruitment, evaluation, selection, training, and promotion of

personnel, that show the intent of the council to avoid the unlawful

employment practices described by Chapter 21, Labor Code; and

[ (2) an analysis of the extent to which the

composition of the council's personnel is in accordance with state

and federal law and a description of reasonable methods to achieve

compliance with state and federal law.

[ (c) The policy statement must:

[ (1) be updated annually;

[ (2) be reviewed by the state Commission on Human

Rights for compliance with Subsection (b)(1); and

[ (3) be filed with the governor's office.

[ Sec. 102.017. TEXANS CONQUER CANCER ACCOUNT. (a) The

Texans Conquer Cancer account is a separate account in the general

revenue fund. The account is composed of:

[ (1) money deposited to the credit of the account

under Section 502.2735, Transportation Code; and

[ (2) gifts, grants, and donations.

[ (b) The council administers the account. The council may

spend money credited to the account only to:

[ (1) make grants to nonprofit organizations that

provide support services for cancer patients and their families;

and

[ (2) defray the cost of administering the account.

[ (c) The council:

[ (1) may accept gifts, donations, and grants from any

source for the benefit of the account; and

[ (2) by rule shall establish guidelines for spending

money credited to the account.

[ Sec. 102.018. TEXANS CONQUER CANCER ADVISORY COMMITTEE.

(a) The council shall appoint a seven-member Texans Conquer Cancer

advisory committee.

[ (b) The committee shall:

[ (1) assist the council in establishing guidelines for

the expenditure of money credited to the Texans Conquer Cancer

account; and

[ (2) review and make recommendations to the council on

applications submitted to the council for grants funded with money

credited to the Texans Conquer Cancer account.

[ (c) Members of the committee serve without compensation

and are not entitled to reimbursement for expenses. Each member

serves a term of four years, with the terms of three or four members

expiring on January 31 of each odd-numbered year.

[ (d) Section 2110.008, Government Code, does not apply to

the committee. ]

SECTION 5. Section 504.017, Labor Code, is amended to read

as follows:

Sec. 504.017. FEDERAL AND STATE FUNDED TRANSPORTATION

ENTITIES. An entity is eligible to participate under Section

504.016 or Chapter 791 or 2259, Government Code, if the entity

provides transportation subsidized in whole or in part by and

provided to clients of:

(1) the [ Texas ] Department of Assistive and

Rehabilitative Services [ on Aging ];

(2) the Department of State Health Services [ Texas

Commission on Alcohol and Drug Abuse ];

(3) the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of

Texas [ the Texas Commission for the Blind ];

(4) [ the Texas Cancer Council;

[ (5) the Texas Commission for the Deaf and Hard of

Hearing;

[ (6) ] the Texas Department of Housing and Community

Affairs;

(5) [ (7) ] the Health and [ Texas Department of ] Human

Services Commission ;

(6) [ (8) ] the [ Texas ] Department of Aging and

Disability Services [ Mental Health and Mental Retardation ];

[ (9) the Texas Rehabilitation Commission; ] or

(7) [ (10) ] the Texas Youth Commission.

SECTION 6. Section 504.620, Transportation Code, is amended

to read as follows:

Sec. 504.620. TEXANS CONQUER CANCER LICENSE PLATES. (a)

The department shall issue specialty license plates that include

the words "Texans Conquer Cancer." The department shall design the

license plates in consultation with the Cancer Prevention and

Research Institute of Texas [ Cancer Council ].

(b) After deduction of the department's administrative

costs, the remainder of the fee for issuance of the license plates

shall be deposited to the credit of the cancer prevention and

research fund [ Texans Conquer Cancer account ] established by

Section 102.201 [ 102.017 ], Health and Safety Code.

SECTION 7. Section 86.011(c), Health and Safety Code, is

repealed.

SECTION 8. (a) Not later than December 1, 2007, the

appropriate appointing authority shall appoint the members to the

Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas Oversight

Committee as required by Section 102.101, Health and Safety Code,

as added by this Act. The oversight committee may not take action

until a majority of the appointed members have taken office.

(b) Not later than December 1, 2007, the governor and the

other appointing authorities specified by Section 102.151, Health

and Safety Code, as added by this Act, shall appoint the members to

the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas Scientific

Research and Prevention Programs Committee as required by that

section. The research and prevention programs committee may not

take action until a majority of the appointed members have taken

office.

SECTION 9. (a) On the date on which a majority of the

initial appointed members of the Cancer Prevention and Research

Institute of Texas Oversight Committee have taken office, the Texas

Cancer Council is dissolved and all powers, duties, obligations,

rights, contracts, leases, records, property, and unspent and

unobligated appropriations and other funds of the Texas Cancer

Council are transferred to the Cancer Prevention and Research

Institute of Texas.

(b) The reorganization of the Texas Cancer Council into the

Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas does not affect

the validity of a right, privilege, or obligation accrued, a

contract or acquisition made, any liability incurred, a permit or

license issued, any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment assessed, a

rule adopted, a proceeding, investigation, or remedy begun, a

decision made, or other action taken by or in connection with the

Texas Cancer Council.

(c) All rules, policies, procedures, and decisions of the

Texas Cancer Council are continued in effect as rules, policies,

procedures, and decisions of the Cancer Prevention and Research

Institute of Texas until superseded by a rule or other appropriate

action of the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas.

(d) Any action or proceeding before the Texas Cancer Council

is transferred without change in status to the Cancer Prevention

and Research Institute of Texas, and the Cancer Prevention and

Research Institute of Texas assumes, without a change in status,

the position of the Texas Cancer Council in any action or proceeding

to which the Texas Cancer Council is a party.

(e) An employee of the Texas Cancer Council employed on the

effective date of this Act automatically becomes an employee of the

Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas to exercise the

powers and perform the duties transferred under this section. The

executive director of the Texas Cancer Council serving on the

effective date of this Act does not automatically become the

executive director of the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute

of Texas. To become the executive director of the Cancer Prevention

and Research Institute of Texas, a person must apply for the

position and the person's employment in that capacity must be

approved by the oversight committee.

(f) A fund, foundation, or account administered by the Texas

Cancer Council is not considered to be abolished and re-created by

this Act but is considered to be transferred to the Cancer

Prevention and Research Institute of Texas.

(g) Until the date the Texas Cancer Council is reorganized

into the Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas as

provided by Subsection (a) of this section, the Texas Cancer

Council shall continue to exercise the powers and perform the

duties assigned to the Texas Cancer Council under the law as it

existed immediately before the effective date of this Act or as

modified by another Act of the 80th Legislature, Regular Session,

2007, that becomes law, and the former law is continued in effect

for that purpose.

SECTION 10. On or after the effective date of this Act, any

amount remaining in or payable to the credit of the cancer resource

fund under Section 102.012, Health and Safety Code, and the Texans

Conquer Cancer account under Section 102.017, Health and Safety

Code, as those sections existed before repeal by this Act, shall be

transferred to the credit of the cancer prevention and research

fund established under Section 102.201, Health and Safety Code, as

added by this Act.

SECTION 11. This Act takes effect on the date on which the

constitutional amendment proposed by the 80th Legislature, Regular

Session, 2007, establishing the Cancer Prevention and Research

Institute of Texas is approved by the voters. If that amendment is

not approved by the voters, this Act has no effect.

______________________________ ______________________________

President of the Senate Speaker of the House

I certify that H.B. No. 14 was passed by the House on May 11,

2007, by the following vote: Yeas 68, Nays 24, 1 present, not

voting.

______________________________

Chief Clerk of the House

I certify that H.B. No. 14 was passed by the Senate on May 22,

2007, by the following vote: Yeas 25, Nays 6.

______________________________

Secretary of the Senate

APPROVED: _____________________

Date

_____________________