Introduced version
A BILL TO BE ENTITLED

AN ACT

relating to a defense to prosecution for and civil liability of an

educator who uses force or deadly force to protect the educator's

person, students of the school, or property of the school, and

suspension of a student who assaults an employee of a school.

BE IT ENACTED BY THE LEGISLATURE OF THE STATE OF TEXAS:

SECTION 1. Subtitle G, Title 2, Education Code, is amended

by adding Chapter 38A to read as follows:

CHAPTER 38A. TEACHER'S PROTECTION ACT

Sec. 38A.001. SHORT TITLE. This chapter may be cited as the

Teacher's Protection Act.

Sec. 38A.002. EDUCATOR'S DEFENSE OF SELF OR STUDENTS. (a)

An educator is justified in using force or deadly force on school

property, on a school bus, or at a school-sponsored event in defense

of the educator's person or in defense of students of the school

that employs the educator if, under the circumstances as the

educator reasonably believes them to be, the educator would be

justified under Section 9.31, 9.32, or 9.33, Penal Code, in using

force or deadly force, as applicable, in defense of the educator or

students.

(b) It is a defense to prosecution for an offense committed

by an educator only in the course of defending the educator's person

or students of the school that employs the educator that the conduct

is justified in the manner described by Subsection (a).

Sec. 38A.003. EDUCATOR'S DEFENSE OF SCHOOL PROPERTY. (a)

An educator is justified in using force or deadly force on school

property, on a school bus, or at a school-sponsored event in defense

of property of the school that employs the educator if, under the

circumstances as the educator reasonably believes them to be, the

educator would be justified under Section 9.43, Penal Code, in

using force or deadly force, as applicable, in defense of property

of the school that employs the educator.

(b) It is a defense to prosecution for an offense committed

by an educator only in the course of defending property of the

school that employs the educator that the conduct is justified in

the manner described by Subsection (a).

Sec. 38A.004. NONEXCLUSIVITY. This chapter does not prevent

an educator who is a defendant in a criminal prosecution from

offering as a defense to prosecution any justification provided

under Chapter 9, Penal Code.

Sec. 38A.005. CIVIL IMMUNITY. An educator who uses force or

deadly force that is justified in the manner provided under Chapter

9, Penal Code, as described by this chapter, is entitled to the

civil immunity provided by Section 83.001, Civil Practice and

Remedies Code, for injury or death that results from the educator's

use of force or deadly force, as applicable.

Sec. 38A.006. SUSPENSION. A principal or other appropriate

administrator may suspend a student under Section 37.005 who

engages in conduct that contains the elements of the offense of

assault under Section 22.01, Penal Code, against an employee of the

school, regardless of whether that conduct is identified in the

student code of conduct as conduct for which a student may be

suspended.

SECTION 2. This Act takes effect immediately if it receives

a vote of two-thirds of all the members elected to each house, as

provided by Section 39, Article III, Texas Constitution. If this

Act does not receive the vote necessary for immediate effect, this