School of Law Faculty
The faculty at Saint Louis University School of Law are leaders in scholarship, teaching and service. Their research advances the study and practice of law and their commitment is apparent from the first day of class. Drawing from their legal expertise and experience, the faculty work closely with students guiding, challenging and mentoring them through the complexities of the law.

Faculty in the News

Sidney Watson and Ruqaiijah Yearby were interviewed on St. Louis Public Radio about their Robert Wood Johnson Foundation grant to study racial equity tools.

Joel Goldstein was interviewed for The Takeaway that ran on National Public Radio stations across the country discussing the role of Vice President Mike Pence.

Sidney Watson was mentioned in a Springfield News Leader article on Missouri State Senate proposal that would impose new requirements on Medicaid recipients.

Roger Goldman was mentioned in a post by The Crime Report discussing a survey on how the media covers criminal justice.

John Ammann was quoted in a Missouri Lawyers Weekly article on an appellate ruling on the state’s interpretation of the Missouri Employment Security Law.

Sidney Watson was quoted in a St. Louis Post Dispatch article on the negative impacts of a proposed plan that would impose work requirements on adults who receive Medicaid.

Joel Goldstein was quoted in a USA Today article regarding Mike Pence’s heightened political activity in comparison to other vice presidents.

Yvette Liebesman was interviewed in a KMOV news story about copyright infringement on a St. Charles County family photo.

Michael Wolff wrote an article for St. Louis Post-Dispatch about the three medical marijuana proposals on the Nov. 6 ballot.

Michael Wolff wrote an article for the Kansas City Star on the proposed Constitutional Amendment One, which would limit campaign contributions and gift receival for political candidates.

Miriam Cherry was quoted in a Center for Public Integrity article on how online labor marketplaces are impacting campaign finance reporting.

Roger Goldman was quoted in an article by Police Chief Magazine about decertifying police officers who have engaged in serious misconduct.

John Ammann was interviewed for a KSDK TV Ch. 5 story on the possibility of a new St. Louis County Prosecutor to reopen the criminal case against Darren Wilson in the death of Michael Brown.

Joel Goldstein wrote a piece for the History News Network on President Jimmy Carter’s immigration policies while in office.

Yvette Liebesman was interviewed for a KSDK TV Ch. 5 piece on the privacy issues with the Uber driver that was secretly recording his passengers.

Ana Santos Rutschman wrote an article for The Conversation regarding blockchain systems, which would consolidate all U.S. healthcare information into one system.

Dana M. Malkus talked with St. Louis Public Radio about a new website that will give St. Louis neighborhood organizations tools to address vacancy and abandonment issues.