Statutes & Constitution :View Statutes : Online Sunshine
1.01

Definitions. —

In construing these statutes and each and every word, phrase, or part hereof, where the context will permit:

(1) The singular includes the plural and vice versa.

(2) Gender-specific language includes the other gender and neuter.

(3) The word “person” includes individuals, children, firms, associations, joint adventures, partnerships, estates, trusts, business trusts, syndicates, fiduciaries, corporations, and all other groups or combinations.

(4) The word “writing” includes handwriting, printing, typewriting, and all other methods and means of forming letters and characters upon paper, stone, wood, or other materials. The word “writing” also includes information which is created or stored in any electronic medium and is retrievable in perceivable form.

(5) The word “oath” includes affirmations.

(6) Reference to any office or officer includes any person authorized by law to perform the duties of such office.

(7) Reference to the population or number of inhabitants of any county, city, town, village, or other political subdivision of the state shall be taken to be that as shown by the last preceding official decennial federal census, beginning with the Federal Census of 1950, which shall also be the state census and shall control in all population acts and constitutional apportionments, unless otherwise ordered by the Legislature.

(8) The words “public body,” “body politic,” or “political subdivision” include counties, cities, towns, villages, special tax school districts, special road and bridge districts, bridge districts, and all other districts in this state.

(9) Crude turpentine gum (oleoresin), the product of a living tree or trees of the pine species, and gum-spirits-of-turpentine and gum resin as processed therefrom, shall be taken and understood to be agricultural products, farm products, and agricultural commodities.

(10) The term “natural barrier” when used with reference to the possession of real estate includes any cliff, river, sea, gulf, lake, slough, marsh, swamp, bay, lagoon, creek, saw grass area, or the like.

(11) The words “registered mail” include certified mail with return receipt requested.

(12) Whenever the terms “agriculture,” “agricultural purposes,” “agricultural uses,” or words of similar import are used in any of the statutes of the state, such terms include aquaculture, horticulture, and floriculture; aquacultural purposes, horticultural purposes, and floricultural purposes; aquacultural uses, horticultural uses, and floricultural uses; and words of similar import applicable to agriculture are likewise applicable to aquaculture, horticulture, and floriculture.

(13) The word “minor” includes any person who has not attained the age of 18 years.

(14) The term “veteran” means a person who served in the active military, naval, or air service and who was discharged or released under honorable conditions only or who later received an upgraded discharge under honorable conditions, notwithstanding any action by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs on individuals discharged or released with other than honorable discharges. To receive benefits as a wartime veteran, a veteran must have served in a campaign or expedition for which a campaign badge has been authorized or during one of the following periods of wartime service: (a) Spanish-American War: April 21, 1898, to July 4, 1902, and including the Philippine Insurrection and the Boxer Rebellion. (b) Mexican Border Period: May 9, 1916, to April 5, 1917, in the case of a veteran who during such period served in Mexico, on the borders of, or in the waters adjacent to Mexico. (c) World War I: April 6, 1917, to November 11, 1918; extended to April 1, 1920, for those veterans who served in Russia; also extended through July 1, 1921, for those veterans who served after November 11, 1918, and before July 2, 1921, provided such veterans had at least 1 day of service between April 5, 1917, and November 12, 1918. (d) World War II: December 7, 1941, to December 31, 1946. (e) Korean War: June 27, 1950, to January 31, 1955. (f) Vietnam War: February 28, 1961, to May 7, 1975. (g) Persian Gulf War: August 2, 1990, to January 2, 1992. (h) Operation Enduring Freedom: October 7, 2001, and ending on the date thereafter prescribed by presidential proclamation or by law. (i) Operation Iraqi Freedom: March 19, 2003, and ending on the date thereafter prescribed by presidential proclamation or by law.

(15) The term “wrecker operator” means any person or firm regularly engaged for hire in the business of towing or removing motor vehicles.

(16) The term “Administrative Procedures Committee” means a committee designated by joint rule of the Legislature or by agreement between the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.

(17) The term “Legislative Auditing Committee” means a committee or committees designated by joint rule of the Legislature, by the President of the Senate or the Speaker of the House of Representatives, or by agreement between the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.

(18) The term “Office of Program Policy Analysis and Government Accountability” means an entity designated by joint rule of the Legislature or by agreement between the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.