Statutes & Constitution :View Statutes : Online Sunshine
Select Year: 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 The Florida Statutes

The 2018 Florida Statutes

Title IX

ELECTORS AND ELECTIONS Chapter 106

CAMPAIGN FINANCING View Entire Chapter F.S. 106.07 106.07 Reports; certification and filing. — (1) Each campaign treasurer designated by a candidate or political committee pursuant to s. 106.021 shall file regular reports of all contributions received, and all expenditures made, by or on behalf of such candidate or political committee. Except as provided in paragraphs (a) and (b), reports shall be filed on the 10th day following the end of each calendar month from the time the campaign treasurer is appointed, except that, if the 10th day following the end of a calendar month occurs on a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the report shall be filed on the next following day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. Monthly reports shall include all contributions received and expenditures made during the calendar month which have not otherwise been reported pursuant to this section. (a) A statewide candidate or a political committee required to file reports with the division must file reports: 1. On the 60th day immediately preceding the primary election, and each week thereafter, with the last weekly report being filed on the 4th day immediately preceding the general election. 2. On the 10th day immediately preceding the general election, and each day thereafter, with the last daily report being filed the 5th day immediately preceding the general election. (b) Any other candidate or a political committee required to file reports with a filing officer other than the division must file reports on the 60th day immediately preceding the primary election, and biweekly on each Friday thereafter through and including the 4th day immediately preceding the general election, with additional reports due on the 25th and 11th days before the primary election and the general election. (c) Following the last day of qualifying for office, any unopposed candidate need only file a report within 90 days after the date such candidate became unopposed. Such report shall contain all previously unreported contributions and expenditures as required by this section and shall reflect disposition of funds as required by s. 106.141 (d)1. When a special election is called to fill a vacancy in office, all political committees making contributions or expenditures to influence the results of such special election or the preceding special primary election shall file campaign treasurers’ reports with the filing officer on the dates set by the Department of State pursuant to s. 100.111 2. When an election is called for an issue to appear on the ballot at a time when no candidates are scheduled to appear on the ballot, all political committees making contributions or expenditures in support of or in opposition to such issue shall file reports on the 18th and 4th days before such election. (e) The filing officer shall provide each candidate with a schedule designating the beginning and end of reporting periods as well as the corresponding designated due dates. (2)(a)1. All reports required of a candidate by this section shall be filed with the officer before whom the candidate is required by law to qualify. All candidates who file with the Department of State shall file their reports pursuant to s. 106.0705 . Except as provided in s. 106.0705 , reports shall be filed not later than 5 p.m. of the day designated; however, any report postmarked by the United States Postal Service no later than midnight of the day designated is deemed to have been filed in a timely manner. Any report received by the filing officer within 5 days after the designated due date that was delivered by the United States Postal Service is deemed timely filed unless it has a postmark that indicates that the report was mailed after the designated due date. A certificate of mailing obtained from and dated by the United States Postal Service at the time of mailing, or a receipt from an established courier company, which bears a date on or before the date on which the report is due, suffices as proof of mailing in a timely manner. Reports other than daily reports must contain information on all previously unreported contributions received and expenditures made as of the preceding Friday, except that the report filed on the Friday immediately preceding the election must contain information on all previously unreported contributions received and expenditures made as of the day preceding that designated due date; daily reports must contain information on all previously unreported contributions received as of the preceding day. All such reports are open to public inspection. 2. This subsection does not prohibit the governing body of a political subdivision, by ordinance or resolution, from imposing upon its own officers and candidates electronic filing requirements not in conflict with s. 106.0705 . Expenditure of public funds for such purpose is deemed to be for a valid public purpose. (b)1. Any report that is deemed to be incomplete by the officer with whom the candidate qualifies must be accepted on a conditional basis. The campaign treasurer shall be notified by certified mail or by another method using a common carrier that provides a proof of delivery of the notice as to why the report is incomplete and within 7 days after receipt of such notice must file an addendum to the report providing all information necessary to complete the report in compliance with this section. Failure to file a complete report after such notice constitutes a violation of this chapter. 2. Notice is deemed complete upon proof of delivery of a written notice to the mailing or street address of the campaign treasurer or registered agent of record with the filing officer. (3) Reports required of a political committee shall be filed with the agency or officer before whom such committee registers pursuant to s. 106.03 (3) and shall be subject to the same filing conditions as established for candidates’ reports. Incomplete reports by political committees shall be treated in the manner provided for incomplete reports by candidates in subsection (2). (4)(a) Except for daily reports, to which only the contributions provisions below apply, and except as provided in paragraph (b), each report required by this section must contain: 1. The full name, address, and occupation, if any, of each person who has made one or more contributions to or for such committee or candidate within the reporting period, together with the amount and date of such contributions. For corporations, the report must provide as clear a description as practicable of the principal type of business conducted by the corporation. However, if the contribution is $100 or less or is from a relative, as defined in s. 112.312 , provided that the relationship is reported, the occupation of the contributor or the principal type of business need not be listed. 2. The name and address of each political committee from which the reporting committee or the candidate received, or to which the reporting committee or candidate made, any transfer of funds, together with the amounts and dates of all transfers. 3. Each loan for campaign purposes to or from any person or political committee within the reporting period, together with the full names, addresses, and occupations, and principal places of business, if any, of the lender and endorsers, if any, and the date and amount of such loans. 4. A statement of each contribution, rebate, refund, or other receipt not otherwise listed under subparagraphs 1. through 3. 5. The total sums of all loans, in-kind contributions, and other receipts by or for such committee or candidate during the reporting period. The reporting forms shall be designed to elicit separate totals for in-kind contributions, loans, and other receipts. 6. The full name and address of each person to whom expenditures have been made by or on behalf of the committee or candidate within the reporting period; the amount, date, and purpose of each such expenditure; and the name and address of, and office sought by, each candidate on whose behalf such expenditure was made. However, expenditures made from the petty cash fund provided by s. 106.12 need not be reported individually. 7. The full name and address of each person to whom an expenditure for personal services, salary, or reimbursement for authorized expenses as provided in s. 106.021 (3) has been made and which is not otherwise reported, including the amount, date, and purpose of such expenditure. However, expenditures made from the petty cash fund provided for in s. 106.12 need not be reported individually. Receipts for reimbursement for authorized expenditures shall be retained by the treasurer along with the records for the campaign account. 8. The total amount withdrawn and the total amount spent for petty cash purposes pursuant to this chapter during the reporting period. 9. The total sum of expenditures made by such committee or candidate during the reporting period. 10. The amount and nature of debts and obligations owed by or to the committee or candidate, which relate to the conduct of any political campaign. 11. Transaction information for each credit card purchase. Receipts for each credit card purchase shall be retained by the treasurer with the records for the campaign account. 12. The amount and nature of any separate interest-bearing accounts or certificates of deposit and identification of the financial institution in which such accounts or certificates of deposit are located. 13. The primary purposes of an expenditure made indirectly through a campaign treasurer pursuant to s. 106.021 (3) for goods and services such as communications media placement or procurement services, campaign signs, insurance, and other expenditures that include multiple components as part of the expenditure. The primary purpose of an expenditure shall be that purpose, including integral and directly related components, that comprises 80 percent of such expenditure. (b) Multiple uniform contributions from the same person, aggregating no more than $250 per calendar year, collected by an organization that is the affiliated sponsor of a political committee, may be reported by the political committee in an aggregate amount listing the number of contributors together with the amount contributed by each and the total amount contributed during the reporting period. The identity of each person making such uniform contribution must be reported to the filing officer as provided in subparagraph (a)1. by July 1 of each calendar year, or, in a general election year, no later than the 60th day immediately preceding the primary election. (c) The filing officer shall make available to any candidate or committee a reporting form which the candidate or committee may use to indicate contributions received by the candidate or committee but returned to the contributor before deposit. (5) The candidate and his or her campaign treasurer, in the case of a candidate, or the political committee chair and campaign treasurer of the committee, in the case of a political committee, shall certify as to the correctness of each report; and each person so certifying shall bear the responsibility for the accuracy and veracity of each report. Any campaign treasurer, candidate, or political committee chair who willfully certifies the correctness of any report while knowing that such report is incorrect, false, or incomplete commits a misdemeanor of the first degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083 (6) The records maintained by the campaign depository with respect to any campaign account regulated by this chapter are subject to inspection by an agent of the Division of Elections or the Florida Elections Commission at any time during normal banking hours, and such depository shall furnish certified copies of any of such records to the Division of Elections or Florida Elections Commission upon request. (7) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, in any reporting period during which a candidate or political committee has not received funds, made any contributions, or expended any reportable funds, the filing of the required report for that period is waived. However, the next report filed must specify that the report covers the entire period between the last submitted report and the report being filed, and any candidate or political committee not reporting by virtue of this subsection on dates prescribed elsewhere in this chapter shall notify the filing officer in writing on the prescribed reporting date that no report is being filed on that date. (8)(a) Any candidate or political committee failing to file a report on the designated due date is subject to a fine as provided in paragraph (b) for each late day, and, in the case of a candidate, such fine shall be paid only from personal funds of the candidate. The fine shall be assessed by the filing officer and the moneys collected shall be deposited: 1. In the General Revenue Fund, in the case of a candidate for state office or a political committee that registers with the Division of Elections; or 2. In the general revenue fund of the political subdivision, in the case of a candidate for an office of a political subdivision or a political committee that registers with an officer of a political subdivision. No separate fine shall be assessed for failure to file a copy of any report required by this section. (b) Upon determining that a report is late, the filing officer shall immediately notify the candidate or chair of the political committee as to the failure to file a report by the designated due date and that a fine is being assessed for each late day. The fine is $50 per day for the first 3 days late and, thereafter, $500 per day for each late day, not to exceed 25 percent of the total receipts or expenditures, whichever is greater, for the period covered by the late report. However, for the reports immediately preceding each special primary election, special election, primary election, and general election, the fine is $500 per day for each late day, not to exceed 25 percent of the total receipts or expenditures, whichever is greater, for the period covered by the late report. For reports required under s. 106.141 (8), the fine is $50 per day for each late day, not to exceed 25 percent of the total receipts or expenditures, whichever is greater, for the period covered by the late report. Upon receipt of the report, the filing officer shall determine the amount of the fine which is due and shall notify the candidate or chair or registered agent of the political committee. The filing officer shall determine the amount of the fine due based upon the earliest of the following: 1. When the report is actually received by such officer. 2. When the report is postmarked. 3. When the certificate of mailing is dated. 4. When the receipt from an established courier company is dated. 5. When the electronic receipt issued pursuant to s. 106.0705 or other electronic filing system authorized in this section is dated. Such fine shall be paid to the filing officer within 20 days after receipt of the notice of payment due, unless appeal is made to the Florida Elections Commission pursuant to paragraph (c). Notice is deemed complete upon proof of delivery of written notice to the mailing or street address on record with the filing officer. In the case of a candidate, such fine is not an allowable campaign expenditure and shall be paid only from personal funds of the candidate. An officer or member of a political committee is not personally liable for such fine. (c) Any candidate or chair of a political committee may appeal or dispute the fine, based upon, but not limited to, unusual circumstances surrounding the failure to file on the designated due date, and may request and shall be entitled to a hearing before the Florida Elections Commission, which shall have the authority to waive the fine in whole or in part. The Florida Elections Commission must consider the mitigating and aggravating circumstances contained in s. 106.265 (2) when determining the amount of a fine, if any, to be waived. Any such request shall be made within 20 days after receipt of the notice of payment due. In such case, the candidate or chair of the political committee shall, within the 20-day period, notify the filing officer in writing of his or her intention to bring the matter before the commission. (d) The appropriate filing officer shall notify the Florida Elections Commission of the repeated late filing by a candidate or political committee, the failure of a candidate or political committee to file a report after notice, or the failure to pay the fine imposed. The commission shall investigate only those alleged late filing violations specifically identified by the filing officer and as set forth in the notification. Any other alleged violations must be separately stated and reported by the division to the commission under s. 106.25 (2). (9) The Department of State may prescribe by rule the requirements for filing campaign treasurers’ reports as set forth in this chapter. History. — s. 7, ch. 73-128; ss. 5, 15, 17, ch. 74-200; ss. 1, 2, ch. 75-8; s. 2, ch. 75-139; s. 1, ch. 77-174; s. 46, ch. 77-175; s. 23, ch. 79-164; ss. 7, 8, ch. 79-365; s. 4, ch. 79-378; s. 58, ch. 79-400; s. 52, ch. 81-259; s. 27, ch. 81-304; s. 2, ch. 82-143; s. 11, ch. 83-251; s. 37, ch. 84-302; s. 6, ch. 85-226; s. 1, ch. 86-134; s. 13, ch. 87-224; s. 9, ch. 89-256; s. 31, ch. 90-315; s. 2, ch. 90-338; s. 18, ch. 90-502; s. 7, ch. 91-107; s. 2, ch. 95-140; s. 640, ch. 95-147; s. 15, ch. 95-280; s. 7, ch. 97-13; s. 6, ch. 2001-75; s. 29, ch. 2002-17; s. 2, ch. 2002-197; s. 8, ch. 2003-1; ss. 17, 18, ch. 2004-252; s. 24, ch. 2005-286; ss. 5, 10, ch. 2006-300; s. 29, ch. 2008-95; s. 59, ch. 2011-40; s. 6, ch. 2012-5; s. 9, ch. 2013-37.