Statutes & Constitution :View Statutes : Online Sunshine
Select Year: 2018 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007 2006 2005 2004 2003 2002 2001 2000 1999 1998 1997 The Florida Statutes

The 2018 Florida Statutes

Title XLVI

CRIMES Chapter 790

WEAPONS AND FIREARMS View Entire Chapter F.S. 790.06 790.06 License to carry concealed weapon or firearm. — (1) The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services is authorized to issue licenses to carry concealed weapons or concealed firearms to persons qualified as provided in this section. Each such license must bear a color photograph of the licensee. For the purposes of this section, concealed weapons or concealed firearms are defined as a handgun, electronic weapon or device, tear gas gun, knife, or billie, but the term does not include a machine gun as defined in s. 790.001 (9). Such licenses shall be valid throughout the state for a period of 7 years from the date of issuance. Any person in compliance with the terms of such license may carry a concealed weapon or concealed firearm notwithstanding the provisions of s. 790.01 . The licensee must carry the license, together with valid identification, at all times in which the licensee is in actual possession of a concealed weapon or firearm and must display both the license and proper identification upon demand by a law enforcement officer. Violations of the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a noncriminal violation with a penalty of $25, payable to the clerk of the court. (2) The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall issue a license if the applicant: (a) Is a resident of the United States and a citizen of the United States or a permanent resident alien of the United States, as determined by the United States Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services, or is a consular security official of a foreign government that maintains diplomatic relations and treaties of commerce, friendship, and navigation with the United States and is certified as such by the foreign government and by the appropriate embassy in this country; (b) Is 21 years of age or older; (c) Does not suffer from a physical infirmity which prevents the safe handling of a weapon or firearm; (d) Is not ineligible to possess a firearm pursuant to s. 790.23 by virtue of having been convicted of a felony; (e) Has not been: 1. Found guilty of a crime under the provisions of chapter 893 or similar laws of any other state relating to controlled substances within a 3-year period immediately preceding the date on which the application is submitted; or 2. Committed for the abuse of a controlled substance under chapter 397 or under the provisions of former chapter 396 or similar laws of any other state. An applicant who has been granted relief from firearms disabilities pursuant to s. 790.065 (2)(a)4.d. or pursuant to the law of the state in which the commitment occurred is deemed not to be committed for the abuse of a controlled substance under this subparagraph; (f) Does not chronically and habitually use alcoholic beverages or other substances to the extent that his or her normal faculties are impaired. It shall be presumed that an applicant chronically and habitually uses alcoholic beverages or other substances to the extent that his or her normal faculties are impaired if the applicant has been convicted under s. 790.151 or has been deemed a habitual offender under s. 856.011 (3), or has had two or more convictions under s. 316.193 or similar laws of any other state, within the 3-year period immediately preceding the date on which the application is submitted; (g) Desires a legal means to carry a concealed weapon or firearm for lawful self-defense; (h) Demonstrates competence with a firearm by any one of the following: 1. Completion of any hunter education or hunter safety course approved by the Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission or a similar agency of another state; 2. Completion of any National Rifle Association firearms safety or training course; 3. Completion of any firearms safety or training course or class available to the general public offered by a law enforcement agency, junior college, college, or private or public institution or organization or firearms training school, using instructors certified by the National Rifle Association, Criminal Justice Standards and Training Commission, or the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services; 4. Completion of any law enforcement firearms safety or training course or class offered for security guards, investigators, special deputies, or any division or subdivision of a law enforcement agency or security enforcement; 5. Presents evidence of equivalent experience with a firearm through participation in organized shooting competition or military service; 6. Is licensed or has been licensed to carry a firearm in this state or a county or municipality of this state, unless such license has been revoked for cause; or 7. Completion of any firearms training or safety course or class conducted by a state-certified or National Rifle Association certified firearms instructor; A photocopy of a certificate of completion of any of the courses or classes; an affidavit from the instructor, school, club, organization, or group that conducted or taught such course or class attesting to the completion of the course or class by the applicant; or a copy of any document that shows completion of the course or class or evidences participation in firearms competition shall constitute evidence of qualification under this paragraph. A person who conducts a course pursuant to subparagraph 2., subparagraph 3., or subparagraph 7., or who, as an instructor, attests to the completion of such courses, must maintain records certifying that he or she observed the student safely handle and discharge the firearm in his or her physical presence and that the discharge of the firearm included live fire using a firearm and ammunition as defined in s. 790.001; (i) Has not been adjudicated an incapacitated person under s. 744.331 , or similar laws of any other state. An applicant who has been granted relief from firearms disabilities pursuant to s. 790.065 (2)(a)4.d. or pursuant to the law of the state in which the adjudication occurred is deemed not to have been adjudicated an incapacitated person under this paragraph; (j) Has not been committed to a mental institution under chapter 394, or similar laws of any other state. An applicant who has been granted relief from firearms disabilities pursuant to s. 790.065 (2)(a)4.d. or pursuant to the law of the state in which the commitment occurred is deemed not to have been committed in a mental institution under this paragraph; (k) Has not had adjudication of guilt withheld or imposition of sentence suspended on any felony unless 3 years have elapsed since probation or any other conditions set by the court have been fulfilled, or expunction has occurred; (l) Has not had adjudication of guilt withheld or imposition of sentence suspended on any misdemeanor crime of domestic violence unless 3 years have elapsed since probation or any other conditions set by the court have been fulfilled, or the record has been expunged; (m) Has not been issued an injunction that is currently in force and effect and that restrains the applicant from committing acts of domestic violence or acts of repeat violence; and (n) Is not prohibited from purchasing or possessing a firearm by any other provision of Florida or federal law. (3) The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall deny a license if the applicant has been found guilty of, had adjudication of guilt withheld for, or had imposition of sentence suspended for one or more crimes of violence constituting a misdemeanor, unless 3 years have elapsed since probation or any other conditions set by the court have been fulfilled or the record has been sealed or expunged. The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall revoke a license if the licensee has been found guilty of, had adjudication of guilt withheld for, or had imposition of sentence suspended for one or more crimes of violence within the preceding 3 years. The department shall, upon notification by a law enforcement agency, a court, or the Florida Department of Law Enforcement and subsequent written verification, suspend a license or the processing of an application for a license if the licensee or applicant is arrested or formally charged with a crime that would disqualify such person from having a license under this section, until final disposition of the case. The department shall suspend a license or the processing of an application for a license if the licensee or applicant is issued an injunction that restrains the licensee or applicant from committing acts of domestic violence or acts of repeat violence. (4) The application shall be completed, under oath, on a form adopted by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services and shall include: (a) The name, address, place of birth, date of birth, and race of the applicant; (b) A statement that the applicant is in compliance with criteria contained within subsections (2) and (3); (c) A statement that the applicant has been furnished a copy of or a website link to this chapter and is knowledgeable of its provisions; (d) A conspicuous warning that the application is executed under oath and that a false answer to any question, or the submission of any false document by the applicant, subjects the applicant to criminal prosecution under s. 837.06 (e) A statement that the applicant desires a concealed weapon or firearms license as a means of lawful self-defense; and (f) Directions for an applicant who is a servicemember, as defined in s. 250.01 , or a veteran, as defined in s. 1.01 , to request expedited processing of his or her application. (5) The applicant shall submit to the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services or an approved tax collector pursuant to s. 790.0625 (a) A completed application as described in subsection (4). (b) A nonrefundable license fee of up to $55 if he or she has not previously been issued a statewide license or of up to $45 for renewal of a statewide license. The cost of processing fingerprints as required in paragraph (c) shall be borne by the applicant. However, an individual holding an active certification from the Criminal Justice Standards and Training Commission as a law enforcement officer, correctional officer, or correctional probation officer as defined in s. 943.10 (1), (2), (3), (6), (7), (8), or (9) is exempt from the licensing requirements of this section. If such individual wishes to receive a concealed weapon or firearm license, he or she is exempt from the background investigation and all background investigation fees but must pay the current license fees regularly required to be paid by nonexempt applicants. Further, a law enforcement officer, a correctional officer, or a correctional probation officer as defined in s. 943.10 (1), (2), or (3) is exempt from the required fees and background investigation for 1 year after his or her retirement. (c) A full set of fingerprints of the applicant administered by a law enforcement agency or the Division of Licensing of the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services or an approved tax collector pursuant to s. 790.0625 together with any personal identifying information required by federal law to process fingerprints. Charges for fingerprint services under this paragraph are not subject to the sales tax on fingerprint services imposed in s. 212.05 (1)(i). (d) A photocopy of a certificate, affidavit, or document as described in paragraph (2)(h). (e) A full frontal view color photograph of the applicant taken within the preceding 30 days, in which the head, including hair, measures 7 / 8 of an inch wide and 1 1 / 8 inches high. (f) For expedited processing of an application: 1. A servicemember shall submit a copy of the Common Access Card, United States Uniformed Services Identification Card, or current deployment orders. 2. A veteran shall submit a copy of the DD Form 214, issued by the United States Department of Defense, or another acceptable form of identification as specified by the Department of Veterans’ Affairs. (6)(a) The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, upon receipt of the items listed in subsection (5), shall forward the full set of fingerprints of the applicant to the Department of Law Enforcement for state and federal processing, provided the federal service is available, to be processed for any criminal justice information as defined in s. 943.045 . The cost of processing such fingerprints shall be payable to the Department of Law Enforcement by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. (b) The sheriff’s office shall provide fingerprinting service if requested by the applicant and may charge a fee not to exceed $5 for this service. (c) The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall, within 90 days after the date of receipt of the items listed in subsection (5): 1. Issue the license; or 2. Deny the application based solely on the ground that the applicant fails to qualify under the criteria listed in subsection (2) or subsection (3). If the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services denies the application, it shall notify the applicant in writing, stating the ground for denial and informing the applicant of any right to a hearing pursuant to chapter 120. 3. In the event the department receives criminal history information with no final disposition on a crime which may disqualify the applicant, the time limitation prescribed by this paragraph may be suspended until receipt of the final disposition or proof of restoration of civil and firearm rights. (d) In the event a legible set of fingerprints, as determined by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services or the Federal Bureau of Investigation, cannot be obtained after two attempts, the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall determine eligibility based upon the name checks conducted by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement. (e) A consular security official of a foreign government that maintains diplomatic relations and treaties of commerce, friendship, and navigation with the United States and is certified as such by the foreign government and by the appropriate embassy in this country must be issued a license within 20 days after the date of the receipt of a completed application, certification document, color photograph as specified in paragraph (5)(e), and a nonrefundable license fee of $300. Consular security official licenses shall be valid for 1 year and may be renewed upon completion of the application process as provided in this section. (f) The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall, upon receipt of a completed application and the identifying information required under paragraph (5)(f), expedite the processing of a servicemember’s or a veteran’s concealed weapon or firearm license application. (7) The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall maintain an automated listing of licenseholders and pertinent information, and such information shall be available online, upon request, at all times to all law enforcement agencies through the Florida Crime Information Center. (8) Within 30 days after the changing of a permanent address, or within 30 days after having a license lost or destroyed, the licensee shall notify the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services of such change. Failure to notify the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall constitute a noncriminal violation with a penalty of $25. (9) In the event that a concealed weapon or firearm license is lost or destroyed, the license shall be automatically invalid, and the person to whom the same was issued may, upon payment of $15 to the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, obtain a duplicate, or substitute thereof, upon furnishing a notarized statement to the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services that such license has been lost or destroyed. (10) A license issued under this section shall be suspended or revoked pursuant to chapter 120 if the licensee: (a) Is found to be ineligible under the criteria set forth in subsection (2); (b) Develops or sustains a physical infirmity which prevents the safe handling of a weapon or firearm; (c) Is convicted of a felony which would make the licensee ineligible to possess a firearm pursuant to s. 790.23 (d) Is found guilty of a crime under the provisions of chapter 893, or similar laws of any other state, relating to controlled substances; (e) Is committed as a substance abuser under chapter 397, or is deemed a habitual offender under s. 856.011 (3), or similar laws of any other state; (f) Is convicted of a second violation of s. 316.193 , or a similar law of another state, within 3 years after a first conviction of such section or similar law of another state, even though the first violation may have occurred before the date on which the application was submitted; (g) Is adjudicated an incapacitated person under s. 744.331 , or similar laws of any other state; or (h) Is committed to a mental institution under chapter 394, or similar laws of any other state. Notwithstanding s. 120.60(5), service of a notice of the suspension or revocation of a concealed weapon or firearm license must be given by either certified mail, return receipt requested, to the licensee at his or her last known mailing address furnished to the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, or by personal service. If a notice given by certified mail is returned as undeliverable, a second attempt must be made to provide notice to the licensee at that address, by either first-class mail in an envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the licensee at his or her last known mailing address furnished to the department, or, if the licensee has provided an e-mail address to the department, by e-mail. Such mailing by the department constitutes notice, and any failure by the licensee to receive such notice does not stay the effective date or term of the suspension or revocation. A request for hearing must be filed with the department within 21 days after notice is received by personal delivery, or within 26 days after the date the department deposits the notice in the United States mail (21 days plus 5 days for mailing). The department shall document its attempts to provide notice, and such documentation is admissible in the courts of this state and constitutes sufficient proof that notice was given. (11)(a) At least 90 days before the expiration date of the license, the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall mail to each licensee a written notice of the expiration and a renewal form prescribed by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services. The licensee must renew his or her license on or before the expiration date by filing with the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services the renewal form containing an affidavit submitted under oath and under penalty of perjury stating that the licensee remains qualified pursuant to the criteria specified in subsections (2) and (3), a color photograph as specified in paragraph (5)(e), and the required renewal fee. Out-of-state residents must also submit a complete set of fingerprints and fingerprint processing fee. The license shall be renewed upon receipt of the completed renewal form, color photograph, appropriate payment of fees, and, if applicable, fingerprints. Additionally, a licensee who fails to file a renewal application on or before its expiration date must renew his or her license by paying a late fee of $15. A license may not be renewed 180 days or more after its expiration date, and such a license is deemed to be permanently expired. A person whose license has been permanently expired may reapply for licensure; however, an application for licensure and fees under subsection (5) must be submitted, and a background investigation shall be conducted pursuant to this section. A person who knowingly files false information under this subsection is subject to criminal prosecution under s. 837.06 (b) A license issued to a servicemember, as defined in s. 250.01 , is subject to paragraph (a); however, such a license does not expire while the servicemember is serving on military orders that have taken him or her over 35 miles from his or her residence and shall be extended, as provided in this paragraph, for up to 180 days after his or her return to such residence. If the license renewal requirements in paragraph (a) are met within the 180-day extension period, the servicemember may not be charged any additional costs, such as, but not limited to, late fees or delinquency fees, above the normal license fees. The servicemember must present to the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services a copy of his or her official military orders or a written verification from the member’s commanding officer before the end of the 180-day period in order to qualify for the extension. (12)(a) A license issued under this section does not authorize any person to openly carry a handgun or carry a concealed weapon or firearm into: 1. Any place of nuisance as defined in s. 823.05 2. Any police, sheriff, or highway patrol station; 3. Any detention facility, prison, or jail; 4. Any courthouse; 5. Any courtroom, except that nothing in this section would preclude a judge from carrying a concealed weapon or determining who will carry a concealed weapon in his or her courtroom; 6. Any polling place; 7. Any meeting of the governing body of a county, public school district, municipality, or special district; 8. Any meeting of the Legislature or a committee thereof; 9. Any school, college, or professional athletic event not related to firearms; 10. Any elementary or secondary school facility or administration building; 11. Any career center; 12. Any portion of an establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, which portion of the establishment is primarily devoted to such purpose; 13. Any college or university facility unless the licensee is a registered student, employee, or faculty member of such college or university and the weapon is a stun gun or nonlethal electric weapon or device designed solely for defensive purposes and the weapon does not fire a dart or projectile; 14. The inside of the passenger terminal and sterile area of any airport, provided that no person shall be prohibited from carrying any legal firearm into the terminal, which firearm is encased for shipment for purposes of checking such firearm as baggage to be lawfully transported on any aircraft; or 15. Any place where the carrying of firearms is prohibited by federal law. (b) A person licensed under this section shall not be prohibited from carrying or storing a firearm in a vehicle for lawful purposes. (c) This section does not modify the terms or conditions of s. 790.251 (7). (d) Any person who knowingly and willfully violates any provision of this subsection commits a misdemeanor of the second degree, punishable as provided in s. 775.082 or s. 775.083 (13) All moneys collected by the department pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the Division of Licensing Trust Fund, and the Legislature shall appropriate from the fund those amounts deemed necessary to administer the provisions of this section. All revenues collected, less those costs determined by the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services to be nonrecurring or one-time costs, shall be deferred over the 7-year licensure period. Notwithstanding the provisions of s. 493.6117 , all moneys collected pursuant to this section shall not revert to the General Revenue Fund; however, this shall not abrogate the requirement for payment of the service charge imposed pursuant to chapter 215. (14) All funds received by the sheriff pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be deposited into the general revenue fund of the county and shall be budgeted to the sheriff. (15) The Legislature finds as a matter of public policy and fact that it is necessary to provide statewide uniform standards for issuing licenses to carry concealed weapons and firearms for self-defense and finds it necessary to occupy the field of regulation of the bearing of concealed weapons or firearms for self-defense to ensure that no honest, law-abiding person who qualifies under the provisions of this section is subjectively or arbitrarily denied his or her rights. The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall implement and administer the provisions of this section. The Legislature does not delegate to the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services the authority to regulate or restrict the issuing of licenses provided for in this section, beyond those provisions contained in this section. Subjective or arbitrary actions or rules which encumber the issuing process by placing burdens on the applicant beyond those sworn statements and specified documents detailed in this section or which create restrictions beyond those specified in this section are in conflict with the intent of this section and are prohibited. This section shall be liberally construed to carry out the constitutional right to bear arms for self-defense. This section is supplemental and additional to existing rights to bear arms, and nothing in this section shall impair or diminish such rights. (16) The Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services shall maintain statistical information on the number of licenses issued, revoked, suspended, and denied. (17) As amended by chapter 87-24, Laws of Florida, this section shall be known and may be cited as the “Jack Hagler Self Defense Act.” History. — s. 2, ch. 4147, 1893; s. 1, ch. 5139, 1903; GS 3268; RGS 5101; CGL 7203; s. 2, ch. 76-165; s. 67, ch. 77-121; s. 1, ch. 77-302; s. 176, ch. 79-164; ss. 1, 2, ch. 87-24; s. 4, ch. 88-183; s. 2, ch. 89-60; s. 110, ch. 89-96; s. 3, ch. 90-311; s. 2, ch. 90-316; ss. 1, 7, ch. 90-364; s. 1, ch. 92-52; s. 1, ch. 92-183; s. 38, ch. 93-39; s. 52, ch. 95-196; s. 1, ch. 95-229; s. 10, ch. 95-430; s. 17, ch. 97-94; s. 1206, ch. 97-102; s. 5, ch. 98-284; s. 3, ch. 98-335; s. 228, ch. 99-245; s. 61, ch. 2000-258; s. 10, ch. 2002-295; s. 108, ch. 2003-1; s. 60, ch. 2004-357; s. 1, ch. 2006-90; s. 1, ch. 2008-105; s. 2, ch. 2011-145; s. 1, ch. 2012-144; s. 61, ch. 2013-116; s. 1, ch. 2014-205; ss. 39, 40, ch. 2016-166; s. 50, ch. 2017-36; s. 39, ch. 2017-85.