University of Wisconsin Law School
Assistant Professor of Law

Biography

Professor Yackee's research centers on international investment law, international economic relations, foreign arbitration, and administrative law and politics. He teaches Contracts, International Investment Law, International Arbitration, and International Business Transactions.

Professor Yackee graduated summa cum laude and Phi Beta Kappa from University of Pittsburgh , earned an M.A. and Ph.D. in political science (International Relations) from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , and earned a J.D., summa cum laude and Order of the Coif, from Duke University School of Law where he was an editor for the Duke Law Journal. He has also studied French and European law at the Université Panthéon-Assas (Paris-II), and is proficient in French.



Prior to joining the faculty at the Law School Professor Yackee was a Fellow at the University of Southern California Gould School of Law and a law clerk to Chief Judge James B. Loken, U.S. Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit. He has also clerked with the U.S. Department of Commerce, Office of the Chief Counsel of International Commerce and was a summer associate with Steptoe & Johnson LLP.



Professor Yackee's publications include “Bilateral Investment Treaties, Credible Commitment, and the Rule of (International) Law: Do BITs Promote Foreign Direct Investment?” (Law & Society Review, 2009); "A Bias toward Business? Assessing Participant Influence in Notice and Comment Rulemaking" (with Susan Webb Yackee, 68 Journal of Politics, Feb. 2006), "Are BITs Such a Bright Idea? Exploring the Ideational Basis of Investment Treaty Enthusiasm" (U.C. Davis Journal of International Law and Policy, 2006); "Choice of Law Considerations for International Forum Selection Agreements: Whose Law Applies?" (UCLA Journal of International Law and Foreign Affairs, 2004); "American Interests and IMF Lending" (with Thomas Oatley, International Politics, 2004); and "Note: A Matter of Good Form: The (Downsized) Hague Judgments Convention and Conditions of Formal Validity for the Enforcement of Forum Selection Agreements" (Duke Law Journal, 2003). His research has been funded by grants from the National Science Foundation and from the Federalist Society for Law & Public Policy Studies.