Texas Right to Life Slams Abortion Activist Wendy Davis in New Hard-Hitting Ad
Abortion activist Wendy Davis announces her campaign for governor this week and Texas Right to Life is right there to meet her with a new hard-hitting ad that blasts her for her defense of late-term abortions in the Texas legislature.

In an email to LifeNews, Texas Right to Life announced it is launching 60-second English and Spanish language radio ads – with female voiceovers – on South Texas secular and Christian stations educating listeners about Texas Senator Wendy Davis.

Here’s the 60-second radio ad script:

/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/Wendy_Davis_60english.mp3 Nothing is more precious than our children. Medical technology has improved the lives of premature babies. This past summer, Republicans and Democratic state legislators passed limits on second and third trimester abortions when babies are fully formed. Extremist groups protested this new law and rallied around abortion zealot State Senator Wendy Davis. Wendy Davis opposes any limits on abortion and even called late term abortions “sacred ground.” But abortion is not sacred; babies feel the pain of abortion. That’s why state lawmakers from both parties came together to protect our most vulnerable children. Wendy Davis puts late term abortion ahead of our faith, ahead of our families, and ahead of Texas values. Wendy Davis believes terminating babies even after 1/2 way through the pregnancy is okay. Wendy Davis is wrong on life, wrong for our children, and wrong for Texas.

During a speech recently, Davis called abortion “sacred ground” and indicated she may run for governor. Later, she indicated she thinks pro-life women “don’t understand” abortion and she showed she has no understanding of the Kermit Gosnell case.

The last Democrat to be elected Texas Governor was Ann Richards in 1990. Since then, the Democratic nominee has lost every gubernatorial election.

In July, pro-life Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott made it official, saying he will run for governor and seek the GOP nomination to replace pro-life Governor Rick Perry, who is not planning to run again next year. Prior to assuming the office of attorney general, Abbott was a justice on the Texas Supreme Court and was appointed by former Texas governor and President George W. Bush.

At age 26, Abbott was struck by a falling oak tree that injured his back as he jogged by. He has used a wheelchair ever since and has become an eloquent pro-life advocate — speaking up for both the disabled and the unborn.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

The accident serves as a reminder that regardless of someone’s circumstances, he or she deserves a chance at life, Abbott has said.

“As I laid there motionless on the ground, gripped with pain, as helpless as a child in the womb, I knew my life had changed forever,” he said at the National Right to Life convention in June.. “Some people think it’s easy to write off the lives of the disabled or the different. But every day, God reminds us that all life has value, no matter the form.”

Abbott, a rising Republican Party star, who is pro-life on abortion, is the leading contender with Perry not running. Abbott already has millions in the bank for a statewide bid.