Ohio: Ted Strickland Wants to Force Ohio Taxpayers to Fund Abortion
Ohio Right to Life and the national pro-life group Susan B. Anthony List (SBA List) are slamming U.S. Senate candidate Ted Strickland for his support for repealing the Hyde Amendment, longstanding bipartisan policy preventing federal taxpayer funding of abortion on-demand under Medicaid.

The platform ratified by Democrats in Philadelphia last week, for the first time, explicitly calls for the repeal of this policy and Hillary Clinton has pledged to repeal it if elected President. The issue has caused controversy with her running mate, Tim Kaine, who has refused to give a clear answer on where he stands.

Ohio Right to Life president Mike Gonidakis and SBA List president Marjorie Dannenfelser released the following comment:

“Ted Strickland stands in lockstep with Hillary Clinton and the abortion lobby in their desire to force Americans to pay for abortion on demand, up until the moment of birth, with their taxpayer dollars. He’s made clear today he will fight for Big Abortion, not Ohio families – a position that is profoundly unpopular – including with members of his own party. Already, four Senate Democrats have stated their opposition to the repealing of Hyde including three Senators – Joe Manchin (WV), Bob Casey (PA), and Joe Donnelly (IN) – who represent neighboring states to Ohio.

Keep up with the latest pro-life news and information on Twitter. Follow @LifeNewsHQ

“SBA List and Ohio Right to Life are working together on a massive group operation this election. We have knocked on nearly half a million doors across swing states, including Ohio, to turn out the pro-life base, as well as persuadable pro-life Hispanics and Democrats. We are confident that voters will reject the extreme abortion agenda of Hillary Clinton and Ted Strickland when they go to vote in November.”

A Marist poll released last week found that a majority of Americans (62 percent) oppose taxpayer funding of abortion including 45 percent of those who say they are “pro-choice” and 44 percent of Democrats.