Trump: Too Early to Say on VP
Donald Trump on Tuesday declined to name a potential running mate from among his GOP opponents, but he noted his affection for Texas Sen. Ted Cruz.

“Well, I like like him,” Trump said Tuesday on “The Laura Ingraham Show.” “He’s backed everything I’ve said … Ted Cruz is now agreeing with me 100 percent.”

But the dogged GOP front-runner, still leading the latest polls, was reluctant to go further.

“I like to think of victory, I’ve had a lot of victories, and I like to do victories first, then start thinking about other things,” Trump said to Ingraham.

But Trump was clear on who he thought would not be getting the nomination, dismissing the chances of both Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush.

“Rubio is not going to be the one … it’s not going to be Rubio,” Trump said, “Rubio is very, very weak on immigration — a member of the Gang of Eight.”

Rubio has come under increasing scrutiny of late for his role in the 2013 “Gang of Eight” amnesty push.

On Bush, Trump said that although “you can’t watch television without seeing a (Bush) ad, all paid for by special interests and lobbyists,” he believes the former governor’s campaign is finished.

A national poll of likely GOP primary voters released Monday by the University of Massachusetts Amherst and YouGov America found Trump at 31 percent, back in the range of his previous highs and 9 points ahead of second-place Dr. Ben Carson.

Trump hammered President Obama and German Chancellor Angela Merkel for their handling of Syrian refugees and taking a swipe at opponent Rubio for his track record on immigration.

“Look what Merkel has done in Germany, there are going to be riots over there,” Trump said.

“Look what Merkel has done in Germany, there are going to be riots over there,” Trump said of the German leader for accepting an influx of as many as 800,000 Syrian migrants. “I think this is going to destroy Germany.

“Taking these people is absolute insanity,” Trump said, referring to any Western nation that would accept Syrians after revelations that at least one of the Paris attackers had posed as a Syrian refugee.

Trump suggested that President Obama, who faces growing criticism of his refugees plan and his handling of ISIS, sounded during his news conference Monday like he had thrown in the towel.

“He’s supposed to be a cheerleader for this country,” Trump said. Instead, “he just acts like a defeated man.”