Log Cabin Republicans PAC Announces First Wave of Endorsements
Washington, D.C. — Today Log Cabin Republicans announced its Board of Directors has issued its first wave of endorsements for its federal political action committee (PAC).

“These incumbents represent our strongest allies in Washington,” Log Cabin Republicans Executive Director Gregory T. Angelo stated. “This list features stalwart, equality-minded advocates who have long stood with Log Cabin Republicans, as well as new common-sense conservative allies in the GOP caucus of the United States House and Senate. We look forward devoting resources to ensure that all achieve reelection in November.”

The endorsed elected officials are:

Senator Susan Collins (ME)

Congressman Mike Coffman (CO-6)

Congressman Charlie Dent (PA-15)

Congressman Chris Gibson (NY-19)

Congressman Richard Hanna (NY-22)

Congressman Frank LoBiondo (NJ-02)

Congresswoman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen (FL-27)

“I am pleased to have the support of the Log Cabin Republicans. I have worked closely with them to repeal the military’s discriminatory ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell’ policy and other important issues. I welcome their endorsement and look forward to our continued work together.” — Senator Susan Collins

“I’m proud to be endorsed by the Log Cabin Republicans. I share their principles of limited government, a strong national defense, individual liberty, and a more inclusive Republican Party.” — Congressman Mike Coffman

“My thanks to the Log Cabin Republicans for endorsing my re-election campaign. I’m honored to earn the support of fellow Republicans who believe in individual liberty and fiscal responsibility. Let’s hope for a triumphant November for our Party.” — Congressman Charlie Dent

“It is an honor to receive the endorsement of the Log Cabin Republicans. From my service in the military to my service in Congress, I have always been dedicated to protecting this cherished way of life for all Americans. I look forward to continuing my work with groups like the Log Cabin Republicans that embody the spirit of inclusiveness and equal protection under the law that makes our country a model for the rest of the world.” — Congressman Chris Gibson

“I am pleased to accept the endorsement of the Log Cabin Republicans. As a recipient of the organization’s highest honor, the Spirit of Lincoln Award, I share the principles of the Log Cabin Republicans, including equality for all Americans, personal responsibility, and economic opportunity. It is an honor to have their support.” — Congressman Richard Hanna

“I’m honored to receive the endorsement of the Log Cabin Republicans, an organization dedicated to the respectful treatment of all Americans. I believe discrimination has no place in our society and we should celebrate diversity. I’ve long had a positive relationship with local South Jersey groups such as The Gables and welcome the support of the LGBT community.” — Congressman Frank LoBiondo

“I’m thankful to the Log Cabin Republicans, with whom I’m honored to work, for their endorsement. Together, we must continue to work for the day where everyone enjoys equal rights here and around the world. The Republican Party prides itself on individual freedom and one of our highest priorities must be to allow everyone to determine their own destinies.” — Congresswoman Ileana Ros-Lehtinen