Archives: Gadhafi sent packing from Bedford
CLOSE

Buy Photo Men stand around a tent on the grounds of Seven Springs estate off Oregon Road in Bedford Sept. 24, 2009. The Libyan government has pitched a tent on the property that leader Moammar Gadhafi may use for entertaining, according to a State Department official. (Photo: Frank Becerra Jr./The Journal News)Buy Photo

Editor's note: This article was originally published Thursday, Sept. 24, 2009

BEDFORD - Donald Trump says Libyan strongman Moammar Gadhafi won't be checking into his expansive Bedford estate after all.

Trump, who caused a stir when Gadhafi pitched a Bedouin-style tent on his 213-acre Seven Springs estate, said through a spokeswoman that he had asked the dictator to take it down - which was done Wednesday afternoon after town officials ordered it gone.

"Additionally," said Rhona Graff, the spokeswoman, "Mr. Gadhafi will not be going to the property."

AP: Trump 2016: I made money on Gadhafi Bedford deal

The tent was first pitched after Trump rented out the estate to Middle Eastern associates. They, in turn, opened it to Gadhafi, who was planning to go there after delivering a speech to the United Nations' General Assembly earlier Wednesday.

The tent, which included camel-print drapery, came down about 4:20 p.m., just as Bedford's building inspector arrived for his second inspection in two days. A red couch in the makeshift living quarters was still in place.

"The tent is down," said the building inspector, Rick Megna. "We wanted to make sure it was down. It's gone."

Joel Sachs, a town attorney, said it was unlikely Bedford would take any legal action.

Gadhafi's plans were to entertain guests on the estate that sprawls across parts of Bedford, North Castle and New Castle while he is in New York for the General Assembly.

Libyan leader Moammar Gadhafi listens to speeches during the opening of the African Union Summit in Khartoum Sudan, Monday, Jan. 23, 2006. Presidential candidate Donald Trump said on June 5, 2016, that he made "a lot of money" in a 2009 deal that resulted in Gadhafi's trying, without success, to use Trump's Seven Springs estate in Bedford. (Photo: AP Photo/Sayyid Azim, file)

The north African dictator, who addressed the United Nations in a long, disjointed speech Wednesday morning, has traveled with the tent to major capitals around the world but has found no hospitality in New York and New Jersey in recent weeks.

Bedford officials issued a stop-work order Tuesday afternoon after they observed Libyan agents putting up the tent. Electrical connections and satellite dishes inside made it a temporary residence requiring permits that were never requested by either Trump or the Libyans, Sachs said.

But the order was defied and the tent completed by midmorning Wednesday, as town officials reached out to Trump and his representatives to get it dismantled.

"We are outraged that this known criminal would attempt to set up camp in our community, and we intend to do everything in our power to deny them temporary residence," Bedford town Supervisor Lee Roberts said.

She later spoke directly to Trump, saying he promised only to look into the town's request.

"I told him it was very distressful for the neighbors and the town. He indicated he understood that," Roberts said.

The supervisor said Trump told her he had rented the property for the week of the General Assembly to partners of his from the United Arab Emirates and that they, in turn, had invited the Libyans.

Trump has a history of litigation with neighbors, Bedford and surrounding towns over his development plans for Seven Springs, which once belonged to Washington Post publisher Eugene Meyer. Asked whether he might have known Gadhafi would be coming and allowed the tent on his property to stick it to his neighbors, Roberts said she doubted it.

(Story continues below photo gallery)

"I don't think he invites this kind of controversy, this kind of adverse publicity," she said.

And of that there has been plenty, with federal, state and local officials expressing extreme displeasure at the prospect of Gadhafi staying in Bedford and others extending their anger to Trump.

Reps. Nita Lowey and John Hall wrote to Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton asking for her assistance in keeping the dictator out of the Hudson Valley, citing state-sponsored terrorism by Libya, including the 1988 bombing of a Pan Am flight over Lockerbie, Scotland, in which 270 people died.

They said his "hubris is despicable and inexcusable" and that his presence in an area where several Pan Am victims were from showed a "complete lack of compassion and remorse."

The outcry intensified in the afternoon once word spread that Gadhafi planned to visit. Police from Bedford, North Castle and the state were seen meeting with plainclothes federal agents. The Secret Service asked local police to help provide protection.

"We have no choice but to help with law enforcement, but I remain outraged that our taxpayers have to help protect someone that we don't want in this county," County Executive Andrew Spano said.

The town gave Trump a few more hours to comply but threatened legal action - either a criminal summons or a request in state Supreme Court for an order to dismantle the tent - if he didn't.

But just as Megna returned to reinspect the site after 4 p.m., the tent was taken down.

The Trump Organization then issued its first statement of the day: "We have requested that the tenant occupying the property in Bedford, New York, remove the tent that was erected. They have complied with this request."

Sachs said Wednesday night that the town was told that Trump had a written lease with the entity from the United Arab Emirates in which the renter was told it must comply with state and local regulations.

Throughout the day, Bedford residents weighed in on the controversy. Georgina Najmy, 74, expressed outrage that Gadhafi would consider Bedford.

"Tell him to go back," she yelled outside the Bedford post office, a few feet from two network TV crews reporting on the story.

Najmy, who is Arabic and came to the United States from Greece a half-century ago, said the controversy reflected poorly on her town.

"I can't believe it," she said. "It's bad for any place in this country. I'm outraged that he's in the U.N."

Sitting on a bench in Bedford Green, reading a magazine, Michael Millius took the controversy in stride. The 25-year resident said the visit was hardly the biggest controversy the town has faced. Nearby, a sign marks the downtown park as the site where horses, cattle and swine once grazed.

"Sometimes the swine show up of the two-legged variety," Millius said, "and then they move on."

Gadhafi ended up staying Tuesday night at the Libyan mission on 48th Street, around the corner from the United Nations.

On Wednesday morning at Trump's estate, the only sign of controversy was the red and white "No Parking" signs on both sides of Oregon Road.

Meanwhile, in Manhattan, Gadhafi's motorcade left the mission en route to the General Assembly about 9:30 a.m. as protesters and supporters rallied across from the United Nations. The protesters, some wearing T-shirts that read "Enough Gaddafi," chanted about civil rights violations in Libya. The pro-Gadhafi crowd included members of Louis Farrakhan's Nation of Islam and carried messages welcoming the Libyan leader to the United States and proclaiming "Long Live the King of Africa."

Relatives of the Lockerbie bombing victims were among the protesters. Kathleen and Jack Flynn of Montville, N.J., and Wendy Giebler Sefcik of Towaco, N.J., carried large signs with Gadhafi's picture under the word "MURDERER."

The Flynns' son, J.P., was a 21-year-old Colgate University student traveling with an overseas program from Syracuse.

Kathleen Flynn said the timing of Gadhafi's first U.N. visit - soon after he gave a hero's welcome to released Lockerbie airplane bomber Abdel Basset Ali al-Megrahi in Tripoli during the summer - was a slap in the face to all victims of terrorism.

"He should not have been given the honor of speaking at the United Nations," Kathleen Flynn said. "The organization is supposed to represent peace, honor and tranquillity, and now they let a known mass murderer speak here."

Sefcik's husband, William Giebler, 29, was working in London at the time and returning home for the holidays on the Pan Am flight. They had been married less than a year.

She is remarried and brought two of her sons to the protest Wednesday morning.

"They needed to be here, to realize what an animal (Gadhafi) is," she said. "It's a sad day that we have this man in our country."

She said it was heartening that so many people rejected Gadhafi recently. New York City denied him permission to put the tent in Central Park. An outcry from residents and the mayor of Englewood, N.J., ended plans for the tent to go next to an unoccupied mansion the Libyan government bought there in the 1980s. Real estate agents in Manhattan and the Riverdale section of the Bronx refused to rent mansions and high-end apartments to the Libyans - in some cases rebuffing Gadhafi's agents when they claimed to be representing Dutch and Sri Lankan diplomats.

But Sefcik said she was dumbfounded that the Libyan leader would find a place to stay on Trump's Bedford property.

"I don't know what Trump was thinking," she said, noting that she did not believe reports that Trump was unaware who would be using his property.

Staff writer Brian Howard contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1t1JCSh