Yonkers eyes sales tax increase to fund schools
The measure would allow the city of Yonkers to increase its sales tax rate for three years to 8.875 percent, matching New York City.

Supporters of the Yonkers school district hold signs during a rally on the Great Western Staircase at the Capitol on Tuesday, May 19, 2015, in Albany, N.Y. (AP Photo/Mike Groll) (Photo: Mike Groll, AP)

A new bill in the state Legislature would allow the city of Yonkers to hike its sales tax to help fund its financially troubled school system.

The measure, introduced late Wednesday, would allow Yonkers to increase its sales-tax rate from 8.375 percent to 8.875 percent for the next three years. If approved, the rate would be the same as in New York City, which has the highest in the state.

"The city shall use the net collections from such additional one-half of one percent rate solely for the support of education, unless the city council votes, on an annual basis, to use such net collections for a different purpose of the city," the bill states.

If approved by state lawmakers and signed into law by Gov. Andrew Cuomo, the sales-tax increase would bring in an estimated $14 million to $15 million a year for the city.

The measure, sponsored by Senate Democratic Leader Andrea Stewart-Cousins and Assemblyman Gary Pretlow, comes in the final days of the legislative session. The bill couldn't be voted on until Monday because of a three-day waiting period for bills to age — unless Cuomo decided to waive the rule.

But the legislative session may go into next week.

It's uncertain whether the Republican-led Senate would back the bill. Senate Republicans have generally rejected local sales-tax increases.

By a vote of 5 to 2, the Yonkers City Council passed a home-rule message in support of the bill late Thursday night at an emergency meeting.

"This is by no means the preferred solution to taking care of the children of Yonkers," City Council President Liam McLaughlin, a Republican, said Thursday afternoon.

Pretlow, Stewart-Cousins and Yonkers Mayor Mike Spano said the additional sales tax is needed to help the schools have a reliable revenue stream to help close ongoing budget gaps.

"There's a systemic problem within the budget that has to be fixed, and the only way to fix that is to come with an influx of cash that is recurring," Pretlow, D-Mount Vernon, said.

The bill was introduced just days after Cuomo pledged to help the district as school advocates pressed state leaders for a bailout to close a $26 million shortfall for the fiscal year that starts July 1.

NEWSLETTERS Get the Breaking News newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-888-426-6388. Delivery: Varies Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Breaking News Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

The district has proposed to eliminate 200 positions, cut sports and limit programs to close the budget gap.

The bill "was requested by the city of Yonkers to deal with their education deficit," said Mike Murphy, a spokesman for Stewart-Cousins.

The sales-tax increase would run from September until November 2018.

Cuomo on Sunday proposed a $100 million fund to help struggling school districts north of New York City, including Yonkers. The fund would also need legislative approval.

Spano, a Democrat, said a sales-tax increase would give the school district a recurring funding stream that would end the "crisis" it faces each year. The extra sales tax funding would be used in tandem with the fund proposed by Cuomo, he said.

"It gives the city the ability to end the crisis without going back to the property taxpayer, which I think would be a much larger tax increase," Spano said. "The kids need it. The kids deserve it. It's about having a reoccurring funding stream so that the district isn't in crisis each and every year."

The state has repeatedly come to the city's rescue. Last year, the state bailed out the district with a $28 million infusion of cash after a $55 million accounting error left the schools in fiscal turmoil. In 2011-12 fiscal year, Yonkers received $28 million — which the district then inaccurately included as recurring aid in subsequent budgets.

This year, the budget included the 8 percent school-aid increase and another $2 million in aid. The city is the only city in the state outside of New York City to have its own resident income tax.

E.J. McMahon, president of the fiscally conservative Empire Center in Albany, ripped the proposed sales-tax increase and leaders' contention that the money is for the students.

His group found that Yonkers schools has the seventh highest median salary of the 99 school districts in the Hudson Valley, and federal data showed Yonkers ranked seventh in spending among the nation's 500 largest public school districts in 2013, he said.

"What kind of message do kids get when you make a $55 million accounting error and then demand a tax hike to bail yourself out?" McMahon said.

Kevin Cacace, president of the Yonkers Chamber of Commerce, said the sales-tax increase wouldn't be as bad as a property-tax increase.

"We don't support any tax increases, but it may be the lesser of the evils. It is important that the schools get funded," Cacace said.

jspector@gannett.com; Twitter.com/GannettAlbany

Includes reporting by Albany Bureau staff writer Jon Campbell.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1Li6raL