Florida Absentee Ballot Guide
Important Deadlines

Voter Registration Form: Postmarked 29 days before the election

Absentee Ballot Application: Received by 5:00 p.m. on the Wednesday before the election

Voted Absentee Ballot: Received by 7pm Election Day

How to vote by absentee ballot

Register to vote

Recommended: Use our Voter Registration Tool. Enter your information, print and sign the completed form, and mail it to the address printed on the form. If you don't have a Florida license or state ID card, you should include a copy of your identification.

You can also download and fill out Florida's Voter Registration form. Mail the form to the Supervisor of Elections of your county.

Verify your voter registration

It's best to verify your voter registration before applying for your absentee ballot. If there's a problem with your registration, register again before proceeding.

NOTE: Most people receive their voter registration cards in the mail 2-3 weeks after registering to vote. Don't worry if you lost your voter registration card. You don't actually need it to vote.

Make sure you're eligible to vote by absentee ballot

Good news! Any registered Florida voter may vote by absentee ballot.

Apply for your absentee ballot

All Supervisor of Election websites offer on-line absentee ballot requests. You'll have to click around a bit to find them, but it looks like a fast and easy way to apply for your an absentee ballot.

Alternatively, you can download and complete our Florida Absentee Ballot Application. (Since there's no official statewide application, we created one that has been verified as valid by Florida.) Mail your completed application to your Supervisor of Elections. A family member - or a legal guardian - can also apply for an absentee ballot on your behalf using the same application.

If you don't want to use the application form, and you don't want to apply online, you can write a letter to your Supervisor of Election which contains the following information:

Your full name Your date of birth The Florida address where you are registered to vote Your mailing address Your signature

If a family member - or legal guardian - choses to write a letter on your behalf requesting an absentee ballot, they'll need to include the following information:

the name of the voter who needs an absentee ballot the voter’s address the voter’s date of birth the requestor’s name the requestor’s address the requestor’s driver’s license number (if available) the requestor’s relationship to the voter the requestor’s signature (if the request is written)

You can ask your Supervisor of Elections to mail your absentee ballot, or you can ask to pick up your absentee ballot in person, or you can designate someone to pick up the ballot for you. If you request that your absentee ballot be mailed to you, the request must be received by the Supervisor of Elections no later than 5 p.m. on the 6th day before the election.

Receive, complete and return your absentee ballot

Most people will opt to receive their ballots in the mail. You can also pick up your absentee ballot in person from the Supervisor of Elections beginning five days before the election right up to election day.

You can also designate someone else to pick up your ballot for you. A designee may pick up an absentee ballot for you on election day or up to 5 days before an election. A designee may only pick up 2 absentee ballots per election (other than his or her own ballot and ballots for members of his or her immediate family). Designees must give the Supervisor of Elections a written authorization from the voter. Designees must also show a photo ID and sign a affidavit certifying that they are authorized and eligible to pick up absentee ballots on behalf of others.

Once you receive and complete your ballot, mail or hand deliver it to your Supervisor of Elections no later than 7 p.m. on election day. If you return a voted absentee ballot to a polling place, your ballot will be destroyed and you will need to vote again in person.

Check the status of your voted absentee ballot

You can check if your absentee ballot was received and counted at the Florida Division of Elections website: http://registration.elections.myflorida.com/

Additional Information