Lone Star Project on Facebook

-

Making an Impact “The Lone Star Project … hammers Republicans whenever it gets a chance, promoting strong local Democratic candidates and even bringing lawsuits.”

(Roll Call, Stuart Rothenberg,

March 12, 2009) “Anyone who questions whether [The Lone Star Project] can make life difficult for a Republican legislator should talk to former Sen. Kim Brimer.”

(Austin American Statesman, February 17, 2009) “[The Lone Star Project] is responsible for the aggressive stance the party has taken toward DeLay and other Lone Star State Republicans since the 2004 election.”

(The Washington Post, March 6, 2006) "David Dewhurst has said most Texans don't have much sympathy "for someone who that can't fill out a two page [health insurance] application every six months". The Democrat-supported Lone Star Project in Washington reported this week that Dewhurst failed to file necessary forms at least six times in recent years.

(San Antonio Expres News,, 4/12/2007) "The Justice staff memo was obtained by the Lone Star Project ...The story broke the same day the U.S. Supreme Court was considering legal challenges to the plan brought by Democrats and minority groups."

(Houston Chronicle, 12/3/2005) "The Texas chapter of the NAACP, along with the Lone Star Project, have analyzed the amicus brief filed by the Justice Department and have concluded, justifiably, that the Voting Rights section of the Justice Department is now controlled by partisan political appointees. "

(Roll Call - Donna Brazile, 2/28/2006)

Bill Flores Double Talk = Dishonesty

Video shows CD17 Republican candidate lied about voting record Video and audio recordings obtained by the Lone Star Project show that CD17 Republican congressional candidate Bill Flores casually but blatantly lied about his vote in the 2008 General Election.



Dishonest answer to a direct question

On February 2, 2010 at a Republican debate, Bill Flores was asked directly by his GOP Primary opponent, Rob Curnock, who he had voted for in the 2008 General Election. Without missing a beat, Flores said, “I voted for you.” He went on to repeat two more times that he had voted in 2008 for Rob Curnock, the 2008 Republican congressional nominee in CD17.

Watch the video on YouTube

Official voting records from the Brazos County voter registrar, however, show that Bill Flores DID NOT VOTE AT ALL in the 2008 General Election. (Source: Brazos County Voter Registration Department)In fact, the only 2008 voting activity by Bill Flores was a vote he cast in the 2008 DEMOCRATIC Primary. The Texas Tribune also reported earlier this week that Flores skipped the 2008 General election (Source: Texas Tribune, March 29, 2010). The facts and the record are clear: Bill Flores did not vote for Rob Curnock and when asked about his vote, Flores spun an elaborate lie.



But that’s not all ….



Flores changed his story, lied by omission, was too busy to vote

Just last week, in a joint radio appearance with Rob Curnock, Bill Flores had the opportunity to come clean and tell the truth. He passed. Instead, when asked about his 2008 General Election vote, he again failed to answer honestly and said, “I didn’t vote for you, but didn’t vote for Chet either.” Rather than fess up and tell listeners that he skipped the 2008 General Election altogether, he gave an incomplete and evasive answer, all while trying to pass his original lie off as a “joke."

Voting History William H. Flores 2010 2008 General Election NONE Primary Election REPUBLICAN DEMOCRATIC (Source: Brazos County Voter Registration Department)

When the Texas Tribune followed up on why he failed to vote, Flores said he was stuck in business meetings. (Source: Texas Tribune, March 29, 2010) Flores did not say why he did not cast his vote during the two weeks of early voting available to all Texas voters.



Bottom Line

“Lying” is a harsh term in politics, and we do not use it casually. However, no other term applies to the conflicting, inconsistent and evasive comments made by Bill Flores. As a newcomer to CD17, his first job is to present himself honestly and to earn voters’ trust. By playing games with his own vote and failing to answer direct questions honestly, his integrity can be fairly questioned.



Background

Bill Flores is running for Congress as a Republican in CD17 against popular Democratic incumbent Chet Edwards. CD17 is a central Texas district that runs from Johnson County which is just south of Fort Worth, down through Waco all the way to Brazos County. Before matching up with Edwards, however, Flores must defeat Rob Curnock, the 2008 Republican nominee in CD17 who is running aggressively to win the nomination again. The winner will be decided in an April 13 run-off. Flores is a newcomer to CD17 who moved into the District only recently. Flores had never cast a vote of any type in CD17 until the 2008 Democratic Primary. Curnock is long-time District resident living in Waco.



The district trends Republican in national and statewide elections, but centrist Democrat Chet Edwards has won re-election by reflecting the mainstream sensibilities of the District and carefully attending to its needs.

Permalink