Airports Authority awards Rail to Dulles Phase Two contract

Capital Rail Constructors has been awarded the contract for the largest design-build portion of Phase Two of the Dulles Corridor Metrorail Project that will extend 11 miles of Metro's Silver Line to the Dulles International Airport and into eastern Loudoun County.



Capital Rail is a joint venture between Clark Construction Group and Kiewit Infrastructure South. The group was awarded the contract for approximately $1.18 billion Tuesday, and the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority (MWAA) made the announcement during its Wednesday board meeting.



“This is the first of many milestones to come for the second phase of the Silver Line,” Jack Potter, president and CEO of MWAA, said in a prepared statement. “The Phase Two contract, awarded through a competitive bid process, and with the coordination and collaboration of our project partners, is moving forward to construction.”



When Loudoun County voted to remain a funding partner in the Silver Line project in July 2012, the county agreed to pay 4.8 percent of the project's overall cost, estimated at approximately $268 million. Other funding partners for the project – both Phase One and Phase Two – include the federal government, the Commonwealth of Virginia, Fairfax County and MWAA.



Following a review, MWAA officials said, Capital Rail's $1.18 billion proposal was determined to meet all necessary requirements. The contract represents nearly 50 percent of Phase Two construction.



“We are very encouraged by the price submitted by Capital Rail Constructors and the potential savings it includes,” Pat Nowakowski, executive director of the Dulles Corridor Metrorail Project, said. “This has been a very successful competitive procurement process. The winning proposal is well below our original estimates of $1.4 billion to $1.6 billion for this portion of the project, which hopefully will allow us to pass on additional savings to users of the Dulles Toll Road.”



Phase One of the Dulles Rail project, as it's come to be known, runs from Falls Church to Wiehle Avenue in Reston; that phase is more than 90 percent complete, according to MWAA.



Construction of Phase Two is anticipated to be completed in 2018.



MWAA on Wednesday also approved a contract for Jacobs Engineering, a support services firm utilized during Phase One, to provide project management during Phase Two.





-Trevor Baratko





Comments

Be the first to post a comment!

Post a comment

Commenting is not available in this channel entry.

Comments express only the views of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of this website or any associated person or entity. Any user who believes a message is objectionable can contact us at ltmeditor@loudountimes.com.



More News