Plainview peanut plant closes amid finding of possible salmonella
The Plainview Peanut Co. halted plant operations Tuesday after a private lab report revealed some of its products could be contaminated with salmonella.

Photos Provided By The Plainview Daily Herald

The Plainview plant is a subsidiary of Peanut Corporation of America, which is suspected of distributing contaminated peanut products that resulted in more than 600 cases of illness and eight deaths in 43 states.

The news comes a week after an Associated Press investigation revealed the plant, which had been operational since 2005, had not been licensed or inspected by health officials until last month.

Texas Department of State Health Services officials confirmed the plant was shut down at the request of the agency, but an investigation revealed none of the products that tested presumptively positive for contamination reached consumers.

Doug McBride, press officer with State Health Services, said initial testing from his department and the FDA revealed no contamination at the plant and it wasn't until private samples were tested that the plant was asked to halt production.

Contaminated peanut meal and granulated peanuts were found at the plant but were not shipped out, according to a Health Services statement. Dry roasted peanuts that were shipped to a distributor were recalled before reaching shelves.

It is unclear how long the plant will have to suspend production, McBride said, pending further testing.

"The company's operating on the premise that there was salmonella," he said. "We will be handing down a list of steps to let them know what they need to do to reopen."

Health officials said they have not confirmed whether the strain of salmonella was the same as the one that caused the recall earlier this year, and no cases have been reported in connection with the Plainview plant.

In another development, the House Energy and Commerce Committee voted to compel Peanut Corporation of America President Stewart Parnell to appear at a hearing today, as a wide-ranging investigation focuses on who was responsible for the outbreak.

"Hopefully, people are going to be held accountable," said Rep. Bart Stupak, D-Mich., chairman of the committee's investigations panel. The full committee approved the subpoena by voice vote, without opposition.

Stupak says he wants know how Peanut Corp. managed to sell allegedly tainted goods month after month without triggering action by state and federal health authorities.

Calls by The Avalanche-Journal to the Plainview Peanut Co. and its parent company were not immediately returned.

(The Associated Press contributed to this report.)

To comment on this story:

joshua.hull@lubbockonline.com l 766-8795

walt.nett@lubbockonline.com l 766-8706