Texas census count important for political, economic reasons
It's more important than ever for Texans to be accurately counted in the upcoming census when the time comes. Why? If the 2010 census undercounts Texans as it has in the past, the state stands to lose millions of dollars in federal money for health care and schools.

In the last census, for example, 373,567 Texans were not counted - or 1.76 percent of the state's population in 2000 - according to an audit. The undercount could have resulted in Texas missing out on $1 billion in federal funds from 2002 to 2012 if a recalculation hadn't been done, reported The AP.

Multiple-family homes and language barriers have been identified as an issue for every census, according to Robert Groves, President Obama's nominee for director of the U.S. Census Bureau. Return home visits by census-takers, although expensive, are highly successful, he said. The census also will offer self-administered questionnaires and Web-based surveys for those who prefer them, Mr. Groves said.

An accurate count also is important for economic development reasons, too, as community officials use the data to lure businesses and new jobs.

The data allow communities to compare and market themselves with other communities when employers are interested in moving or expanding to a Texas community.

"It's part of our bread and butter," said Patrick Jankowski, vice president of research for the Greater Houston Partnership. "The economic development business lives on data."

The nation's overall minority population continues to rise steadily, adding 2.3 percent in 2008 to 104.6 million, or 34 percent of the total population.

The 2000 undercount in Texas was most pronounced in border counties, where unincorporated neighborhoods known as "colonias" are located and where residents are often in most need of aid, reported The AP.

The Census Bureau projected last August that white children will become the minority in 2023 and the overall white population will follow in 2042. The agency now says it will recalculate those figures, typically updated every three to four years, because they don't fully take into account anti-immigration policies after the September 2001 terror attacks and the current economic crisis. "Policies changed," said David Waddington, the Census Bureau's chief of projections, in explaining why scientific estimates are no longer valid.

Hispanic groups, such as the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials, say the number of Hispanics is undercounted by about 3 percent - or 1 million Latinos - nationwide. "Unfortunately, the Latino population has never been fully counted," said Arturo Vargas, NALEO executive director. Hispanics make up much of the state's recent population growth, especially along the border, and those areas most benefit from federal dollars.

Editorials represent the opinion of The Avalanche-Journal Editorial Board, which consists of Publisher Stephen A. Beasley, Editor Terry Greenberg, Editorial Page Editor Joe Hughes, editorial writer Joe Gulick, in addition to input provided by community advisory board members Adrienne Cozart, Irasema Velasquez and Dee Jay Wilde.