Gov. Scott Walker More than Halfway to 250,000 Jobs Goal
MacIver News Service | April 9, 2012

[Madison, Wisc…] Wisconsin has 137,372 more private sector jobs than when Governor Scott Walker first took office in January 2011, according to the most recent data available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, which puts him past the halfway point towards his goal of creating 250,000 private sector jobs in his first term.

This information was contained in the BLS’s Quarterly Census of Employment and Wages. That census includes detailed information from more than 96 percent of employers. This is much more accurate than monthly jobs’ reports, which are compiled by surveying a fraction of employers.

The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel used the same data to determine Wisconsin ranked 44th in private sector job growth from September 2011 to September 2012.

John Koskinen, Chief Economist at the Wisconsin Department of Revenue, confirmed the private sector job growth numbers uncovered by the MacIver News Service, “That’s literally true,” however, Koskinen said economists typically use the same month from different years to avoid seasonal variations in employment.

Although Koskinen might be uncomfortable comparing jobs numbers from January 2011 and September 2012, the Democratic Party of Wisconsin felt those two months strengthen the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel story.

“The day Scott Walker took office, we were 11th in job creation. Now, we are 44th, and it is a direct result of both his inattention and his policies. Those have included massive cuts to job-creating investments in education, health care, technology, infrastructure and vocational training,” reads a DPW release from March 28, 2013.

DPW neglected to mention the fact that during that same timeframe, Wisconsin added over 137,000 private sector jobs putting Walker well on track to meet his goal by the end of his term. And although the chief economist for DOR is wary of using such a timeframe, Koskinen completely rejects the statement that Wisconsin is 44th in job creation.

During a presentation in March, Koskinen pointed out Wisconsin’s unemployment rate is consistently lower than the national average. Also, previously the BLS reported Wisconsin was losing jobs, only to have to revise those numbers later and admit the state gained jobs.

Additionally the MacIver News Service reported the state collected 5 percent more tax revenue in February 2013 than in February 2012 according to the Department of Revenue, suggesting Wisconsinites are making and spending more money.

The data used in this story and the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel’s story can be found by clicking here.