Maine Department of Labor: Frequently Asked Labor Law Questions
The frequently asked questions section addresses topics and specific questions that are often asked of the Department of Labor. Many additional answers to questions not addressed here may be obtained from other materials on this website or by calling the Department at 207-623-7900. Depending on the nature of your inquiry, you may need to seek legal guidance from private counsel on questions of your obligations under the law.

What is the minimum wage?

$7.50 per hour.

What is a tipped employee’s minimum wage?

Service employees who receive at least $30 a month in tips can be paid one-half of minimum wage, which is $3.75 per hour, plus the tips they receive. When the employer paid wage plus tips do not average at least the minimum wage at the end of the work week, the employer must make up the difference in wages.

How many hours is full-time employment? How many hours is part-time?

Full-time and part-time employment is not generally defined. These are determined by the employer and are commonly used to define how company benefits are earned.

I feel that I have been unfairly discharged. What can I do?

Most employment is "at-will," which means an employer may hire or fire at will and an employee may decide to work or not work for a company at will. This means an employer may legally fire an employee without notice and without cause. The employer may not discriminate against an employee because of race, color, sex, sexual orientation, age, physical or mental disability, genetic pre-disposition, religion, ancestry or national origin. For any such potential discrimination issues, you should contact the Maine Human Rights Commission at 624-6290. If you would like to file for unemployment benefits because you believe that you lost your job through no fault of your own, a good place to start is the Department’s Frequently Asked Questions webpage regarding unemployment benefits.

My employer has changed my work schedule and pay -- is this legal?

Maine labor laws do not prohibit an employer from changing work hours or schedules. The rate of pay can be lowered when the employer gives at least a one day notice to the affected employee. At no time can the rate be lowered below the established minimum wage.

My final paycheck is being held by the employer. What can I do?

All earned wages are due on the next regularly scheduled payday after termination. The employee must make the demand in person at the business. An employee who is denied payment can call 623-7900 to talk with a Wage and Hour representative.

Who can be placed on salary?

There are two salary types. One is for those who have agreed to a 40 hour workweek for an established amount and overtime would apply for any hours worked over 40 in a work week. The second type of salary agreement exempts employees from overtime in agreements that qualify with the minimum salary amount of $455 per week and the primary job duties are in an executive, administrative or professional capacity. Teachers and highly skilled computer staff may also be paid as exempt-salaried employees. Please check the Maine Wage and Hour Division Rules for specific guidance.

Is there a new minimum amount exempt-salaried workers must be paid?

Exempt-salaried employees must be paid at least $455.00 per week through November 30, 2016. Starting December 1, 2016, exempt-salaried workers must be paid at least $913 a week. All Maine employers will be required to comply with this law. There are also differences between the state law and the federal rules. Learn more here.

Does my employer have to pay my earned paid-vacation, paid-holidays, or paid-sick leave?

Employers are not required to offer paid vacations, holidays, or paid sick leave, which are also commonly called "PTO," "EBT," or "ETO," These are benefits established by company policies specifying how they are earned as well as how or when they are paid. Under Maine law, only the accrued vacation time is required to be paid upon termination in cases where the employer’s policy specifically states that benefit will be paid upon termination.

Does my employer have to provide me with rest breaks?

Employers must offer employees the opportunity to take a consecutive 30-minute unpaid or paid rest break after 6 hours worked. An employee may waive his or her right to a rest break (preferably in writing). When the employer allows the employee to work through a rest break period, that time must be included as hours worked. Shorter breaks are common but not required by law. Such breaks or pauses away from performing duties may not be used to reduce the employee’s time worked.

Can my employer require me to take the consecutive 30-minute rest break?

Yes.

At what age can a child work?

The minimum age is 14 for most jobs as directed under Federal Youth Labor Law. At ages 14 and 15, an approved work permit is required. Agricultural labor does not have a minimum age or work permit requirement.

How does a minor obtain a work permit?

A work permit is required for minors age 14 and 15. The permit can be filled in online and printed. The minor submits the form to their area superintendent with the job offer and parental signature sections completed. The superintendent submits the application to the Bureau of Labor Standards for approval. The minor cannot work until the permit is approved. Minors can have one active permit during the school year and can have two during the summer. This process is described in more detail in our Guide to Maine Laws Governing the Employment of Minors.

My employer has told me that any cash mistakes I make must be paid back. Can they do that?

No. An employer cannot require or allow an employee to pay back for cash shortages, damages, customer walkouts or credit card errors.

My employer is verbally abusing/harassing me. Whom should I contact?

For assistance with workplace sexual harassment or illegal discrimination, contact the Maine Human Rights Commission at 624-6290.

I work as an independent contractor. What do I need to know about labor laws?

The Department of Labor website includes information regarding the criteria used to determine Independent Contractors in Maine. It includes questions and answers as well as phone numbers to call for more information. The IRS also establishes guidelines on the issues in determining employee or independent contractor status.

What posters must be displayed at work?

A list of required State and Federal labor law posters can be found on the Maine Department of Labor’s website; see the List of Required Posters. They are printable or provided at no cost.