Radio Iowa: Clinton, Edwards, Obama on gun control
Read the text of their brief thoughts on gun control after the jump. Click on the Radio Iowa story , go to the bottom and you'll find an audio link if you want to hear their comments. On Friday, Delaware Senator/Democratic presidential candidate Joe Biden said gun control can be a "liability" for Democrats if it goes too far. Here's that Radio Iowa story -- with an audio link at the bottom. Biden closes by saying: "I don't agree with some in my party who are very, very strict on gun control issues."

Each made a point of talking about gun rights, and none of the three endorsed such proposals as gun registration or a ban on handguns.

The three Democratic presidential candidates leading in most polls were in Iowa this past weekend. Radio Iowa's microphone caught up with Edwards Friday night on the Iowa State Fairgrounds after he spoke to a Polk County Democrats gathering there. New York Senator Hillary Clinton talked with Radio Iowa after her Saturday morning appearance in a Marshalltown middle school then late Saturday afternoon Illinois Senator Barack Obama spoke with Radio Iowa just before he spoke to a gathering of community activists at the ICAN convention.

DMR columnist David Yepsen: "Question on your rural proposal here. You said..."

Edwards: "Thank goodness somebody's asking a question about my rural proposal." (Edwards laughed; do you think that was a mention of the stories on Friday about his $400 haircut?)

Yepsen: "This is Iowa. You said in here that you will also crack down on gun crimes. How?"

Edwards: "What we're going to do is, I believe in the Second Amendment and I think it's important for hunters rights to be protected and it's part of my culture and the way I grew up, but I don't think you need an AK-47 to hunt and I think there are a number of things that we can do including a renewal of the assault weapons ban, closing the gun show loophole so that we make sure that we have the information that we need. I would add to that that in light of what's happened at Virginia Tech that we need to do a better job of making sure the registry that's used for the instant check includes people who've had a history of some mental problems because it's a spotted history but there was certainly some history about this gunman."

Yepsen: "Senator, this has been a difficult issue for Democrats, as you know."

Edwards: "It is."

Yepsen: "How do you balance it and does Virginia Tech change the topic...

Edwards: "The dynamic?"

Yepsen: "...and make it more acceptable for a Democrat to be for gun control?"

Edwards: "That's a good question. I think that what's acceptable is for Democrats and Democratic presidential candidates to actually say what they believe and for me, this is part of my culture. It's the way I grew up and I think it is important to protect people's Second Amendment rights but I think there's a balance in it and there's some weapons, particularly automatic weapons that included in the assault weapons ban, that are not necessary for sportsmen and hunters."

Another reporter in the group asked a question on a different topic.

Next, Hillary Clinton answers a couple of my questions:

Henderson: "In your last answer to the last question upstairs, you mentioned the 'crazed killer' at Virginia Tech. Do you think this situation has created a renewed environment for the debate about gun control, or is that still too sticky an issue for Democrats?"

Clinton: "Well, I think what it really raises is the need to enforce the laws that we already have and to work with states so that they have the resources and the specific requirements as to what they're supposed to do. It's come to light that Virginia hasn't really enforced the provision in the Brady Bill to put information like being committed involuntarily, as the shooter was, into the database and then have the database effective enough so that it pops up if somebody tries to buy a gun so the first thing we ought to focus on is figuring out what's gone wrong in actually enforcing all the laws we have and, you know, seeing if we can't do a better job of that."

Henderson: "What about the assault weapons ban or restrictions on bullets?"

Clinton: "Well, there is evidence that I've read about that the killer had ammunition that would have been illegal under the assault weapons ban. You know, look, I think the balancing act is clear here to everybody. You have to balance Second Amendment rights against keeping guns out of the hands of criminals and people who are unstable and that has always been what everyone I know has been seeking to accomplish and maybe this tragic incident will get us to think about how to get back to that balance."

Finally, here is the text of what Obama said during a Radio Iowa interview:

Henderson: "I'm wondering if what happened at Virginia Tech, in your opinion, might alter the debate about gun control."

Obama: "It's early to make a full assessment on how this changes our politics and the public mood. I think all of us are still just overwhelmed with grief for the families and for Virginia Tech and obviously people here remember what happened at the university and how painful it can be (a reference to the shootings at the University of Iowa). I do think that the evidence so far at least indicates that you've got a young man who was mentally deranged, was identified as such, was temporarily committed and was still able to obtain handguns and so one critical question is, 'What happened to our background check system? Why did it fail?' and it seems like we should be able to come to some bipartisan agreement on making that background system, background check system work. The second area which may be fought by the NRA, but I think has to be looked at is the availability of 19-round clips. I'm a strong believer in the rights of hunters and sportsmen to have firearms. I'm a believe in homeowners having a firearms to protect their home and their family. It's hard for me to find a rationale for a 19-clip semi-automatic. I said at a forum earlier this week, 'If you need 19 rounds to shoot a deer, you probably shouldn't be hunting' and so that I think is something that we should be able to have a reasonable conversation about."

Henderson: "Do you think this is a prickly issue for Democrats?"

Obama: "The problem that we've had is that the overwhelming majority of gun owners use those firearms safely, secure them properly and I think would be amenable to reasonable gun control laws. The NRA's attitude has been that any restriction is an infringement on the rights of gun owners and you know because of the breadth of their membership and the large amounts of money that they have at their disposal, I think they are oftentimes able to scare law-abiding gun owners into thinking that Democrats are going to take away their rights and part of what I think we have to communicate is that we are committed to maintaining the rights of lawful gun owners, but that doesn't contradict the need to keep guns out of the hands of the mentally ill or put limits on the accessibility of semi-automatic weapons or make sure that straw purchasers aren't dumping firearms into our inner cities."