Mansfield ISD Arabic grant update - February 18
[February 18, 2011] [Updated April 8, 2011] Arabic Grant Update: Amended grant proposal rejected; district program discontinued The US Department of Education has rejected Mansfield ISD's revised Arabic FLAP grant proposal. As a result, Mansfield ISD has ended all Arabic FLAP grant-related activities and will no longer accept funds related to this grant. Read more... ### Mansfield ISD was recently awarded a Foreign Language Assistance Program (FLAP) grant focused on the Arabic language from the Department of Education. Based on our community feedback, Mansfield ISD has proposed a change to the US Department of Education that will modify the timeline and structure of the Arabic language grant. Arabic language classes will not be mandatory at any level in the District. Mansfield ISD has proposed the following timeline for the Arabic FLAP grant implementation: Year 1 (2010-11) The current school year will be considered a planning year.

The current school year will be considered a planning year. Year 2 (2011-12) T.A. Howard Middle School will offer Arabic as an elective foreign language* ; exploratory class for 7th grade and Arabic 1 foreign language for high school credit** in the 8th grade.

T.A. Howard Middle School will offer Arabic as an ; exploratory class for 7th grade and Arabic 1 foreign language for high school credit** in the 8th grade. Year 3 (2012-13) Cross Timbers Intermediate School (grades 5-6) will offer optional language exploration during advisory periods throughout the day. Parents will have multiple opportunities for feedback once a draft of the curriculum is ready for review. Summit High School will offer a level 2 Arabic as an elective foreign language .

Cross Timbers Intermediate School (grades 5-6) will offer optional language exploration during advisory periods throughout the day. Parents will have multiple opportunities for feedback once a draft of the curriculum is ready for review. Summit High School will offer a level 2 Arabic as an . Year 4 (2013-14) Summit High School will add a level 3 Arabic course as an elective foreign language . Additionally, Kenneth Davis Elementary will add optional language exploration of Arabic for grades K-4. Planning is in the early stages for the optional language development program at Davis. Parents will have multiple opportunities for feedback once a draft of the curriculum is ready for review.

Summit High School will add a level 3 Arabic course as an . Additionally, Kenneth Davis Elementary will add optional language exploration of Arabic for grades K-4. Planning is in the early stages for the optional language development program at Davis. Parents will have multiple opportunities for feedback once a draft of the curriculum is ready for review. Year 5 (2014-15) Summit High School will add a level 4 Arabic course and an Advanced Level Arabic for Native Speakers in partnership with the University of Texas at Austin. “We feel confident that these changes will be approved by the Department of Education,” said Dr. Bob Morrison, Superintendent. --------------------------------------------------------

* All Mansfield ISD middle schools offer Spanish to 8th graders. Howard Middle School will offer both Spanish and Arabic elective languages. ** High school graduates are required to complete two credits of foreign language in the state-required Recommended Graduation Plan or three years of foreign language in the Distinguished Graduation Plan.