Sullivan is Again Hiding the Truth from Alaskans - Senator Mark Begich :: As Independent As Alaska
In Short:

Dan Sullivan is denying he had anything to do with giving violent offenders light sentences. He just pulled his ad, which tried to hide the truth about his record.

Sullivan told Alaskans he was “responsible for everything that happens” in his Department of Law.

Well, the facts are clear – Sullivan repeatedly let off violent criminals. His name is on the documents.

Yet again, Dan Sullivan is trying to rewrite history. Dan Sullivan needs to own up to his record and tell Alaskans the truth.

The Facts:

Dan Sullivan is Covering Up His Record Letting Off Violent Offenders

Republican Gail Phillips: Sullivan’s Record On Crime Has Not Been Properly Examined. In April 2014, former Republican state legislator Gail Phillips wrote, “AG Sullivan’s prosecutors were reducing charges against convicted sex offenders. His office defended this practice by saying the Department had limited resources and this was not a priority.” [Gail Phillips, Peninsula Clarion, 4/23/14]

Fawcett Jr. Pled Guilty To Two Felony Counts of Sexual Abuse of A Minor. As reported by the Juneau Empire, “A 49-year-old Juneau man pleaded guilty Monday to two felony counts involving sexual abuse of a minor. Nicholas Fawcett Jr. admitted to Superior Court Judge Patricia Collins that he sexually assaulted a 15-year-old girl in February in Juneau.” [Juneau Empire, 10/13/09]

Amended Indictment Signed By Assistant District Attorney Under Name Plate Of “Daniel S. Sullivan, Attorney General.” On October 6, 2009, the state filed an amended indictment against Fawcett to two felony counts of sexual abuse of a minor. The indictment was signed by an assistant District Attorney under a name plate reading “Daniel S. Sullivan Attorney General.” [Information Superceding Indictment Counts II And VI – State of Alaska v. Nicholas Fawcett Jr, filed 10/12/09]

Bradley Moody Received Plea Deal Of Community Service And Probation After Shooting At His Girlfriend. Reported the Fairbanks Daily News-Miner in May 2010, “A Fairbanks man accused of shooting at his girlfriend last year was sentenced Thursday to 64 hours of community service and two years of probation. . . . Moody’s girlfriend reportedly told Alaska State Troopers in July that the pair had been arguing for several weeks about separating and that Moody had become increasingly violent and controlling. She told troopers that Moody threw her to the ground and put her in a headlock when she tried to leave her home one morning. The woman got to her truck, at which point Moody got into his truck and tried to push her into a ditch, according to charging documents. He then retrieved a 9mm handgun and reportedly fired several rounds in her direction. The bullets hit dirt. He also threatened to shoot himself.” [Fairbanks Daily News-Miner, 5/14/10]

Moody Was Originally Charged With Multiple Counts Of Felony Assault, Several Misdemeanors – Pled Down To Reckless Endangerment And Criminal Mischief. Reported the Fairbanks Daily News-Miner in May 2010, “Bradley P. Moody, 21, pleaded guilty to reckless endangerment and criminal mischief as part of a plea agreement. He originally faced two felony charges of assault and several other misdemeanor charges stemming from four cases.” [Fairbanks Daily News-Miner, 5/14/10]

Moody’s Court-Appointed Attorney: “I Firmly Believe This Court Will Never See Mr. Moody In Front Of It Again.” Reported the Fairbanks Daily News-Miner in May 2010, “Shannon Morgan, Moody’s court-appointed attorney, said her client has turned his life around since the incident last summer. He has since reconciled with his family, started attending Alcoholics Anonymous meetings and completed about 800 hours of volunteer work, mostly at the Rescue Mission, she said.‘I firmly believe this court will never see Mr. Moody in front of it again,’ Morgan said.” [Fairbanks Daily News-Miner, 5/14/10]

Amended Indictment Signed By Assistant District Attorney Under Name Plate Of “Daniel S. Sullivan, Attorney General.” On May 18, 2010, the state filed an amended indictment against Moody dismissing counts of assault in the third and fourth degree and reckless driving. The indictment was signed by an assistant District Attorney under a name plate reading “Daniel S. Sullivan Attorney General.” [Dismissal Of Counts II, III and IV – State of Alaska v. Bradley Moody, filed 5/18/10]

Dan Sullivan Had to Pull His Television Ad

Sullivan Campaign Removed Crime Ad From TV. Reported KTUU in August 2014, “The campaign for Republican candidate Dan Sullivan said they would remove the ads from the airwaves.” [KTUU, 8/31/14]

Sullivan: I’m Responsible for Everything That Happened at the Department Of Law

Sullivan: “I’m Responsible For Everything That Happens In That Organization. . . . I’m A Big Believer In You Run An Organization, You’re Responsible For It.” “Look, I’m responsible for everything that happens in that organization. I had over 240 attorneys, prosecutors. Every letter that goes out from that organization- every single letter- has the signature block Daniel S. Sullivan, Attorney General. Everything; every prosecutor, every motion, everything. . . . I’m a big believer in you run an organization, you’re responsible for it.” [Sullivan at Conservative Patriots Group, 3/27/14]

Sullivan Promised Sex Offenders Would Be Shown “No Leniency.” “Meanwhile, the Department of Law is moving ahead with updated guidelines for prosecutors ‘to ensure that sex offenders are dealt with harshly and shown no leniency,’ Sullivan said. Under the guidelines, when accepting plea deals these perpetrators will be required to plead guilty to sex crimes so that they do not avoid being registered as sex offenders.” [Dan Sullivan Press Release, 12/3/09]

Current Attorney General Changed Sentencing Rules To Prevent Prosecutors From Negotiating Lesser Sentences For Crimes

HEADLINE – State Puts An End to Sentencing Deals in Serious Crimes. [Anchorage Daily News, 7/23/13]

Department of Law Announced New Change of Policy, Said Prosecutors Would Not Negotiate Plea Deals For Serious Crimes and Domestic Violence. As reported by the Anchorage Daily News, “State prosecutors will no longer negotiate plea deals for lesser sentences for Alaskans accused of serious crimes and domestic violence, the Alaska Department of Law said Tuesday. The change of policy, which took effect Tuesday, bars plea bargains involving sentences for the most serious classes of felony cases, as well as all cases involving sexual assault, sexual abuse of a minor and domestic violence, said deputy attorney general Richard Svobodny.” [Anchorage Daily News, 7/23/13]

Dan Sullivan is Again Trying to Cover Up His Record as Attorney General

Politifact: Sullivan’s Claim That He Passed “Stand Your Ground” Ruled “False.” “A recent radio ad said, ‘As Alaska’s Attorney General, Sullivan successfully fought to protect our Second Amendment rights and passed ‘stand your ground.’’ We found that evidence of Sullivan’s support for ‘stand your ground’ is dubious at best. We couldn’t find any public proof of his support, and multiple attorneys under him spoke out against the law. Even if he had publicly shown support for ‘stand your ground,’ he wasn’t in a position to push the legislation forward when the law finally passed in 2013. We rate this claim False.” [Politifact, 7/2/14]