Patrick Morrisey Joins King & Spalding as Co-Head of FDA/Life Sciences
SOURCE: King & Spalding

Patrick Morrisey Joins King & Spalding as Co-Head of FDA/Life Sciences

Will Focus Extensively on Health Care Reform Implementation for Pharmaceutical, Medical Device, Provider and Insurance Clients

WASHINGTON, DC--(Marketwire - April 27, 2010) - King & Spalding, a leading international law firm, announced today that Patrick Morrisey, a lawyer with extensive experience in health care regulatory, reimbursement, policy, legislative, strategic counseling and pricing matters for pharmaceutical and medical device manufacturers and health care providers and plans, has joined the firm as a partner and co-chair of its FDA/life sciences practice and a member of the firm's health care and public policy practices in Washington, D.C.

"In addition to representing eight of the top 10 pharmaceutical/biotechnology manufacturers as well as eight of the top 10 medical device manufacturers, King & Spalding also has the largest health care law practice in the nation," said Edward M. Basile, co-leader of King & Spalding's FDA/life sciences practice. "Patrick's arrival simultaneously adds depth to both our regulatory and legislative practices and provides us with an unsurpassed opportunity to counsel clients on the intricacies of the new health care reform law.

"As one of the leading experts in the country on healthcare reform, Medicare and Medicaid issues, Patrick's ability to synthesize and navigate through new regulatory regimes will enhance our clients' ability to make key adjustments to their business models and minimize their liability risks. We are fortunate to be able to add Patrick as a partner at this historic juncture in U.S. health care."

Morrisey joins King & Spalding from Sidley Austin. He is a widely recognized authority on Medicare, Medicaid and FDA regulatory issues, especially those involving pharmaceutical companies, medical device manufacturers, plans and providers. He has successfully represented clients before the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and Congress on precedent-setting matters pertaining to coding, coverage and payment of Medicare-related items and services. Morrisey focuses a large portion of his practice on providing companies with regulatory and legislative analysis and strategic counseling on health care reform, Medicare Part D, the "average sales price" law, Medicare Part B, government price controls, manufacturer-distributor relationships, provider reimbursement and compliance matters, the interrelationship between FDA policies and Medicare reimbursement, and pharmaceutical price-reporting laws. He also handles congressional oversight investigations for clients and manages significant matters involving pharmaceutical and device pricing and compliance issues before the HHS Office of Inspector General and other governmental entities.

Morrisey formerly served as deputy staff director and chief health counsel for the House Energy and Commerce Committee, which has jurisdiction over Medicare, Medicaid, FDA, health care insurance and public health. In those roles, he was a principal staff author and negotiator of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003 and helped author bioterrorism and public health legislation, including far-reaching changes to the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetics Act. He also was the committee's lead negotiator on healthcare matters involving the White House, HHS, CMS, FDA, the Ways and Means Committee and the Senate.

Morrisey received a J.D. degree from Rutgers School of Law - Newark and a B.A. degree, with honors, from Rutgers College.

"I am very excited to join the impressive group of lawyers in King & Spalding's FDA/life science, health care and public policy practices and look forward to helping further the synergies among them," Morrisey said. "I am also especially pleased that King & Spalding's strong FDA and life sciences platform will enable me expand my health care regulatory, policy and compliance services for pharmaceutical and medical device companies, as well as companies throughout the health care industry. Of any firm in the country, King & Spalding is strategically positioned to be a leader in helping companies adjust to the fundamental legal and business changes emerging from health care reform."

About King & Spalding

Celebrating 125 years of service, King & Spalding is an international law firm with more than 800 lawyers in Abu Dhabi, Atlanta, Austin, Charlotte, Dubai, Frankfurt, Houston, London, New York, Paris, Riyadh (affiliated office), San Francisco, Silicon Valley and Washington, D.C. The firm represents half of the Fortune 100 and, according to a Corporate Counsel survey in August 2009, ranks fifth in its total number of representations of those companies. For additional information, visit www.kslaw.com.