Study: Scott Brown 2nd-most bipartisan senator in 2011
Lending some credence to his campaign trail claims of being one of the most bipartisan senators in Washington, Republican Sen. Scott Brown of Massachusetts was found to have voted with his party 54 percent of the time in 2011, making him the second-most bipartisan senator in the 100-member U.S. Senate, according to a new study.

The latest Congressional Weekly study tracked voting records in cases in which there was a Republican-Democrat disagreement on the issue at hand.

Brown was also found to have voted in favor of President Barack Obama's stated positions 70 percent of the time in 2011, compared to 61 percent in 2010.

The study also reported that in 2010, Brown's first year in the Senate after winning a special election following the death of Democratic Sen. Edward Kennedy, he voted with the Republican Party 78 percent of the time.

The most bipartisan senator in 2011, according to the study, was Sen. Susan Collins, R-Maine, who voted with the Republican Party only 48 percent of the time.

Brown voted independently with a greater frequency than Democratic Sen. John Kerry and every other elected official in the Massachusetts delegation in 2011.

In 2011, Kerry voted with Democrats 96 percent of the time, compared to 97 percent of the time in 2010. The frequency for every Massachusetts member of the House of Representatives, all Democrats, was more than 90 percent.

Bipartisanship has been a major theme of Brown's campaign so far, as he cites a "broken system" in which party politics gridlock all legislation while Americans' support of their elected leaders remains at an all-time low.

In December, Brown notably broke from the Republican Party when he voted to confirm Richard Cordray as the first director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, an agency which Elizabeth Warren, a Democrat challenging Brown for his Senate seat, helped develop in the Obama administration. A few weeks later he made headlines when he blasted House Republicans as they embarked on a failed standoff over the issue of a two-month extension to unemployment benefits and the payroll tax cut.

At his campaign kickoff party in Worcester, Brown told supporters that among the differences between him and Warren is his ideology of compromise.

"Professor Warren is a hard-working, talented and accomplished academic. And she's got the other side pretty excited. She talks about how she's a, 'rock thrower,' and rather than compromise she prefers to leave 'blood and teeth' on the floor," Brown said in Worcester. "That sure doesn't sound like the kind of compromise and progress this country needs right now. I'm a bridge builder, not a rock thrower."

The frequency of voting along party lines on contentious issues in 2011 by the Massachusetts Congressional delegation, according to the Congressional Weekly study:

Senate

Scott Brown (R): 54%

John Kerry (D): 96%