Following Donald Trump election, UMass offers students grief counseling
AMHERST -- As the reality of President-elect Donald Trump sets in, the University of Massachusetts is offering grief counseling services for students and staff.

Counseling on campus is usually offered following some traumatic event, and, according to Oscar Collins, co-director of the Center of Multicultural Advancement and Student Success, that is how many students view a Trump presidency.

Collins said many students with "marginalized identities" suffered through the lengthy campaign that featured both a lack of empathy and an abundance of racial and xenophobic hate speech. He defined marginalized identities as people who are minority, gay, lesbian or transgender, or who are either from other countries or their children.

"We're starting to see student reactions -- students and staff," he said. "People need space to pause and discuss. And one of the best ways we see is to come together and support each other."

Beginning Wednesday, different groups on campus, including the Latin American Cultural Center and the Malcolm X Cultural Center, have been offering group counseling.

The Center for Multicultural Advancement and Student Success in Wilder Hall will also accept appointments for those who wish to speak to a counselor one-on-one. There are also drop-in sessions planned Thursday from 1-2 p.m. in the Engineering Library, on Nov. 16 from 5-6 p.m. in the Campus Center Room 177, and Nov. 22 from 4-5 p.m. in the Recreation Center Wellness Room.

For more information or to schedule counseling sessions, UMass students may call 413-545-2517.

Donald Trump on the campaign trail 2016 28 Gallery: Donald Trump on the campaign trail 2016



Collins said many student populations on campus are left with very real feelings of "grief and anxiety" about the election of Trump leading to a rollback in the areas of civil rights and gay rights.

Those who identify as white, heterosexual and American-born may not necessarily understand that grief and anxiety of those who are not, he said. But that does not make it any less real for those who are experiencing it.

"There's a Native American poem that goes, 'Until you walk a mile in my shoes, you can't understand my life experiences,'" Collins said.

"You may not have the same experience, but you are an empathetic person, you can understand another person's pain," he said.