CONCERNED VETERANS OF AMERICA THANKS SENATOR McCAIN FOR EFFORTS TO PASS HISTORIC VA REFORM LEGISLATION
Washington, D.C. ­– Concerned Veterans of America (CVA), a non-partisan, non-profit organization that advocates for policies on behalf of veterans and their families, wrote to thank Senator John McCain (R-AZ) for his efforts to pass the Veterans’ Access to Care through Choice, Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014. The legislation, which Congress passed last week, includes provisions to begin addressing the most pressing issues raised by the ongoing scandal in veterans’ health care that began with revelations in Phoenix before spreading across the country this year.

In the letter, CVA CEO Pete Heseth writes: “With the Veterans’ Access to Care through Choice, Accountability and Transparency Act set to be signed into law this week – having passed overwhelmingly in both chambers – Concerned Veterans for America (CVA) would like to take the opportunity to thank you for your contributions toward getting this historic legislation passed. Without your efforts, this bill would not have passed – and we are grateful for all your hard work in making it happen.”

The full letter is below.

August 6, 2014

Senator John McCain

241 Russell Senate Office Building

Washington DC 20510-0303

Dear Senator McCain,

With the Veterans’ Access to Care through Choice, Accountability and Transparency Act of 2014 set to be signed into law this week—having passed overwhelmingly in both chambers—Concerned Veterans for America (CVA) would like to take the opportunity to thank you for your contributions toward getting this historic legislation passed. Without your efforts, this bill would not have passed—and we are grateful for all your hard work in making it happen.

As a veteran’s advocacy organization with a presence across the country, CVA believes choice is pivotal in ensuring better healthcare options for veterans while also forcing the Department of Veterans Affairs to better serve veterans needs. We know you have a long history of fighting to give veterans choice when it comes to their health care options, and your efforts during negotiations were pivotal in its inclusion in the final piece of legislation. Again, thank you.

Thank you for your continued efforts in support of America’s veterans. We look forward to working together on future reform efforts at the Department of Veterans Affairs, Department of Defense and elsewhere in our government.

Sincerely,

Pete Hegseth

Chief Executive Officer

Concerned Veterans for America