Obama: ‘What We Said Was, You Could Keep’ Your Health Care Plan, If…
During an appearance in front of supporters at Monday evening’s Organizing for America summit in Washington, D.C., President Obama addressed the critics who are latching on to promises he made over the course of several years about the impact of the Affordable Care Act on those who already have health insurance. “If you like your plan, you can keep it,” Obama said again and again, sometime adding the word “period” at the end.

Now that some Americans are receiving termination notices from insurance companies who are canceling plans that don’t measure up to standards dictated by Obamacare, the administration and its allies have been forced to qualify those promises. Obama delivered his most direct remarks on the issue Monday night in an attempt to defend his previous statements and explain the present situation.

“While virtually every insurer is offering new, better plans and competing for these folks’ business,” Obama said of the people who are losing their current insurance, “I realize that can be scary for people if you just get some notice like that.”

“If you had or have one of these plans before the Affordable Care Act came into law,” the president said, “and you really like that plan, what we said was, you could keep it… if it hasn’t changed since the law’s passed.”

He explained that those people are “grandfathered in” under the Affordable Care Act. “But if the insurance company changes it, then what we’re saying is they’ve got to change it to a higher standard. They’ve got to make it better. They’ve got to improve the quality of the plan that they’re selling.”

“The bottom line is that we are making the insurance market better for everybody,” Obama declared.

Essentially, what President Obama is now saying is that when he promised people they could keep their existing health plans, the missing caveat was: “but if not, the Affordable Care Act will make sure you get a better one.”

Watch video below, via CNN:

[photo via screengrab]

— —

>> Follow Matt Wilstein (@TheMattWilstein) on Twitter

Have a tip we should know? tips@mediaite.com