Medicare Rights Center
Our Mission The Medicare Rights Center is a national, nonprofit consumer service organization that works to ensure access to affordable health care for older adults and people with disabilities through counseling and advocacy, educational programs and public policy initiatives.

Medicare Interactive Available only through the Medicare Rights Center, Medicare Interactive (MI) is a free and independent online reference tool thoughtfully designed to help older adults and people with disabilities navigate the complex world of health insurance. Create your free profile today! National Helpline Through our national telephone helpline (800-333-4114), we provide direct assistance to older adults and people with disabilities as well as their friends, family and caregivers. Learn More

Additional Resources Information about Medicare is available from more sources than ever before, and it can sometimes be difficult to distinguish fact from fiction. Browse other sites that provide quality information and are used by the Medicare Rights staff. Learn More



MI Pro Courses To delve deeper into Medicare, sign up for MI Pro, a new comprehensive online Medicare curriculum which takes you on a guided learning experience. As an MI PRO subscriber, you’ll access exclusive in-depth Medicare content, quizzes to test your progress, and printable learning tools. Keep track of where you left off within each course, and complete coursework at your own pace. View Courses Community Partners Through the Community Partners program, the Medicare Rights Center provides a range of technical assistance over a mutually agreed-upon time period to help partner organizations strengthen their Medicare counseling to clients, with an emphasis on helping clients access low-income programs that help pay the costs related to Medicare. Learn More Medicare Minute Through the Medicare Minute program, the Medicare Rights Center works with host organizations nationally to enlist, train, and track the outcomes of Medicare Minute volunteers as they help their friends and neighbors understand Medicare and related health insurance coverage. Learn More