Andrew Lincoln
Dr. Andrew Lincoln, ScD, MS, is Director of the Sports Medicine Research Center for the MedStar Health Research Institute and Program Coordinator of the MedStar Sports Medicine Concussion Program. He specializes in the epidemiology of concussion and sports injuries and sports health policy, and coordinates research activity for the Sports Science and Safety Committee of US Lacrosse and the NFL Subcommittee on Cardiovascular Health. Dr. Lincoln is considered a national thought leader and leading researcher in the area of youth sports concussion.

Dr. Lincoln is the recipient of the NCAA Research Award and the O'Donoghue Award from the American Orthopaedic Society for Sports Medicine. His publications appear in prominent scientific and medical journals including the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, and the American Journal of Sports Medicine. He serves on the editorial board for several leading medical journals, including Frontiers in Sports Neurology; he has been quoted in national publications, such as USA Today andThe Washington Post. He is actively involved in the American Public Health Association and the American College of Sports Medicine and provides consultation to government, sport governing bodies, and private organizations.

Dr. Lincoln received his bachelor's degree in Engineering Science and Mechanics from Virginia Tech, his master's degree in biomedical engineering from Louisiana Tech, and his doctorate in injury epidemiology from Johns Hopkins University. Dr. Lincoln has adjunct faculty appointments at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health and the Uniformed Services University of Health Sciences, Bethesda, MD.

Research Interests

Dr. Lincoln's current research interests includes

Investigation of the mechanisms of youth sports concussions

Trends in sports-related concussion incidence in high schools

Video analysis of youth sports injuries

Cardiovascular disease risk factors among active and retired professional football players

Epidemiology of youth lacrosse injuries

Evaluation of the protective eyewear mandate in women's lacrosse

Pitching motion and upper extremity injury in professional baseball pitchers

Injury surveillance, treatment, and patient outcomes in public high schools throughout the United States (NATA NATION)

View Dr. Lincoln's publications on PubMed