How Bill O’Reilly got beat up by the girls — and the fight’s not over
Women’s rights groups are celebrating the stunning ouster of cable news king Bill O’Reilly from his job at Fox News.

They credit his downfall to the courage of women who came forward with their sexual harassment allegations and to the hard work activists have put in over the years to bring attention to the toxic nature of sexual harassment in the work place.

At the same time, they say O’Reilly’s ouster was too long in coming — 13 years after he was first publicly accused by a producer of sexually harassing her through a series of explicit phone conversations.

And numerous other disturbing alleged incidents followed — on air and off. O’Reilly, with his show “The O’Reilly Factor” become a top-rated cable news anchor who raked in millions of dollars a year for his longtime network, in part by cultivating an audience that seemed to enjoy his coarse and aggressively anti-PC attitudes toward many things, including women.

In 2015, he was also reported to have physically abused his ex-wife, with his teenage daughter as witness. Then, this past fall, he shamed his network colleague Megyn Kelly on air for revealing her sexual harassment claims against their former boss Roger Ailes.

But the tipping point in O’Reilly’s tenure at Fox News was the explosive New York Times report on April 1, which revealed that the network had paid out $13 million over the years to settle five sexual harassment claims against him.

The report sparked protests outside Fox News headquarters, prompted more than 50 advertisers to bail from his show and stoked simmering outrage among female employees that the network wasn’t really committed to changing its culture after parting ways with Ailes — who was accused by more than 12 women of sexual harassment.

Pushing the momentum toward O’Reilly’s ouster was the “growing power of women, more emboldened than ever before, to protest sexual harassment and assault,” writes Huffington Post reporter Emily Peck.

Those women in turn were motivated by their outrage over the surprise election of Donald Trump as president. In recent days, the president became one of O’Reilly’s chief defenders, calling him a “good person” who didn’t do “anything wrong.”

For Trump to defend O’Reilly is beyond ironic given that the president himself faced multiple allegations of sexually predatory behavior while campaigning and likewise has a history of misogynistic comments. Trump was also caught in a leaked 2005 Hollywood Access video boasting about grabbing women by their genitals and kissing them without consent.

“You’d think that Trump’s election would have sent the message that speaking up doesn’t matter,” Peck continued. “Instead, it galvanized an already growing movement.”

Terry O’Neill, president of the National Organization for Women, joined in celebrating O’Reilly’s “deserved” downfall, saying it was high time that he was “unmasked as a vicious sexual predator.”

Actually, O’Neill acknowledges that the Times story didn’t reveal much new about O’Reilly’s character. His inappropriate behavior was certainly well known within Fox, she said. The New York Times also reported that Fox’s refusal to punish its male star sealed Kelly’s decision to leave the network and go work for NBC.

Kelly, who was considered Fox’s next big star, reportedly told Fox executives that his behavior and comments had a chilling effect on female employees, leaving many doubting that the network was truly committed to changing its culture after forcing Ailes out for his alleged mistreatment of Kelly and other female anchors and employees.

Despite losing Kelly, Fox apparently still viewed O’Reilly as an asset.

And in the age of Trump, O’Reilly seemed even more untouchable, to be “in the catbird’s seat,” the Atlantic’s Alex Wagner said. From his prized primetime platform, O’Reilly could give voice to the same powerful strain of disaffected conservatism that put Donald Trump in the Oval Office.”

In recent weeks, Fox’s continued loyalty to O’Reilly seemed assured when it decided to extend his contract for a for a reported $18 million a year — even as the New York Times was preparing its expose.

To Shauuna Thomas, the co-founder of Ultraviolet, the women’s rights organization that led protests against O’Reilly, Fox’s refusal to abandon O’Reilly much sooner shows that the issue within the network is “bigger than just Bill O’Reilly.”

“For years, Fox News executives, like Bill Shine, have provided cover for systematic sexual harassment and abuse of Fox New’s employees,” Thomas said in a statement. “From Roger Ailes to Bill O’Reilly, Fox News has consistently failed to provide a workplace safe from sexual harassment and abuse — and that’s a big problem.”

Thomas also said Fox wasn’t moved by noble principles or concern for its female employees when it finally took action against O’Reilly. Rather, an investigation showed that O’Reilly could be in trouble for defrauding shareholders by not revealing the payouts to his accusers.

Moreover, it was revealed Thursday that O’Reilly will exit Fox News even wealthier than before, with a sizable safety net in his contract that could net him tens of millions of dollars, according to CNN.

Still, she agreed that O’Reilly’s ouster, along with backlash against Trump’s election, is bringing necessary and long-overdue attention to the problem of sexual harassment in workplaces and in society. In the Atlantic story, she said, “Ultraviolet launched in 2012 and it was hard to even name sexism as a real problem without getting real pushback, even on the left.”

In this way, cultural norms are shifting — for the better. These norms hold that sexual harassment and discrimination don’t belong in modern workplaces.

“This is a watershed moment in our culture, that Roger Ailes and Bill O’Reilly have gone,” said Hearst chief content officer and former Cosmopolitan editor in chief Joanna Coles at a conference Wednesday. “On behalf of all the young women readers I have represented over the years, this is a huge moment.”

With this watershed moment in mind, both Ultraviolet and NOW are demanding a thorough, independent investigation of sexual and racist harassment at Fox News.

“O’Reilly may be out, but this isn’t over,” NOW’s O’Neill said. “The public has the right to know the facts about the toxic culture of harassment that appears to be endemic at the network.”

But whether that kind of awareness and zero-tolerance to harassment can be brought to other realms of society — including the White House — remains to be seen.

Activists have their work cut for them, but they sound committed to push forward, galvanized by O’Reilly’s ouster — a victory that signals progress if not perfection.