Opinion: Neither of HP's founders would have endorsed Fiorina
Craig Barrett, a former CEO of Intel, recently provided an endorsement for Carly Fiorina in this space. He also offered his "suspicion" that my father, Dave Packard, and Bill Hewlett would join him in supporting Carly. Barrett is, of course, entitled to admire anyone of his choice, but he is far beyond his depth in speaking for HP's founders.

Let's not forget that the HP board fired Fiorina early in 2005, and no company has hired her since. When she arrived in 1999, HP earnings per share (adjusted for stock splits) were $1.54. In her last year (2004) they were $1.16.

The Hewlett-Packard Company, which Fiorina renamed HP Invent, had a corporate culture admired around the world. Author Michael Malone called it "the gold standard few enterprises can ever hope to approach." ﻿Barrett mentions three HP values: meaningful innovation, agility and passion for customers. He might have added profitability, which makes everything else possible.

But HP's philosophy of management and treatment of employees is what made it most unique. It is worth quoting this "Corporate Objective" in full:

"HP selects and manages its businesses with a goal of providing long-term employment for its people and opportunities for personal growth and development. In return, HP people are expected to meet certain standards of performance on the job, to adjust to changes in work assignments and schedules when necessary, and to be willing to learn new skills and to apply them where most critically needed."

Advertisement

HP did not promise lifetime employment, but Bill and Dave ﻿repeatedly said they did not want a "hire and fire" company. They deliberately rejected possible business strategies that would lead in this direction. They wanted all their employees to share in the long-term success of their company.

Fiorina's merger with Compaq was explicitly based on eliminating at least 15,000 HP jobs. Barrett says that Fiorina "positioned HP to gain market share and helped transform HP into the largest computer manufacturer in the world." But my father made very clear his views on market share:

"For some reason, we've got this talking about one of our objectives (being) to increase the share of the market, and I want to start right out by telling you that that is not a legitimate management objective of this company, that it leads you to the wrong kind of decisions."

Fiorina's relentless pursuit of size and market share only served her personal ambition to be celebrated as "the most powerful woman in American business." Her fatal failing was her inability to win the respect of HP employees, which stemmed from her inability to trust, empower and motivate these employees.

In the classic movie "Kings Row," an unethical doctor amputates both of Ronald Reagan's legs for no medical reason. Reagan wakes up with his famous line, "Where's the rest of me?" Eventually, with the loving support of his girl (the wonderful Ann Sheridan), he is determined not to let this tragedy ruin his life. But the fact that the patient survived unnecessary surgery does not exonerate the evil doctor.

HP needed a good trainer. It did not need a chain saw.

Barrett says that "refusing to move forward was a recipe for mediocrity." But there are always many ways to move forward. The alternative to Fiorina was not inaction. HP had been effective at meeting new circumstances for 60 years.

HP's current CEO, Mark Hurd, has done a remarkable job reviving the patient. The tragedy is that if Hurd had been made CEO in 1999, he might have helped HP improve its focus and vigor, without causing the devastation Fiorina did.

DAVID W. PACKARD, the son of HP founder Dave Packard, served on the HP board for 12 years and now heads the Packard Humanities Institute and the Stanford Theatre Foundation. He wrote this article for this newspaper.