Analysts: Carly Fiorina long on vision, fell short on execution at HP
WASHINGTON — After she was fired in 2005, Carly Fiorina's stormy tenure as CEO of Hewlett-Packard was widely labeled a failure — marked by a plummeting stock price, a bruising battle with the firm's founding families over her corporate strategy, and mass layoffs at a company revered for its benevolent treatment of employees.

Five years later, Fiorina is running for U.S. Senate, and her business record is back in the spotlight. But a review of her tenure, based on interviews with multiple sources who followed her time at HP closely, paints a more nuanced picture: that of an executive with keen strategic foresight who ultimately was unable to execute her vision.

Fiorina continues to draw negative reviews for her management skills and a leadership style that critics say focused excessively on marketing buzz and flash. Other critics say she destroyed the famous "HP Way," transforming a company built on innovation and valuing its employees into a bottom-line-obsessed behemoth that treats workers like commodities.

"HP just really isn't such a special place anymore," said David Woodley Packard, a former HP board member whose father cofounded the company. "She came in and turned it into something else, and I don't think it was necessary."

Advertisement

But in at least one key respect, Fiorina's reign at the helm of the iconic Silicon Valley firm has been vindicated by time. Her signature move while at HP — a $25 billion megamerger with Compaq that was panned by many observers at the time — has turned out to be a boon for the company, several experts now acknowledge. That acquisition and others undertaken by Fiorina's successor, Mark Hurd, have made Palo Alto-based HP the largest technology company in the world.

"She created a situation where the company could be successful, but it took others to actually make it work," said technology analyst Rob Enderle.

HP record aside, Fiorina faces an enormous political challenge. At a time of record high unemployment in California, she must sell voters on her business savvy while sidestepping criticism that she laid off tens of thousands of workers and sent jobs overseas. She faces former Silicon Valley Congressman Tom Campbell and state Assemblyman Chuck DeVore in the June 8 Republican primary, and the winner will go up against three-term Democratic Sen. Barbara Boxer in the fall.

The Mercury News interviewed a range of informed observers to weigh in on two questions: With five years of perspective to evaluate Fiorina's tenure at HP, how does her record stack up? And what kind of senator might Fiorina be, judging from how she performed at HP?

Fiorina at HP: Thumbs up or down?

If stock price is the ultimate measure of success for a CEO, Fiorina would get a failing grade. During her 51/2-year tenure, HP's stock fell 52 percent. By contrast, the stock price of top competitors IBM and Dell fell 27.5 percent and 3 percent, respectively, and the tech-heavy Nasdaq index fell 26 percent. Although the reasons for her dismissal are still in dispute, the company's poor performance — including multiple quarters of missed profit and revenue targets — was critical.

(Click to enlarge)

But stock performance and earnings only begin to tell the story of Fiorina's time at HP. Any evaluation inevitably circles back to the Compaq acquisition, and on that front the verdict is more mixed.

The merger was one of the most dramatic and closely watched stories of the decade in the valley. After a pitched eight-month battle pitting her against the Hewlett and Packard families, as well as most of HP's work force, Fiorina prevailed in a 2002 proxy vote by a razor-thin margin.

At the time, many business and media analysts called the deal a loser, predicting that it would dilute HP's cash-cow printer business and hitch the company's fortunes to low-margin PCs. Critics called it a desperate move by Fiorina to do something — anything — big, after being hired to shake up HP and failing to pull off a purchase of the consulting arm of PricewaterhouseCoopers.

As it turned out, the acquisition has paid off handsomely. Several analysts say it has given the company a commanding presence in the PC and server markets and allowed it to become a one-stop shop for many companies' computing needs. HP has since overtaken Dell as the top PC seller and become the world's biggest technology company by revenue, which reached $115 billion in 2009.

"Simply put, Carly made tough decisions to reform the company that were criticized at the time, but HP and its shareholders are now reaping the rewards," Fiorina campaign materials say. In an interview, she called herself "a successful CEO who transformed a company during a very difficult time."

But several analysts say that while the Compaq purchase worked, it is far from clear that the company would have reached its current heights had she remained CEO. They say Fiorina deserves credit for her strategic vision, but that it took someone with better operational skills — namely, her successor, Hurd — to realize the merger's potential.

While Fiorina's early work integrating HP and Compaq exceeded expectations — early cost savings outpaced estimates by $1 billion — she lost focus after that initial phase, experts said. That led to repeated missed earnings targets and credibility issues with Wall Street, problems that contributed to Fiorina's dismissal.

Some critics said she became caught up in high-level strategy and high-profile marketing events to create buzz (such as appearing on stage at a trade show with pop singer Gwen Stefani a month before her firing), rather than homing in on the nitty-gritty operational issues that ultimately would determine whether the deal would pay off.

"If HP hadn't done the Compaq deal, I believe it would've become a printer company almost entirely — a shell of what it is today," said Charles House, co-author of "The HP Phenomenon," which is based on interviews with dozens of former and current HP executives. Fiorina, he said, "is taking credit for something she launched and got started. But I think you obviously have to give a hell of a lot of credit to (Hurd) for making it successful. I'd be loath to say it would be the same with her there."

Or, as former Compaq Chairman Benjamin Rosen wrote in a 2008 blog post praising the merger: "She made it happen. But while she did the deal, she simply did not have the skills to manage one of the world's largest technology companies."

What would Fiorina be like as a senator?

Fiorina has frequently blamed venture capitalist Tom Perkins for helping to orchestrate her firing. The former HP director denies it, but he hasn't been shy about criticizing Fiorina's management skills. "We've exchanged a few brickbats," he said in an interview.

But after Fiorina announced her Senate candidacy, Perkins gave her the maximum campaign contribution and hosted a fundraiser for her. The reason is simple: While the two butted heads at HP, he believes Fiorina would be a very good senator.

Unlike a governor or mayor in charge of managing a large bureaucracy, Perkins said, senators "don't run anything. They're focused on policy matters and strategies for the country, which I think she would be really good at. And she's a terrific communicator, which is also important."

Aside from her polished speaking skills and commanding stage presence, others said Fiorina's firsthand knowledge of business would be a major asset in Congress.

"In terms of strategic clarity, I think she would be one of the finer minds in Congress, especially on issues involving the economy and business," said House, the author.

Fiorina's willingness to challenge HP's work culture showed she's able to make unpopular decisions, admirers say. And they say she displayed toughness and tenacity in pushing through the Compaq merger in the face of fierce resistance — attributes that could serve her well in political office.

"She has an urgent personality times 10," said Tom Peters, a business management expert and author.

But others contend that Fiorina betrayed a lack of political savvy and an inability to inspire lasting loyalty. Her poor relationship with HP's work force is particularly telling, critics say.

After Fiorina arrived at HP and dazzled employees with her charisma and promises of a bright future, workers became disillusioned as they learned that her recipe for revamping HP entailed mass layoffs imposed with blunt, no-nonsense resolve. All told, about 33,000 employees were laid off during Fiorina's tenure, according to HP filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

At one point HP was forced to take down an employee message board teeming with anti-Fiorina screeds, and workers at one branch celebrated her firing by handing out Hostess Ding-Dongs and chanting, "Ding-dong, the witch is dead!" according to Michael Malone, author of "Bill & Dave: How Hewlett and Packard Built the World's Greatest Company."

In an interview, Malone said Fiorina's focus on burnishing her own image at HP suggests she would have a hard time building alliances with other senators.

Fiorina also displayed questionable political instincts in her dealings with HP's board of directors leading up to her firing. Fiorina has said she was stunned by her dismissal, but according to Perkins, dissatisfaction with her performance had been building for months. He said Fiorina probably could have saved her job had she shown more flexibility with board members, who he said were pushing Fiorina to find executives to improve the company's operations. But Fiorina, perhaps not wanting to be seen as weak, refused to budge, Perkins said.

"I think she believed that part of being a strong CEO was not letting the board of directors walk all over her," Perkins said. "But on the other hand, the board of directors is the boss, and sooner or later if you can't agree on things, somebody's got to budge, and it isn't going to be the board."

Mercury News staff writers Ken McLaughlin and Chris O'Brien contributed to this report. Contact Mike Zapler at 202-662-8921.