Definition of Climate by Merriam-Webster
living in a cold climate These trees only grow in humid climates. The country's climate is ideal for growing grapes. the humid climate of Malaysia A climate of fear prevails in the city. the country's changing economic climate The company is trying to develop a positive climate for innovation.

Recent Examples on the Web

Amazon, which has been criticized for not doing more to fight climate change, earlier this year announced plans to make half of all its shipments carbon-neutral by 2030. Alain Sherter, CBS News, "Amazon shows off new delivery drone that flies like a helicopter and a plane," 5 June 2019

The lawsuit says the young are more vulnerable to serious effects from climate change in the future. Andrew Selsky, Anchorage Daily News, "Federal court weighs whether human-influenced climate change violates children’s rights," 5 June 2019

There’s no contradiction: As California utilities buy more and more solar power as part of the state’s quest to confront climate change, supply and demand are increasingly out of sync. Sammy Roth, latimes.com, "California has too much solar power. That might be good for ratepayers," 5 June 2019

Alaska Anchorage: The rapid melting of glaciers because of climate change has created a new market for Alaska’s tour operators. USA TODAY, "Painting over history, saving cats’ claws, angry birds: News from around our 50 states," 5 June 2019

Ronnie Citron-Fink is the editorial director for the Environmental Defense Fund’s Moms Clean Air Force, a national organization of over a million people uniting to protect children’s health by combating the urgent crisis of climate change. Longreads, "True Roots," 5 June 2019

Germany certainly does not approve of American fracking or its abandonment of the Iran deal and the Paris climate accord. Victor Davis Hanson, National Review, "Is Germany Becoming Germany — Again?," 4 June 2019

Warren's plan calls for fighting climate change by investing in research as well as manufacturing products in the United States using environmentally friendly processes. Keith Matheny, Detroit Free Press, "Presidential candidates Elizabeth Warren, Jay Inslee campaign in pivotal Michigan," 4 June 2019

The cost of inaction on climate change is unfathomable. Jon Goldin-dubois, The Denver Post, "Guest Commentary: Colorado, and others in the West, lead the way on reducing carbon emissions," 4 June 2019

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'climate.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.