Definition of Bankrupt by Merriam-Webster
As a lawyer, she specialized in working with bankrupts.

Recent Examples on the Web: Noun

That perception came back to bite in big way later in 2008, with the failure of investment bank Lehman Brothers, which went bankrupt on Sept. 15, 2008. Michael S. Derby, WSJ, "New York Fed Says It Wound Down Crisis Bailout Facility With $2.5 Billion Profit," 18 Sep. 2018

After earning $17 million, the men declared the company bankrupt. Jacob Bernstein, New York Times, "The Great Interview Magazine Caper," 16 June 2018

Tarsila, bankrupt, divorced from de Andrade and increasingly Marxist, would veer into a more politically engaged style. Jason Farago, New York Times, "She Led Latin American Art in a Bold New Direction," 15 Feb. 2018

Alitalia was officially declared bankrupt in May, when staff rejected a restructuring plan. Stephen Wilmot, WSJ, "Airline Dealmaking Won’t Cure Europe’s Profit Problem," 2 Aug. 2017

The business, which went bankrupt in previous incarnations in 2005 and 2009, may still find a way to restructure its debt out of court. Lauren Coleman-lochner, Bloomberg.com, "Winn-Dixie and Tops Owners Are Said to Prepare for Bankruptcy," 17 Feb. 2018

Prior to the label going bankrupt, PolyGram Records purchased 50 percent of Def Jam, and took control of distribution to save the label. Michael Saponara, Billboard, "A Timeline of the Major Events That Defined Def Jam's Legacy in Hip-Hop," 25 Jan. 2018

By Preston Turegano, Staff writer A new era begins today for the once bankrupt and demoralized San Diego Symphony. sandiegouniontribune.com, "Record symphony gift," 14 Jan. 2018

The family sold the company in 1968 to Southland Dairy, which went bankrupt in the early 1990s. Julia Terruso, Philly.com, "Kensington's giant milk bottle gets historic designation," 12 Jan. 2018

Recent Examples on the Web: Adjective

Marvel’s Fantastic Four, on the other hand, once went bankrupt and were evicted from their skyscraper headquarters. Jeremy Dauber And Danny Fingeroth, WSJ, "The Superhero of the Comics Business," 16 Nov. 2018

Buy Photo Years after the city nearly went bankrupt and fell under state control, Harrisburg is finally in a good place financially, state and local officials agree. Michaelle Bond, Philly.com, "How Pa.'s 'distressed' program helps towns; and why it's hard to leave it," 16 Mar. 2018

In response, the company is accelerating its store remodels in areas where bankrupt retailers once had stores. Anne D'innocenzio, The Seattle Times, "Retailers aim to pick up business from defunct, dying rivals," 21 Nov. 2018

As with virtually all post-hurricane disaster relief in Puerto Rico, the work is contracted and paid for by bankrupt local agencies using money disbursed by FEMA from billions appropriated by Congress. Michael Weissenstein And Danica Coto, Fox News, "Turmoil slows rebuilding of Puerto Rico's power grid," 19 July 2018

Others see it as an appropriately scornful term for a woman who was barely literate, left little for other women to emulate and led the bankrupt Qing dynasty to its downfall in a country whose government remains as male-dominated as ever. New York Times, "Was This Powerful Chinese Empress a Feminist Trailblazer?," 10 July 2018

Alden Global Capital took control of The Denver Post in 2013 after acquiring its bankrupt parent, MediaNews Group, and runs it through a subsidiary, Digital First Media. BostonGlobe.com, "Trade war fears aren’t hurting stock market," 17 June 2018

The former students attended the career-training colleges Everest, Heald and WyoTech, which the bankrupt Corinthian sold off in 2014. Nanette Asimov, SFChronicle.com, "Students of defunct Corinthian Colleges to get millions in loan refunds," 14 June 2018

Alicia Silverstone, 41 and loving it, stars as Bonnie, a wife and mother who kicks her cheating husband out of the house and soon discovers how easily her world shuns a bankrupt divorcée with no job skills. Hank Stuever, chicagotribune.com, "'Sharp Objects,' 'Yellowstone' and other new shows worth a look this summer," 14 June 2018

Recent Examples on the Web: Verb

Cat bonds emerged in the mid-1990s, after Hurricane Andrew ravaged the Florida coast and bankrupted nearly a dozen insurance companies, which didn’t have the money to cover such a massive storm. latimes.com, "Mexico's disaster bonds were meant to provide quick cash after hurricanes and earthquakes. But it often hasn’t worked out that way," 8 Apr. 2018

Some even predict that so many small startups will be bankrupted by the compliance costs, there might be a bit of a pot property bubble, which will lead to underpriced assets and consolidation. Patrick Sisson, Curbed, "Cannabis, coworking, and the marijuana-industry land rush," 24 July 2018

Not so for your typical startup, however, which might be bankrupted by the cost. Hiawatha Bray, BostonGlobe.com, "Calif.’s Net privacy law gives consumers more clout, and Big Tech may be just fine with that," 1 July 2018

China’s move to begin hoarding the fiber eight years ago pushed cotton prices above $2 a pound in 2011, bankrupting some mills and merchants globally. Julie Wernau, WSJ, "China Becoming a Major Buyer of U.S. Cotton After Years of Stockpiling," 10 June 2018

The Obama administration’s regulatory response bankrupted some institutions. New York Times, "With Legislation Stalled, DeVos Moves to Wield Deregulatory Power," 31 May 2018

Middleton has said his sisters wanted to liquidate their ownership stakes in the cigar company because of the threat of lawsuits or new regulations that could bankrupt the company, leaving him to take the risk of owning it alone. Bob Fernandez, Philly.com, "Philly law firm Schnader Harrison, lawyer sued in Middleton brother-sister feud over billions," 26 June 2018

That means that an accident or illness could still bankrupt you. Liz Weston, latimes.com, "When a Social Security spousal benefit goof is suspected," 17 June 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'bankrupt.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.