Definition of Plagiarize by Merriam-Webster
He plagiarized a classmate's report. She plagiarized from an article she read on the Internet.

Recent Examples on the Web

So where some companies might meet a deadline by hiring more employees or implementing crunch hours, NURV is stuck crafting schemes to plagiarize these super coders’ work. Adi Robertson, The Verge, "Looking back at Antitrust, the movie where Bill Gates murders coders," 7 Sep. 2018

The website also hired one of the major promoters of the Pizzagate conspiracy theory (who then plagiarized from Unite the Right leader Jason Kessler), and Levant has appeared on Alex Jones’s Infowars show. Jane Coaston, Vox, "Steve King endorses a bona fide white supremacist for Toronto mayor," 18 Oct. 2018

Some have noted a sort of pastiche effect in the G70’s styling—a little of the Infiniti Q50 here, a lot of the Alfa Romeo Giulia there, a ventral chrome accent nearly plagiarized from the BMW. Dan Neil, WSJ, "Genesis G70: A Hyundai Spinoff You Can Proudly Drive," 12 Dec. 2018

Your Content does not plagiarize or otherwise infringe any third party copyright, moral rights or any other intellectual property rights or similar rights. Harper's BAZAAR, "Reader Submission Terms and Community Guidelines," 13 Jan. 2015

Is anybody working on a script about Mr. Biden plagiarizing speeches by Neil Kinnock? Matthew Hennessey, WSJ, "Cheney Biopic ‘Vice’ Has Few Virtues," 4 Oct. 2018

Hinostroza managed to ascend to the country's Supreme Court despite accusations of previous misconduct, including having allegedly plagiarized his thesis and a book that bears his name. Fox News, "Peru judicial chief resigns in latest scandal rocking Peru," 19 July 2018

The fledgling group, which has just 36 members, is also encouraging universities to make greater efforts to detect plagiarism—such as by installing software that can detect plagiarized material—and to penalize those who copy. Linda Nordling, Science | AAAS, "In Nigeria, a battle against academic plagiarism heats up," 27 June 2018

In North Carolina, Deberry’s candidacy hit a speed bump in March, when she was accused of plagiarizing pieces of Krasner’s campaign website. Chris Palmer, Philly.com, "6 months in, Philly DA Larry Krasner cementing national stature among reform advocates," 12 June 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'plagiarize.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.