Definition of Vacation by Merriam-Webster
The university will be closed for Christmas vacation.

When are you taking vacation this year?

Recent Examples on the Web: Noun

Ten months ago, the 24-year-old x-ray technician cobbled together sick days and vacation days, plus three weeks of unpaid leave, to recover from childbirth and take care of her baby. Chloe Angyal, Marie Claire, "The Cost of Child Care Is Crushing American Families. What Will the Presidential Candidates Do About It?," 15 Apr. 2019

Working out all of the details of a getaway like that — where to stay, what to see, which guides to use — can make your fantasy vacation feel like work. Lauren Hubbard, Town & Country, "6 Luxury Pre-Planned Trips You Need to Book Immediately," 15 Mar. 2019

Planned vacation days for officers were canceled, fencing was erected to separate the two sides and trucks were used to block roads near the protest sites. Darcy Costello, The Courier-Journal, "Anti-ICE rally surges in face of 'patriot' militia group counterprotest," 7 July 2018

All over Europe, workers are guaranteed 20 paid vacation days off, and usually get more. Nestor Ramos, BostonGlobe.com, "The Fourth of July falls on a Wednesday this year. And that presents some . . . challenges," 2 July 2018

The district will pay out his 35 vacation days and there is a non-disparagement clause included as well. Kathleen Mcwilliams, Courant Community, "Newington Superintendent Resigns," 26 June 2018

In summer, Barbara earned 25 cents a day helping her grandmother clean vacation homes. James R. Hagerty, WSJ, "Barbara Gardner Proctor Became a Role Model for African-American Women," 25 Jan. 2019

When Sabrina Albanese was enlisted to design a family vacation home on southern Ontario’s Lake Simcoe, her clients' requests were simple: comfortable, colorful and creative. Lucia Tonelli, ELLE Decor, "A Vivacious Canadian Lake House With a Joyful Sense of Irreverence," 24 Dec. 2018

The added vacation day isn't permanent and only applies to this year, but the Oval Office has traditionally granted this extra paid time-off when Christmas Eve falls on a Monday. Caroline Picard, Good Housekeeping, "Here's What It Means That Christmas Eve Is a Federal Holiday This Year," 21 Dec. 2018

Recent Examples on the Web: Verb

This isn't the first time the group has vacationed together, of course. Abby Gardner, Glamour, "Priyanka Chopra, Sophie Turner, Nick Jonas, and Joe Jonas Are on Another Fabulous Vacation Together," 26 Mar. 2019

Gillum vacationed at a luxury resort in Costa Rica in May 2016 with Corey, as well as another investor in the Edison. Gary Fineout, The Seattle Times, "New documents contradict Florida Democratic nominee Gillum," 23 Oct. 2018

The singer was spotted on June 27, vacationing with boyfriend Matthew Hussey in Barcelona. Avery Matera, Teen Vogue, "Camila Cabello Wore a Scarf as a Top in Barcelona With Boyfriend Matthew Hussey," 28 June 2018

In Arizona in 2015, a riot broke out in a private prison where previously three inmates had escaped and murdered a vacationing couple. Timothy Williams And Richard A. Oppel Jr., New York Times, "Escapes, Riots and Beatings. But States Can’t Seem to Ditch Private Prisons.," 10 Apr. 2018

The body was found floating in the surf near Juan Creek by a couple that was vacationing along the coast, the sheriff's office said. Tina Burnside, CNN, "Body found in ocean near site of Hart family crash," 7 Apr. 2018

The family even vacationed all together in Italy this year. Victoria Rodriguez, Seventeen, "Everything You Need to Know About Kourtney Kardashian's Boyfriend Younes Bendjima," 18 July 2018

A year after the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel brought to light a suspicious drowning and other troubling accounts from tourists vacationing at upscale all-inclusive resorts in Mexico, the stories continue to surface. Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, "Terrifying stories from tourists in Mexico continue a year after mysterious drowning," 27 June 2018

Though the location hasn’t been disclosed, the Canadian resort where the royal couple was rumored to be vacationing denied that Harry and Meghan had booked a stay there. Dana Rose Falcone, PEOPLE.com, "How Prince Harry and Meghan Markle Secretly Squeezed in a 2-Week Honeymoon," 11 June 2018

These example sentences are selected automatically from various online news sources to reflect current usage of the word 'vacation.' Views expressed in the examples do not represent the opinion of Merriam-Webster or its editors. Send us feedback.