Meet Our Staff
.

Adrienne O'Neil is a part-time Office Support Specialist at MHA and a full-time student at UW-Milwaukee pursuing a degree in Social Work. Adrienne has also worked as a child care provider for MHA's Strong Families Healthy Homes program. (414) 336-7970 or adrienne@mhawisconsin.org.

Anne Fojut is a part time Family Advocate in the Strong Families Healthy Homes program. Anne was an intern with SFHH and excelled in that role. She has a Master’s of Science in Community Counseling from Mount Mary College. (414) 336-7984 or anne@mhawisconsin.org.

Cara Hansen is the Information and Assistance Coordinator for Mental Health America of Wisconsin (MHA). She has been employed at MHA since 2001. In her current role, Cara provides information and referral to mental health and wellness resources and is responsible for the MHA website and resource directories. Prior to her current position, Cara served as the Community Outreach & Education Coordinator for MHA. (414) 336-7969 or cara@mhawisconsin.org.

Christye Johnson is a graduate of the Strong Families Healthy Homes Program (SFHH). She has since been hired to work as a Parent Peer Specialist. Christye embraces the recovery and person-centered philosophy of the SFHH program. (414) 336-7966 or parentpeer@mhawisconsin.org parentpeer@mhawisconsin.org.

Coming soon. (715) 551-0966 or traeders@charter.net.

Karissa Vogel is the Program Manager for the Strong Families Healthy Homes program. She graduated with a Bachelor's Degree in Psychology and Criminology/Law Studies from Marquette University and a Master's Degree in Social Work from UW-Madison. Karissa has many years of experience working with children and families, as well as adults with severe and persistent mental illnesses. (414) 336-7964 or karissa@mhawisconsin.org.

As President/CEO, Kristina is responsible for the organization's consistent achievement of its mission and financial objectives. Included in this responsibility is program development and administration, agency communication and marketing, advocacy, budget development and oversight, fund development and employee management. Previously, Kristina was the Director of Programs for MHA where she oversaw the Milwaukee-based programs. Kristina has worked in the mental health field for the past 10 years. She has experience working with inner city youth, families and those with mental illness, as well as developing and implementing curriculum and programs that fit the needs of these populations. Prior to MHA, Kristina served as a Grievance and Appeals Specialist for the State of Arizona. In that role, she advocated for the rights of consumers by educating clients and training providers. Kristina has also spent some time as a Youth Counselor and School Social Worker in both Milwaukee and the City of Phoenix. (414) 336-7963 or kristina@mhawisconsin.org.

Martina Gollin-Graves, MSW, APSW, is the Project and Outreach Manager at MHA. Martina manages all agency project objectives by planning and evaluating project activities; providing local and statewide mental health and suicide prevention presentations; and holding conferences and trainings for businesses, community organizations and schools. She assists in collaborative projects, and coordinates the Survivors Helping Survivors support groups. Martina previously worked with families in the Strong Families Healthy Homes program providing advocacy and education for parents and children with mental illness; crisis stabilization; and facilitation of psychoeducation groups. (414) 336-7972 or martina@mhawisconsin.org.

Shel Gross has been Director of Public Policy for Mental Health America of Wisconsin (MHA) since 2000. Shel was Project Manager for Wisconsin’s Garrett Lee Smith Youth Suicide Prevention Grant from 2006-2010 and also serves as Project Manager for a State Prevention/Early Intervention grant, which also focuses on youth suicide prevention. Shel chairs the Wisconsin Council on Mental Health and its Legislative and Policy Committee, and is on the steering committee for Wisconsin United for Mental Health, a statewide anti-stigma initiative. He is a past board member of the Wisconsin Prevention Network and co-chair of the Survival Coalition of Wisconsin Disability Organizations. Shel holds a Master's Degree in Public Policy from the LaFollette Institute for Public Affairs at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and has more than 35 years of experience in the mental health field. Prior to joining MHA he worked for ten years in the Wisconsin Medicaid program. (608) 250-4368 or shelgross@tds.net.