Cantor Makes GOP Pitch to Obama
WASHINGTON- Rep. Eric I. Cantor, R-7th, said he told President Barack Obama at the White House Friday that the economic stimulus bill now in the House is too much like "old Washington."



At the meeting with bipartisan congressional leaders, Obama sought to ease Republican resistance to the economic stimulus bill, while Cantor, the No. 2 House Republican, presented GOP alternatives. Those ideas include reducing the tax rate on the lowest income earners and cutting spending.



"You have so much spending in the bill," Cantor said he told Obama. "It's almost like how Washington always behaves."



Cantor said some lawmakers are trying to "take advantage of the crisis" by tossing pet projects into the $825 billion package that's supposed to be aimed at creating jobs. Cantor cited $300,000 for a Miami sculpture garden.



"This is serious. We need to act like it," Cantor said after the meeting.



Cantor sat at the end of the table in the Roosevelt Room, five seats to the right of Obama, who sat in the middle.



"I don't think the House bill meets the standards" Obama set, Cantor said he told the president, who wants the economic stimulus bill on his desk by Feb. 16.



The White House is expected to meet with House Republicans again next week, as Cantor has requested, but the House may have voted on the plan by then.



Republicans want the bill to eliminate taxes on unemployment benefits and give a $7,500 tax credit to homebuyers who can make a 5 percent down-payment.



With Republicans in the minority, they may have the best shot at getting their small business tax cut plan in the bill, Cantor said. Those businesses would get a tax deduction equal to 20 percent of their income under the GOP plan.



Asked how receptive Obama was to his ideas, Cantor said, "He did not close any doors."



Speaker Nancy Pelosi called the Republican ideas constructive and said they would be reviewed.



Cantor was rebuffed Thursday on the House floor by Democratic Leader Steny Hoyer when he asked that Republicans be allowed to submit unlimited amendments to the stimulus bill when it is debated in the House.



"Bills ... never come to the floor that way," Hoyer said.



(Contact Neil H. Simon at nsimon@mediageneral.com)