TRUMP NATIONAL - BEDMINSTER IS RECIPIENT OF FIRST ANNUAL MGA CLUB ENVIRONMENTAL AWARD
HARRISON, N.Y. (March 22, 2007) - The Metropolitan Golf Association Foundation is pleased to announce Trump National Golf Club in Bedminster, N.J., as the recipient of the first annual MGA Club Environmental Award. The award honors an MGA member club that has demonstrated environmental stewardship through golf course maintenance, construction, education and research. The award was presented at the 2007 MGA/USGA Green Chairmen Education Series and Club Environmental Award Luncheon on Wednesday, March 21, at Willow Ridge Country Club in Harrison, N.Y.

Applications from a number of MGA member clubs were submitted to the award panel and Trump National GC - Bedminster came away with the highest total score in the six categories under review: water quality and quantity, education, outreach, Integrated Pest Management, wildlife and other awards received.

“Along with our roster of outstanding member clubs, and our rich traditions, the MGA is very proud that many of our leading clubs and their talented superintendents lead the way with innovative programs and practices to enhance our environment,” said MGA Assistant Executive Director/Tournament Director Gene Westmoreland.

Trump National, represented at the seminar by director of grounds Greg Nicoll, CGCS, has been an environmental leader among Met Area clubs. Through the leadership of Donald J. Trump, Nicoll has implemented an environmental strategy that has resulted in the preservation of a dedicated 45 acre grassland bird habitat on the property, as well as intensive erosion control and stream stabilization management plan. The impacts of golf construction and operations on this land have resulted in a significant environmental net gain from the previous land use. Trump National has made itself readily available to Bedminster Township officials by way of monthly meetings to keep them up to date on the club’s environmental monitoring activities.

The construction of an additional 18 holes at Trump National is underway and the club has successfully integrated environmental awareness into their golf course maintenance and construction plans by maintaining more stringent standards than those required by state and local regulations.

“All of the applicants were very qualified,” said Matt Ceplo, superintendent at Rockland CC and president of the Metropolitan Golf Course Superintendents Association. “The superintendents are grateful for the MGA’s recognition of area golf courses and what we do for the environment.”

The panel of judges was drawn from local superintendent’s organizations as well as environmental leaders in the industry. The panel included: Edgewood CC superintendent Paul Dotti; Matt Ceplo of Rockland CC; Joe Alonzi of Westchester CC; Greg Stanley of The Bridge; Larry Pakkala of Woodway CC; Joellen Zeh, Programs Manager at the Audubon Cooperative Sanctuary Programs; and Dr. Frank Rossi, professor of turfgrass science at Cornell University. Two MGA representatives were also on the panel: Assistant Executive Director/Tournament Director Gene Westmoreland and Arthur Weber, a member of the MGA Green Committee and USGA Green Section Committee.

For more information on the MGA Club Environmental Award please contact Gene Westmoreland of the MGA via e-mail at gwestmore@mgagolf.org or by phone at (914) 347-4653.