Employ Miami-Dade
Training - Individuals who have completed one of the Employ Miami-Dade training programs.

- Individuals who have completed one of the Employ Miami-Dade training programs. Placements - Individuals placed on a job as a result of a job referral in one of the Employ Miami-Dade Program targeted industries (Construction, Hospitality or Culinary).

Training

Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) 10 Certification

National Center for Construction Education Research (NCCER) Certification

Basic Tool Kit

Books, Materials and Supplies

Education and leadership

Career and social development

Resume writing

Mock interviews

Our Goals

Connect employers with potential workers.

Provide the skills training necessary to prepare our residents to enter the workforce.

Ensure that Miami-Dade residents are first in line to be considered for jobs.

Become a Business Partner

Miami-Dade County Mayor Carlos A. Gimenez, CareerSource South Florida, Neighbors and Neighbors Association (NANA) and other local agencies have partnered to offer construction, hospitality, culinary, private security and information technology trainings to help put eligible Miami-Dade County residents back to work.Employ Miami-Dade now has a mobile application. Download the app today from the Apple Store or Google Play to search for jobs from your mobile device.For more information contact CareerSource South Florida, City of Miami Center at Lindsey Hopkins, 750 NW 20 St., 4th Floor, Miami, 33127 or call 305-372-8300.For more information contact Neighbors And Neighbors Association, 180 NW 62 St., Miami, 33150 or call 305-756-0605.The Employ Miami-Dade project will focus on the targeted industry sectors of the One Community One Goal strategic plan, where employment growth is essential to making this project a success. The goal is to increase employment opportunities that will help residents become self-sufficient in Miami-Dade.Employ Miami-Dade has three goals:Employ Miami-Dade is an initiative introduced and led by Mayor Carlos A. Gimenez to develop innovative ways to bridge the divide between industry and job seekers.Are you a business owner in the Construction, Hospitality, Culinary, Private Security or Information Technology industries interested in working with Miami-Dade County and community partners to help make a difference in our community? Call CareerSource South Florida at 305-372-8300 to find out how to register your business.