Ex-Broward School Board member Beverly Gallagher gets 37 months for bribery
Ex-Broward School Board member Beverly Gallagher was sentenced to 37 months in prison on Wednesday at the Federal Courthouse in Fort Lauderdale.

Beverly Gallagher, the PTA-mom-turned-politician who served on the Broward School Board for almost a decade, was sentenced Wednesday to three years and one month in federal prison.

A remorseful and weeping Gallagher, who in March pleaded guilty to bribery, stood before U.S. District Judge James Cohn in the Fort Lauderdale federal courthouse and apologized.

``I'm just so sorry,'' she said, crying. ``I never meant for this to happen. It was a huge mistake. I know I need to be punished for it.

``I let down all my constituents and the office I thought to be a privilege.''

Gallagher did not speak to reporters outside the courtroom, which she left surrounded by her supporters: her three adult children and her granddaughter's father.

Her sentencing marks the end of the second of three high-profile corruption cases involving Broward politicians arrested on the same day in September. The FBI stings caused a tumult in a county previously seen as cleaner than neighboring Miami-Dade.

``Ms. Gallagher sold her office, and she betrayed the trust of the parents and teachers of the Broward schools support system for her own personal gain,'' U.S. Attorney Wifredo Ferrer said after the sentencing. ``Corrupt public officials, elected or appointed, are on notice today.''

Gallagher, 51, was also sentenced to three years of supervised release after she gets out of prison.

Gallagher, a Democrat, was elected to the Broward School Board in 2000 after years of volunteering at her children's schools and working as a substitute teacher. Her signature issues on the board became legislative policies and building schools in her then-booming Southwest Broward district.

Over the course of a federal investigation that lasted several years, Gallagher took $9,000 from undercover agents posing as consultants for contractors looking to break into the Broward school district's construction business. There were four payoffs, including one Gallagher slipped into a restaurant doggie bag.

She was arrested Sept. 23 and later charged with bribery, extortion and five counts of fraud. She pleaded guilty only to bribery under a plea agreement negotiated with prosecutors.

``I've embarrassed myself,'' Gallagher told the judge. ``I've embarrassed my family, my children, my parents . . . The embarrassment, I can't stand it.''

``Over the past couple years I've really turned into a Beverly I didn't recognize,'' she added, asking the judge not to keep her away very long from her elderly parents and 1-year-old granddaughter.

Judge Cohn recommended a sentence at the low end of guidelines calling for 37 to 46 months in prison. With good behavior, Gallagher could get out in 31 or 32 months, said her attorney, David Bogenschutz.

Prosecutors and Bogenschutz had asked that Gallagher serve 37 months because she cooperated with investigators and had no previous criminal record.

Bogenschutz had also asked that Gallagher be sent to a minimum-security prison with a drug-abuse program. In court documents released last week, Gallagher said she binged on alcohol during the past four years, briefly abused pain pills and suffered from depression.

The judge did not recommend residential drug-abuse treatment but instead a nonresidential program, available at any prison.

``I am concerned that she does have a problem,'' Cohn said, but not one that requires a lengthy residential program.

Prosecutors said before Gallagher was released on a $100,000 personal surety bond after her arrest that a federal officer asked her whether she had a substance abuse program, and she said no.

``So at least at that point in time, in Ms. Gallagher's mind, there was no problem,'' Cohn said.

Michael Brannon, a psychologist, testified in Gallagher's defense that she suffers from long-term depression and a serious alcohol dependency.

``I would characterize it as severe,'' he said of her alcohol abuse. ``And most difficult to treat because it's episodic.''

Gallagher will surrender voluntarily on July 2 to whatever prison she is assigned to by the federal Bureau of Prisons. Bogenschutz asked that she be sent to a minimum-security women's prison in Bryan, Texas.

Cohn could have also fined Gallagher, but did not do so, citing her troubled finances. After her arrest, Gallagher lost her School Board post and her job at the nonprofit blood bank.

Gallagher was arrested the same day as two other Broward Democrats: former County Commissioner Josephus Eggelletion, who is serving a 2 ½-year sentence for money laundering, and former Miramar City Commissioner Fitzroy Salesman, who awaits sentencing after a jury convicted him of bribery and extortion.