Congressional redistricting law taken to court
Less than 24 hours after its surprise passage, a constitutional amendment that restricts state lawmakers when they draw new congressional districts was challenged in court by two members of Congress.

The amendment, along with a similar proposal concerning state legislative districts that is not under legal challenge, passed with nearly 63 percent of the vote Tuesday despite polls indicating both would fail.

In filing suit against the state just before 2 a.m. Wednesday, U.S. Reps. Mario Diaz-Balart, R-Miami, and Corrine Brown, D-Jacksonville, leveled two basic claims against Amendment 6:

• Florida voters can't change the standards for congressional district-drawing because the issue is governed by the U.S. Constitution, not the Florida Constitution.

• Because Amendment 6 prohibits lawmakers from intending to favor incumbents when they draw districts, it violates the federal Voting Rights Act, which requires lawmakers to weigh incumbency to ensure that already elected minority legislators remain in power.

``You can't take that out of the mix,'' said Stephen Cody, a Palmetto Bay lawyer for Diaz-Balart and Brown.

J. Gerald Hebert, a Voting Rights Act expert and supporter of both redistricting amendments, says the lawsuit is ``frivolous and misleading.''

``They're misinterpreting the Voting Rights Act,'' he said. ``It protects voters, not incumbent politicians.'' Approval of the two proposals was a rare bright spot for Democrats on Tuesday in an election that saw Republicans pick up four new members of Congress and veto-proof majorities in the Legislature and narrowly hold onto the Governor's Mansion.

The once-a-decade redistricting effort is the essence of political power-brokering. The ruling party tries to draw districts that spread its voters throughout more districts, while the minority party's voters are packed into relatively few districts.

The process is slated to begin as soon as December when lawmakers receive U.S. Census data that could give Florida two more seats in Congress. The new maps will be crucial for both parties, as Republicans hope to maintain lopsided legislative and congressional majorities. Democrats hope the new restrictions will result in more competitive races.

Cody said he hopes for an expedited ruling on Wednesday's challenge so legislators will know what laws to follow when they draw the new maps.

The lawsuit targets restrictions on drawing congressional districts addressed in Amendment 6. There are not yet challenges to Amendment 5, which put similar restrictions on drawing state-level districts.

The text of the amendments sounds straightforward, saying no district shall be drawn ``with the intent to favor or disfavor a political party or an incumbent'' and that districts shall not deny minorities the ability to ``elect representatives of their choice.''

The amendments also say that lawmakers can't violate federal law when they draw the districts.

``We're tired of politicians picking their voters,'' said Ellen Freidin, chairwoman of Fair Districts Florida, which sponsored the amendments. ``In a democracy, people should pick their politicians.''

But opponents say the amendments are simply a sneaky way for Democrats and liberals to sue over the districts.

``This is about intent. Anytime you start talking about intent you've got a lawsuit on your hands,'' said Miguel De Grandy, a redistricting expert and lawyer for the state House of Representatives, which was named in the suit along with the governor and Senate.

Marc Caputo can be reached at mcaputo@MiamiHerald.com or 850-222-3095.