Change to Bright Futures scholarships hits poor, minorities
• At the University of Florida, Florida State and New College, 65 to 90 percent of students would still qualify. But black recipients would drop below 40 percent at all institutions except New College.

Below 50 percent at the University of Central Florida, the University of North Florida and the University of South Florida.

The percentage of Bright Futures recipients would drop below 25 percent at Florida Atlantic University, Florida International University, Florida A&M; University, Florida Gulf Coast University and the University of West Florida.

An analysis of changes to the qualifications for Bright Futures scholarships starting in 2014 measures the impact on students:

Florida International University graduates march across the stage to get deplomas at a ceremony held at the Modesto Maidique Campus at S.W. 112 the ave and Tamiami Trail Monday April 30, 2012

Upcoming changes to Florida’s Bright Futures program will result in only half as many total scholarship recipients — but Miami-Dade will fare worse than other areas, and poor and minority students across the state will suffer tremendously.

Those are the findings of a new analysis performed by a University of South Florida administrator who predicts that the changes will have dramatic consequences.

Florida lawmakers in 2011 hiked the SAT/ACT test score requirement for Bright Futures as part of a strategy to reduce the costs by reducing the number of scholarships.

As the effective date of those changes approaches, the USF report examines the potential impact.

“I was shocked by the whole picture,” said USF administrator J. Robert Spatig.

Since its launch in 1997, Bright Futures’ focus has been encouraging student achievement, making college more affordable for the middle class, and persuading Florida’s most promising students to stay in state. The program is popular with parents, but there have been persistent questions regarding race and class.

The scholarships are funded by state lottery games, which are more likely to be played by Floridians who are poor, uneducated, or minority. Yet the recipients of the awards — even under current rules — are more likely to be college-educated, upper-income white households. A University of North Florida professor who studied this phenomenon described it as “a reverse Robin Hood effect.”

The new requirements will be phased in over the next two school years. Ultimately, thousands fewer students will be eligible for Bright Futures at the same time that the higher education price tag is slipping out of reach for some families. College tuition in Florida has more than doubled in the past decade, and student loan debts continue to grow.

Spatig, USF’s assistant vice president of admissions, recruitment and enrollment planning, compared current student data from all state universities with the newer, tougher Bright Futures requirements. Though the minimum high school GPA of 3.0 will stay the same, starting this fall, the minimum student ACT score will increase from 21 to 22. In 2014, the minimum ACT score will jump to 26. Minimum SAT scores will increase at a similar rate — from 980 now to 1020 this fall to 1170 in 2014.

What are the consequences? Here’s what Spatig found:

• The total number of college freshmen receiving Bright Futures at state universities would drop from 30,954 to 15,711 — a decrease of about 50 percent. Minority students would drop even more, with Hispanic recipients decreasing by more than 60 percent, and black scholarship recipients plummeting by more than 75 percent.

• Of all large Florida counties, Miami-Dade would take the biggest hit from the changes, with scholarship recipients dropping by almost 64 percent. Broward’s scholarships would drop by about 55 percent.

• Florida International University and Florida Atlantic University would suffer more than schools such as the University of Florida and Florida State University. At UF and FSU, a solid majority of students would still qualify for Bright Futures, but at the local universities, less than 25 percent of incoming freshmen would receive the scholarship.

• When it came to students’ family income, Spatig’s analysis was limited to USF, rather than statewide. But the demographics of USF are similar to the state university system as a whole, and the trend lines were clear: Only 40 percent of poor students who now qualify for Bright Futures would receive the scholarship under the new standards. Among middle-class students (who are too rich to receive federal Pell Grants but still struggle to pay for college), roughly 50 percent would qualify for the new Bright Futures. Affluent students fared the best, with 60 percent of wealthy students continuing to qualify.