ICE Announces New Record Number of Deportations—and a Better Detainer Policy

Late last Friday, Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) announced that they had deported another record number of immigrants in the last fiscal year, but that they were enacting reforms that could lead to fewer unnecessary deportations in the future. As a New York Times Christmas editorial noted, the policy change “if it works — should lead to smarter enforcement of the immigration laws, with greater effort spent on deporting dangerous felons and less on minor offenders who pose no threat.”

ICE deported 409,949 immigrants in the 2012 fiscal year, up from 396,096 immigrants in FY 2011 and more than 392,000 immigrants in FY 2010.





The record-breaking number of deportations is all the more alarming given that a new prosecutorial discretion policy was first announced a year and a half ago, which promised to focus on criminal deportations and help prevent the separation of immigrant families. And yet deportations continued to rise. As a statement from immigration reform champion Rep. Luis Gutierrez (D-IL) shortly after the ICE announcement explained:

This is nothing to be proud of. In the 409,849 deportations are hardened criminals for whom I have no sympathy, but we must also realize that among these hundreds of thousands of deportations are parents and bread-winners and heads of American families that are assets to American communities and have committed no crimes.

ICE tried to cloak the bad news in some good. The announcement of the deportation numbers came with an ICE policy change that promises to only issue detainers (requests to local law enforcement agencies asking them to hold suspected immigrants in jail until ICE can pick them up) for serious criminal offenders, rather than immigrants with no convictions or only minor transgressions, like a traffic violation. Felons and violent criminals would be streamlined for deportation, while mothers, fathers, and community members could breathe a little bit easier. But it was a testament to the deportation numbers’ potential for damage that ICE saw the need to release them with the policy change—and late on a Friday afternoon just before the holidays.

Last month, Latino voters won a major victory when they turned out in record-breaking numbers of their own to reelect President Obama over Mitt Romney by more than a 3-1 margin. Republicans reeled after the defeat, many publicly admitting that the GOP would have to do better on immigration in the future in order to attract more Latino voters. But the strength of the Latino vote mobilization held a warning for the President and the Democrats as well: that they can’t continue to break deportation records and fail to meet promises of reform.

And so there is a sense of déjà-vu from the newest ICE announcement. The White House knows it must do better to shore up support from its base—and so is trying again to enact a policy it should have implemented last year. (It is also allowing its 287(g) task force agreements to expire at the end of this year, but only because programs like Secure Communities have taken its place.) Ultimately, time will tell whether last week’s announcement marks a turning point —or another failed try, ala last year’s memos. As the New York Times editorial notes: