Zika virus: Eight more local Zika infections in Florida, including seven in Miami-Dade and one in Palm Beach | Miami Herald
Health officials on Monday reported eight more local Zika infections, including seven in Miami-Dade and one in Palm Beach, raising the total to 64 Florida residents who have acquired the disease from mosquitoes in the state this year.

In addition, eight out-of-state residents have acquired Zika in Florida this year. But the Florida Department of Health does not disclose those cases in its daily count.

The additional local cases reported Monday included two infections linked to a section of Miami’s Wynwood neighborhood, though the individuals were symptomatic in July, the health department said. Two additional cases are linked to Miami Beach, where the Florida Department of Health has identified a 1.5-square-mile area with active spread of the disease.

Never miss a local story. Sign up today for a free 30 day free trial of unlimited digital access. SUBSCRIBE NOW

The remaining three Miami-Dade cases are being investigated to determine where exposure to the virus occurred, the health department said. That raises to 12 the number of ongoing investigations into Miami-Dade infections outside of the Zika zones already identified in Wynwood and Miami Beach.

In addition, the health department announced seven more travel-related cases, including two in Miami-Dade, two in Palm Beach and the first case in Nassau County. And two more pregnant women were confirmed to have acquired the disease after traveling abroad to places where Zika is widespread.

The agency reported 771 Zika infections statewide, including 621 travel-related cases, 64 local cases and 86 pregnant women.

Florida Department of Health officials will be at the Miami Beach Police Department offering free Zika testing this week for those who live or work in the area of local transmission in South Beach, between Eighth Street and 28th Street, from the ocean to Biscayne Bay..

Zika testing will be available at the police department, 1101 Washington Ave., from 5 to 7 p.m. Monday, and 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. and 5 to 7 p.m. Tuesday and Wednesday.

Those who want to get tested must bring a picture ID to prove they live and/or work in the Zika zone. Testing is available to anyone who works or lives in the area, not just pregnant women.

The city quietly offered free testing to local residents last week without publicizing it. Monday afternoon, the city sent out a news alert with information about the free testing.