Michelle Nunn Meets With Georgia Agriculture Leaders During Visits With Georgia Farm Bureau, Fort Valley State University
Nunn Was Joined By Senate Committee Chairwoman Debbie Stabenow & Congressman Sanford Bishop During Agricultural Swing Through Middle Georgia



NUNN: “I understand how important our agriculture community is to the economy and our heritage as Georgians. It's clear that Georgia farmers need stability and certainty from Washington, and I'll be their voice in the Senate.”



FORT VALLEY, GA – Today, Michelle Nunn, former Points of Light CEO and candidate for U.S. Senate, hosted a listening session with members of the Georgia Farm Bureau and toured agricultural facilities at Fort Valley State University. U.S. Senate Agriculture Committee Chairwoman Sen. Debbie Stabenow and Congressman Sanford Bishop joined Nunn as she met with agricultural leaders and talked about the importance of the agricultural industry to Georgia.



“My family has a third generation farm in Perry, and we have grown and raised everything from pecans to peppers to pigs -- if you count our farm pig Maybeline,” said Nunn. “I understand how important our agriculture community is to our economy and our heritage as Georgians. I'm glad I had the chance to introduce Chairwoman Stabenow to our agricultural leaders in our state and hear the challenges and opportunities they face. It's clear that Georgia farmers need stability and certainty from Washington, and I'll be their voice in the Senate.”



Nunn and Stabenow also met with leaders of the Georgia Farm Bureau and Georgia farmers to talk about issues facing Georgia’s agricultural industry.



Later in the day, Fort Valley State University College President Dr. Ivelaw Loyd Griffith gave Nunn, Sen. Stabenow and Rep. Bishop a tour of Fort Valley State University’s Agricultural Education Program, which prepares graduates for careers in occupations such as farm managers, processing plant managers, farmers, and ranchers. Their state-of-the-art facility features an agriscience and technology teaching lab that has prepared hundreds of students for work in the agriculture industry.