SB-1317 Truancy.
(1) Existing law defines a truant as any pupil subject to compulsory full-time education or to compulsory continuation education who is absent from school without a valid excuse 3 full days in one school year, or tardy or absent for more than any 30-minute period during the schoolday without a valid excuse on 3 occasions in one school year, or any combination thereof.

This bill would define a chronic truant as any pupil subject to compulsory full-time education or to compulsory continuing education who is absent from school without a valid excuse for 10% or more of the schooldays in one school year, from the date of enrollment to the current date, provided that the appropriate school district officer or employee has complied with specified provisions of law.

(2) Existing law provides that, if a person is a parent of a minor child, he or she is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,000, or by imprisonment in a county jail for a period not exceeding one year, or by both that fine and imprisonment, if he or she willfully omits, without lawful excuse, to furnish necessary clothing, food, shelter, medical attendance, or other remedial care for the child.

Under existing law, the parent or guardian of a pupil, who is subject to compulsory full-time education or to compulsory continuation education, whose child is habitually truant, as defined, or fails to perform his or her duty to compel attendance of the pupil, is guilty of a crime.

This bill would provide that a parent or guardian of a pupil of 6 years of age or more who is in kindergarten or any of grades 1 to 8, inclusive, and who is subject to compulsory full-time education or to compulsory continuation education, whose child is a chronic truant, who has failed to reasonably supervise and encourage the pupil’s school attendance, and who has been offered language accessible support services to address the pupil’s truancy, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not exceeding $2,000, or by imprisonment in a county jail for a period not exceeding one year, or by both that fine and imprisonment. The bill would provide that a parent or guardian may not be punished for a violation of both these provisions and another specified law involving criminal liability for parents or guardians of truant children. By changing the definition of an existing crime, this bill would impose a state-mandated local program.

The bill would authorize a superior court to establish a deferred entry of judgment program, meeting specified conditions, to adjudicate cases involving parents or guardians of elementary school pupils who are chronic truants. The bill would authorize a deferred entry of judgment program established under the bill to refer defendant parents or guardians for services, including, but not necessarily limited to, case management, mental and physical health services, parenting classes and support, substance abuse treatment, and child care and housing. The bill would authorize the deferment of entry of judgment in these cases upon the defendant’s compliance with terms and conditions set forth by the court. The bill would require that funding for the deferred entry of judgment program come solely from nonstate sources.

(3) The California Constitution requires the state to reimburse local agencies and school districts for certain costs mandated by the state. Statutory provisions establish procedures for making that reimbursement.

This bill would provide that no reimbursement is required by this act for a specified reason.