Draper Lab to upgrade more submarine-launched Trident nuclear missile guidance systems
WASHINGTON – U.S. Navy strategic weapons experts are improving the accuracy of the nation's fleet of submarine-launched nuclear missiles with the latest upgrades to the Trident (D5) ballistic missile guidance systems.

Officials of the Navy Strategic Systems Program office in Washington announced a potential $58.6 million order Wednesday to the Charles Stark Draper Laboratory Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., for Trident (D5) MK 6 guidance system production.

Wednesday's order -- a modification to a $53.5 million contract awarded to Draper Lab last month -- includes failure verification, test, repair, and recertification of Trident MK 6 guidance system inertial measurement units (IMUs), electronic assemblies, and electronic modules.

The Navy's Trident II D5 nuclear missiles are designed for launch from Ohio-class ballistic missile submarines, as well as from the Navy's future Columbia-class submarine, formerly known as the Ohio Replacement Submarine and SSBN-X Future Follow-on Submarine.

The Columbia-class submarine program, which will replace the Ohio-class ballistic missile submarines will begin construction in 2021 and enter service in 2031. From there, the submarine class will serve through 2085.

Related: Nuclear ballistic missile command and control

The Trident II nuclear-tipped ballistic missile has a range of more than 7,000 miles and carries four independently targeted 475-kiloton nuclear warheads.

The Trident missile's MK 6 guidance system consists of an electronics assembly with the system's flight computers, and an IMU with the system's inertial sensors. The electronics assembly interfaces with the submarine's fire-control system and the missile's flight-control electronics assembly. The IMU, meanwhile, senses the motion of missile and provides navigation information to the mission computer.

story continues below

&amp;nbsp;

Trident missiles are aboard 14 Navy Ohio-class submarines and four British Royal Navy Vanguard-class submarines. Each Ohio-class submarine can carry as many as 24 Trident atomic missiles. These vessels together carry about half of all U.S. strategic thermonuclear warheads.

The Draper Lab contract is part of a Navy effort begun in 2002 to extend the life of the D5 missiles to the year 2040 by replacing obsolete components with commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) hardware. Upgrades involved the missile reentry systems and guidance systems.

[Native Advertisement]

The first flight test of a D5 extended-life subsystem, the MK 6 Mod 1 guidance system, was in early 2012 aboard the ballistic missile submarine USS Tennessee (SSBN 734).

Related: Lockheed Martin to move Trident nuclear missile design to next-generation ballistic missile submarine

The Trident nuclear missile has a maximum speed of 13,000 miles per hour, and has precision guidance from inertial sensors with star sighting. No GPS-guided Trident D5 missiles have been deployed.

The Trident II missile warhead discharges the energy of 475,000 tons of TNT, and is roughly 30 times the size of the U.S. nuclear bomb dropped on Hiroshima, Japan, in 1945.

On this contract Draper Lab will do the work in Minneapolis; Pittsfield and Cambridge, Mass.; and Clearwater, Fla., and should be finished by January 2021.

For more information contact Draper Lab online at www.draper.com, or the Navy Strategic Systems Programs Office at www.ssp.navy.mil.

Learn more: search the Aerospace & Defense Buyer's Guide for companies, new products, press releases, and videos