AMS Calls on U.S. Defense Department to Review Army Reserve Training Material for Anti-Religious Content
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE 04/04/2013 AMS Calls on U.S. Defense Department to Review Army Reserve Training Material for Anti-Religious Content Concern raised by brief citing Catholicism as example of “religious extremism” WASHINGTON, D.C.—The Archdiocese for the Military Services (AMS) issued the following statement today on the mischaracterization of “Catholicism” as an example of “religious extremism” on slide #24 of this U.S. Army Reserve training brief : Statement The Archdiocese for the Military Services and Chaplain Alliance for Religious Liberty recently became aware of a U.S. Army Reserve Equal Opportunity training brief that expressly listed “Catholicism,” “Evangelical Christianity” and other religious groups as examples of “religious extremism” alongside groups such as “Al Qaeda”, “Hamas” and the “KKK.”



The Archdiocese is astounded that Catholics were listed alongside groups that are, by their very mission and nature, violent and extremist. According to an investigation and reply from the Army Chief of Chaplains office, the training in question appears to have been an isolated incident not condoned by the Department of the Army. The Archdiocese and the Chaplain Alliance explained that the Army can and should take steps to prevent such incidents in the future.



The Archdiocese calls upon the Department of Defense to review these materials and to ensure that tax-payer funds are never again used to present blatantly anti-religious material to the men and women in uniform. -30- ------------ The AMS was created as an independent archdiocese by Pope John Paul II in 1985 as the only Catholic jurisdiction responsible for endorsing and granting faculties for priests to serve as chaplains in the U.S. military and VA Medical Centers.



AMS-endorsed priests serve at more than 220 U.S. military installations in 29 countries, making the AMS the nation's only global archdiocese. AMS-endorsed chaplains also serve at 153 VA Medical Centers throughout the U.S.



The AMS service population also includes American Catholic civilians working for the federal government in 134 countries, but currently, due to limited resources, the AMS cannot adequately serve this population.



Worldwide, an estimated 1.8 million Catholics depend on the AMS to meet their spiritual and sacramental needs.



For more information on the Archdiocese for the Military Services, visit www.milarch.org , the only official Web site for Catholics in the military and for the Cause of Father Vincent Capodanno, M.M.