13 Words
ADVERTISER: Dealing with serious illness? Find out more about how healthcare planning can help you. Complete this 3 question health survey today to get your free assessment from Iris Plans.

If you’re wondering how such an obvious ticking time bomb as Orlando mass murderer Omar Mateen was somehow overlooked by our massive federal security apparatus, it turns out that was deliberate.

Fox News’ Catherine Herridge reports that in a closed door meeting Monday, FBI Director James Comey confirmed to reporters that there was a full, 10-month investigation of Mateen in 2013. It started after his co-workers reported that he had told them he had family connections to Al Qaeda, he was a member of a Shi’a terrorist group, and that he hoped police would raid his home and assault his wife so he could retaliate and die a martyr.

So why in the world did they drop the investigation and walk away after 10 months? They bought his claim that he was teasing his co-workers because he thought they were trying to marginalize him for his Muslim faith. In other words, they were more willing to believe that all his American co-workers were bigots than that he might be a danger to society. He’d learned to speak the language of political correctness well and used it to manipulate guilty liberals.

At the same time that the Obama Administration was arguing for the right to gather electronic data on every US citizen, including reporters, it was abandoning real leads, killing a serious terrorist investigative unit and deleting its files, and removing experts and training materials on how to identify threats, all because those things might be seen as culturally insensitive to Muslims. This is how political correctness kills, and it just set a new US record.

To sum up the Obama Administration’s counter-terrorism strategy in 13 words:

Feds: “If you see something, say something!”

Citizen: “I see something.”

Feds: “Bigot!”

ADVERTISER: Dealing with serious illness? Find out more about how healthcare planning can help you. Complete this 3 question health survey today to get your free assessment from Iris Plans.