Conservative Republican for US Congress Florida
Content Missing

"There has to be a better way."

That's what I've been telling myself these past couple years, as the career politicians in Washington and Tallahassee kept spending our money in billion and trillion dollar chunks. And as I've traveled the state and met with activists and business leaders in dozens of communities, I've learned that the voters of Florida share the same sentiment. Our present path is unsustainable and the people know it, but our representatives don't.



We are on the verge of being the first generation of Americans who leaves this nation worse off for the next that inherits it. That's unacceptable. There are hard choices ahead and our country needs strong leaders that are ready and willing to make the tough decisions. If we are to persevere as the greatest nation on earth, we must get our house in order. We have to stop the out-of-control spending and begin to rollback our mountainous debt. I understand that in bad economic times, we need to tighten our belts and that we can't spend our way out of a recession. We must simplify our onerous tax system and give tax relief to the job creators so that we can reduce unemployment and put money back in the pockets of our hard-working middle-class. We need to modernize our entitlement programs for future generations while preserving and protecting Social Security and Medicare for today's seniors. And we must maintain the strongest military in the world. These are not easy tasks, but our country--our children and our grandchildren--deserve no less from us.



Those that have had a chance to lead have failed us. The politicians we have trusted to represent us are the ones who have gotten us into the mess we now face. The time for new leadership is now. I'm a businessman. I've been fortunate enough to live the American Dream, starting in the dish room and working my way up to the board room. Along the way, I've created over 40,000 jobs and I've spent my career in the restaurant industry balancing budgets and meeting payroll. I know the kind of pro-growth and pro-job environment we need to get our economy moving again. My life experiences have prepared me to go to Washington and take on the career politicians and entrenched interests that only know how to spend your money.



I have served my country before, volunteering for the United States Air Force and deploying to Vietnam. I see our great nation charging down the wrong path and I feel called to serve again. In the coming months, I invite you to learn more about my candidacy and where I stand on the issues.