US White House fan builds £150,000 replica of Oval Office in his own home
Get daily updates directly to your inbox + Subscribe Thank you for subscribing! Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

This is the £150,000 replica Oval Office built by an avid White House fan in his own home.

Father-of-two Ron Wade painstakingly recreated the White House’s most famous room over almost four years - and his family don't mind one bit.

Obsessed Ron, who first developed a taste for politics after assisting George Bush Snr's campaign for the presidency at 13, also owns the world’s largest collection of presidential memorabilia.

The 63-year-old from Longview, Texas, said: "When I told people I was going to build the Oval Office I don’t think they realised that it was going to be exactly the same as the one the president sits in everyday.

"But it's identical down to the last detail.

"I had George W Bush look at a blow-up photo of my Oval Office and he said 'you've got it down, everything is just right'."

Now the proud man gives tours of his collection, which includes JFK's former car and rocking chair and a dresser bought by Calvin Coolidge.

Ron said: "I have no idea how much the collection is worth - there are so many pieces from the White House which I couldn't put a value to.

"I wish I had a warehouse that I could fill with about 200 file cabinets more.

"I work every single day classifying items in my collection and putting them in order."

But it is the replica Oval Office which stuns visitors with its attention to detail.

Ron said: "The reaction the this room is really wonderful.

"People say, 'Oh my god, it's just like the real one we've seen on TV'.

"I spent years in planning, using 350 photographs of the real Oval Office so every little detail was complete."

And Ron's wife Laura, 36, and children, Valentina, 16, and Laura, 10, love living among the collection.

Ron's wife Laura said: "It's like you're living in a museum but it's really beautiful.

"I love sharing our home with other people and telling them the history of each item.

"I sometimes wish we had more space as a family but I support Ron 100 per cent."

Over the years Ron's collection has grown taking over much of his home.

He said: "I add pieces to it every day and I've tried to list them at one time and come up with an inventory but it's just really impossible. I have too many items."

One highlight of the collection is a Lincoln car which once belonged to iconic US president John F Kennedy.

Ron said: "I was perusing on eBay and of all things this Lincoln, formally owned by JFK showed up.

"I was fascinated and didn't think I I would ever be able to win. But I bid and I won it."

And in 1970 he teamed up with George W Bush to campaign for Bush Snr once again.

Ron said: "For forty years I have been good friends with both of the President Bushes.

"I've had the good fortune since I was in high school to know at various times seven United States presidents including Lydon Johnson, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Cater and Ronald Regan."

And despite all the years of hard work put into his museum, Ron is happy to enjoy it as long as it lasts

He said: "My children have expressed an interest in turning my house into a museum - they say it's already a museum now.

"I've told them they can do what they want with it when I am gone. I've enjoyed it while I was here. It's just been fun."