Mitt Romney Announces Support Of Kansas Secretary Of State Kris Kobach
Mitt Romney today announced the support of Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach.

“I’m so proud to earn Kris’s support,” said Mitt Romney. “Kris has been a true leader on securing our borders and stopping the flow of illegal immigration into this country. We need more conservative leaders like Kris willing to stand up for the rule of law. With Kris on the team, I look forward to working with him to take forceful steps to curtail illegal immigration and to support states like South Carolina and Arizona that are stepping forward to address this problem.”

“We need a president who will finally put a stop to a problem that has plagued our country for a generation: millions of illegal aliens coming into the country and taking jobs from United States citizens and legal aliens, while consuming hundreds of billions of dollars in public benefits at taxpayer expense,” said Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach. “Illegal immigration is a nightmare for America’s economy and America’s national security. Mitt Romney is the candidate who will finally secure the borders and put a stop to the magnets, like in-state tuition, that encourage illegal aliens to remain in our country unlawfully. He is also the candidate who will stand shoulder to shoulder with the states that are fighting to restore the rule of law. I am pleased to stand with this true conservative.”

Kris Kobach is the Secretary of State of Kansas. He was formerly the chairman of the Kansas Republican Party and a professor of constitutional law. Kobach has been a longtime advocate for immigration reform. He is the co-author of the Arizona and Alabama laws against illegal immigration, and he served as Attorney General John Ashcroft’s chief adviser on immigration and border security while at the U.S. Department of Justice. He has degrees from Harvard, Yale, and Oxford Universities. He lives in Piper, Kansas, with his wife Heather and daughters Lilly, Reagan, Molly, and Charlotte.