Mitt Romney
Email this Page To:

Multiple addresses seperated by commas From:

Subject:

Message :



Former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney has been widely recognized for his leadership and accomplishment as a public servant and in private enterprise. Throughout his life, he has proven to be a skilled leader who has the ability to turn around failing organizations. Whether in business, at the Olympics or in Massachusetts, Governor Romney took on the seemingly insurmountable challenges, made the tough decisions and got the job done.



For 25 years, Mitt Romney enjoyed a successful career helping businesses grow and improve their operations through innovation and dynamism. From 1978 to 1984, Romney was a Vice President at Bain & Company, Inc., a leading management consulting firm. In 1984, he founded Bain Capital, one of the nation's most accomplished venture capital and investment companies. Bain Capital helped guide hundreds of companies on a successful course, including Staples, Bright Horizons Family Solutions, Domino's Pizza, Sealy, Brookstone, and The Sports Authority. Through investments like Staples, Governor Romney proved that his data-driven approach would lead to success time and time again. He also demonstrated himself to be capable of taking troubled companies and rebuilding them into business giants.



When Bain & Company fell into despair in the early 1990's, Governor Romney was asked to return and help save the company. Romney led a difficult restructuring of the organization, and Bain & Company now employs more than 2,000 people in 25 offices worldwide.



Governor Romney first gained recognition on a national level for his role in turning around the 2002 Winter Olympics. With the 2002 Games mired in controversy and facing a financial crisis, Romney left behind a successful career as an entrepreneur in 1999 to take over as President and CEO of the Salt Lake Organizing Committee.



Governor Romney has said he felt compelled to assume the seemingly impossible task of rescuing the Games by both the urgings of his wife, Ann, and by the memory of his father, George Romney, who had been a successful businessman, three-term Governor of Michigan, and a tireless advocate of volunteerism in America.



In his three years at the helm in Salt Lake, Romney erased a $379 million operating deficit, organized 23,000 volunteers, galvanized community spirit and oversaw an unprecedented security mobilization just months after the September 11th attacks, leading to one of the most successful Olympics in our country's history. All Americans could be proud of America's athletes and the Games.



Elected in 2002 as the 70th Governor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Romney brought the skills he had acquired in business to Beacon Hill and presided over a dramatic reversal of the state's fortunes. Taking the oath of office on January 2, 2003, Romney faced a nearly $3 billion budget deficit. Yet, he pledged not to raise taxes. Facing this fiscal crisis, he chose instead to force tremendous spending cuts and streamline government. As the conservative Club for Growth stated, Romney "imposed some much-needed fiscal discipline on a very liberal Massachusetts legislature." Each year thereafter, Romney would balance the Massachusetts budget. When he left office in 2007, Romney left a rainy day fund of over $2 billion and a state in better fiscal shape.



At the beginning of Governor Romney's term, Massachusetts was losing thousands of jobs every month. Under the previous administration, more than 140,000 jobs were lost in a deep recession. Under Romney, Massachusetts began to turn the corner. He moved to make Massachusetts a better place to do business by lowering taxes 19 times, streamlining regulations and enhancing incentives for businesses to move to the state. By the end of his administration, nearly 80,000 jobs had been created from the low point of the recession and the Massachusetts economy was on the rebound.



One of Governor Romney's top priorities was reforming the education system so that young people could compete for good paying jobs in the global economy. In 2004, Romney established the John and Abigail Adams Scholarship Program to reward the top 25 percent of Massachusetts high school students with a four-year, tuition-free scholarship to any Massachusetts public university or college. He has also championed a package of education reforms, including merit pay, an emphasis on math and science instruction, important new intervention programs for failing schools and English immersion for foreign-language speaking students.



In 2006, Governor Romney signed into law a private, market-based reform that ensures every Massachusetts citizen will have health insurance, without a government takeover and without raising taxes. By bringing Republicans and Democrats together and working with the conservative Heritage Foundation, Romney was able to tackle an issue that has long challenged America's leaders. Today, nearly half of the state's uninsured have gotten insurance under the Massachusetts health care plan.



Governor Romney was elected to the Chairmanship of the Republican Governors Association by his fellow Governors for the 2006 election cycle, and raised a record $27 million for candidates running in gubernatorial contests around the country.



On January 3, 2007, as Governor Romney took his "long walk" exiting the State House, he could be confident that Massachusetts was in better shape than when he was inaugurated. Romney had increased access to higher education for thousands of Massachusetts children, enhanced benefits for Massachusetts National Guardsmen, soldiers and veterans, reformed health care, toughened the state's drunk driving laws and strengthened the State Police.

Governor Romney received his B.A., with Highest Honors, from Brigham Young University in 1971. In 1975, he was awarded an MBA from Harvard Business School, where he was named a Baker Scholar, and a J.D., cum laude, from Harvard Law School. He has been deeply involved in community and civic affairs, serving extensively in his church and numerous charities including City Year, the Boy Scouts, and the Points of Light Foundation.



Mitt Romney was born in Detroit, Michigan on March 12, 1947 and lived in the state until leaving for college as a young man. He has been married to his high school sweetheart, Ann, for 38 years. He has five boys (Tagg, Matt, Josh, Ben and Craig), five daughters-in-law (Jen, Laurie, Jen, Andelyne and Mary) and 11 beautiful grandchildren.