Gov. Rick Snyder wants to wean Michigan off coal as an energy source
windmill-barn.JPG

Gov. Rick Snyder on Thursday spoke about replacing coal with a mix of energies including natural gas.

(MLive file photo)

LANSING, MI -- Gov. Rick Snyder on Thursday at a conference of the Michigan Conservative Energy Forum said energy issues were a high priority for him in 2015, and one of the things he'd like to accomplish is reducing the state's dependence on coal.

"I think there is a large window of opportunity in the state," Snyder said. "Now is the time to look at a long term transition away from coal."

The Republican governor suggested that coal be replaced by a variety of cleaner sources, including natural gas. Because of Michigan's natural gas production and infrastructure, "we're well positioned to actually have a fair amount of that coal demand go to natural gas," Snyder said.

He also gave a nod to other energy sources.

"Michigan is a pretty solid wind state today. We're still not as solid in solar because of the cost structures. We could use a little bit more sunshine occasionally, but I love Michigan," Snyder said.

Michigan Environmental Council Policy Director James Clift attended the conference. He said that the question is how to balance the state's portfolio with sources like natural gas, wind and solar.

"We think that a healthy blend of renewable energy is actually a better overall mix," Clift said.

He said that in terms of economic development and jobs created, renewable energy like wind and solar generates more jobs and activity than natural gas.

Snyder labeled energy issues as his second priority for 2015, behind the focus he's taken on talent.

Senate Majority Leader Arlan Meekhof, R-West Olive, also listed energy as a legislative priority.

"I think the Legislature is going to have to deal with energy issues, given what the federal government has done with some of the rules they're going to put on coal plants," Meekhof said. "There's lots of issues around energy. If we don't get some relief from those rules it's likely in a few years we'll be short of energy in Michigan."

2015 is a key year in Michigan energy policy because it's when renewable energy portfolio standards cap out. Current law mandates that Michigan get 10 percent of its energy from renewable sources by 2015.

But it's not just renewable energy on the horizon. Issues such as energy deregulation and energy choice have circulated in recent years, and could be included in a wide-ranging energy discussion.

Snyder said there were some things the state couldn't solve, like the lack of a comprehensive national energy policy. But the he framed the energy discussion as one that could affect the state's business climate. Companies are looking at energy reliability and cost when selecting new locations, he said.

Snyder plans a special message focusing on energy for the first half of 2015.

MLive Reporter Jonathan Oosting contributed to this report.

Emily Lawler is a Capitol/Lansing business reporter for MLive. You can reach her at elawler@mlive.com, subscribe to her on Facebook or follow her on Twitter: @emilyjanelawler.