Flint emergency manager's budget proposal would cut 36 cops, 19 firefighters
The two-year budget plan, expected to be delivered to the City Council at a 5:30 p.m. meeting today, also includes higher fees for property owners for street lighting, garbage pickup, as well as water and sewer service.

"It's my job to balance the budget (and) the city of Flint remains in an emergency," Earley said before the start of the meeting. "We are at a point when we have to look at the single biggest stress (on the budget). Public safety has to be (a part of) the discussion ...

"The city is unable to fund police and fire at current levels."

Under the proposed budget, Flint's total police staffing would shrink from 151 to 115 with seven vacancies left unfilled and 29 additional positions eliminated by the end of the fiscal year that begins July 1.

"The next several months will be focused on mitigating the impact of this through reorganization with the assistance of consultants specialized in police and fire service; seeking additional funds; and obtaining assistance from law enforcement partners in order to achieve the best possible level of police response," the budget proposal says.

Earley said Gov. Rick Snyder is also "pleased with the results" of Michigan State Police patrols in Flint and "has pledged that continuing support."

In fire services, the department is proposed to drop from 94 to 75 with 19 positions eliminated as a Staffing for Adequate Fire & Emergency Response grant expires.

Earley said his consultant from the International City/County Management Association will also be asked for recommendations for reorganizing the fire department in an effort to mitigate the affect of the cuts.

The emergency manager said contracts currently being negotiated with police and firefighters could help lay the groundwork for reorganization, but said "we want to get to that as cooperatively as possible."

He said the state's emergency manager law gives him the ability to impose model contracts if necessary, however, giving him "greater leeway to get things done."

Flint Finance Director Jerry Ambrose said city officials won't immediately start issuing pick slips once the budget is adopted in early June, but will take the next six to seven months to explore all the options.

Ambrose said the city can't continue to cut in other departments because police and firefighters represent nearly half of all city employees.

"There's just a point in time when you cannot sustain the organization (that way)," he said. "City government is ... not just police and fire."

Other highlights of the budget proposal:

Although property tax levies remain unchanged, street lighting assessments would be increased from $68 to $71 in the coming fiscal year, garbage pickup fees would increase from $146 to $163, and water and sewer rates would increase by a total of 6.5 percent.

Out-of-pocket costs to city employees are proposed to increase, including a required 20 percent share of health insurance, 50 percent premium share for dental and vision insurance, and vacation and sick leave replaced with personal time off with new caps established.

The position of city administrator would be filled and the salaries of mayor and City Council partially restored "as their role in governance increases."

The city would set aside $1 million to whittle down on a $13-million deficit, and officials said they are on pace to eliminate the deficit by 2020.

Legacy costs -- retiree health care and pensions -- "will continue to be a cost burden to the city of Flint," according to the proposal. Earley proposed $30.2 million for retiree health care and pensions, an amount equal to 17 percent of total revenues.

FLINT, MI -- The city's police and fire departments would lose 36 police officer positions and 19 firefighter jobs under a new $55-million budget proposed today, April 30, by emergency manager Darnell Earley.

Earley has said a lawsuit filed by retirees could force the city into bankruptcy and put pensions and health benefits at risk of cuts.

Six retirees and the Flint-based United Retired Governmental Employees association filed a lawsuit against the city after former emergency manager Michael Brown decided in 2012 that retirees would be forced to pay more out of pocket for health coverage.

But Earley said today that he's been encouraged that the judge presiding over that lawsuit is encouraging the parties to move expeditiously, possibly toward "some form of settlement."