Flint monthly water and sewer bills highest in Genesee County by $35
FLINT, MI – Flint charges $35 more per month in water and sewer rates than the next highest municipality in Genesee County, and $90 more than the lowest.

And what are Flint residents getting for that higher cost?

Their own water system, Flint River water that is more than twice as hard as the previous Lake Huron water from Detroit and an aging infrastructure.

An MLive-Flint Journal analysis of water and sewer rates in 25 communities in Genesee County shows Flint is tops with $140 per month.

And city officials warn that cost is likely going up.

Even though Flint has switched off from the Detroit water that supplies the rest of the county, city officials say the cost may go up to $149 under Emergency Manager Darnell Earley's proposed budget.

Those continued rate increases have made the decision easier for former residents like Kayla Carroll to leave Flint.

Carroll, who moved to Burton three months ago, has twice as many people living with her now than when she lived on Flint's southeast side.

And after her two months worth of water bills in Burton, she said still hasn't matched what it would've cost when she lived less than a mile away in Flint.

"I'm a hell of a lot happier," said Carroll, who lives close to the Flint city line near Camden Avenue and Hemphill Road. "I have twice as many people and it's still less than half of what it was."

The average resident in Flint pays $140 per month, while the average Burton home pays less than $58.

After Flint, Montrose has the next highest water and sewer rates at $104.65 a month, followed by Linden at $100.93.

Genesee Township residents have the cheapest rates in the county, paying just $50.33 per month. Beecher is the next lowest at $52.88 and then Burton at $57.46.

Nijal Williams doesn't like that he pays almost $65 more per month in Flint for his water than a Burton customer does who lives less than 100 yards away.

"Why are we not getting our water from the same place that Burton is so our water will be as cheap," he said. "Knowing that we pay the highest rate and live in one of the most crime-ridden areas makes me feel not good. It's like we're getting taken advantage of."

Williams used to live in Burton, so he said he knew water rates were cheaper there.

He said Flint's skyrocketing water bills has been a crucial budgeting factor for him.

"They're raising these rates at such a high rate that we're losing property taxes, income taxes and we're losing students at Flint Community Schools," said city council President Scott Kincaid. "They don't realize the long-term effects that's going to have."

Kincaid filed a federal lawsuit earlier this month claiming the city charged more than was allowed when it raised water and sewer rates in 2011. A similar suit was dismissed in Genesee Circuit Court last year.

"The people I feel really sorry for are the senior citizens who are on a fixed income and can't afford to move," Kincaid said. "They've become prisoners."

While Beecher, Davison, Fenton, Grand Blanc and Linden all have their own municipal water systems, a majority of municipalities purchase their water through Genesee County.

Rates in Flint are higher than every municipality on the county's water system.

Residents in the communities with their own systems often have to pay special assessments for infrastructure improvements, which can result in higher rates.

"I hope people read this and move to Beecher," said Kevin Forbes, administrative superintendent with the Beecher Metropolitan District. "The crux of the problem is the population loss. We're the cheapest around."

Genesee County pays Detroit to pipe treated Lake Huron water here and then sends it throughout the county.

Flint residents began drinking treated Flint River water earlier this month. The city is using the river while the Karegnondi Water Authority builds its pipeline from Lake Huron to Genesee County.

The project is expected to be complete sometime in 2016, at which time Flint and the 17 other municipalities in Genesee County will switch over to the KWA.

“We understand that the rates for utilities in the city of Flint are higher than the surrounding communities,” Flint Finance Director Jerry Ambrose told a crowd of people during a water forum April 17.

“I don’t even flush my toilet but once a day,” a woman at the forum yelled in frustration.

Water and sewer rates will increase by a total of 6.5 percent under the city’s proposed budget for the 2015 fiscal year, which begins July 1.

“Reducing rates by eliminating expenditures for critically needed upgrades and repairs is a disservice to current and future users of the system,” Ambrose told The Flint Journal for an April 15 story. “The cost for future users will be even higher if needed infrastructure investments are put off.”

Flint’s aging system is the main reason why water rates in the city are so much higher.

Midway through April, Flint officials said there were more than 250 water main breaks. Genesee County had seven.

“I don’t, within the county, have the cost of maintaining that system,” Genesee County Deputy Drain Commissioner John O’Brien previously said.

The following list ranks the monthly water and sewer rates throughout Genesee County. The figures were provided by the Genesee County Water and Waste Services or individual municipalities.

Flint: $140.02 Montrose: $104.65 Linden: $100.93 Davison: $91.49 Flushing: $89.61 Grand Blanc Township: $83.86 Clio: $83.19 Vienna Township: $83.01 Richfield Township: $76.76 Flushing Township: $72.85 Mt. Morris Township: $72.38 Montrose Township: $70.21 Swartz Creek: $69.20 Clayton Township: $68..87 Gaines Township: $68.18 Fenton: $67.74 Flint Township: $63.95 Davison Township: $63.82 Grand Blanc: $62.46 Thetford Township: $60.16 Mundy Township: $59.79 Mt. Morris: $57.89 Burton: $57.46 Beecher: $52.88 Genesee Township: $50.33

Dominic Adams is a reporter for The Flint Journal. Contact him at dadams5@mlive.com or 810-241-8803. Follow him on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.