USMNT midfielder Bedoya to play against his roots
CHESTER, Pa. – The US national team has always been a melting pot, so it's hardly a surprise when a Nats player has a family connection to the opposing team's nation.

On Saturday against Poland, it was right back Eric Lichaj, whose parents are Polish. On Tuesday it will be the turn of winger Alejandro Bedoya, whose parents are from Colombia. Bedoya even rooted for the Colombian national team growing up.

During the 1994 World Cup, he followed Colombian greats Faustino Asprilla, Fredy Rincón and former MLS midfielder Leonel Álvarez, all while wearing the popular wig made famous by MLS legend Carlos “El Pibe” Valderrama.

“I was a fan of Colombia, but I knew I would always play for the USA,” Bedoya said. “But I never thought I’d actually get to play against Colombia.”

After practice on Monday at PPL Park, he was surrounded by a throng of Colombian reporters, who grilled him about his roots. It turns out Bedoya’s grandfather was a goalkeeper for Deportivo Quindío and his dad played at forward on both the Quindío and Millonarios reserve sides.

Before joining his current Swedish club, Örebro, Bedoya also took regular summer trips to Colombia to train informally with Deportivo Quindío.

Despite missing out on the final cut for the 2010 World Cup in South Africa, the 23-year-old is now a regular call-up of US manager Bob Bradley, who will be exploiting Bedoya’s versatility even further.

Bedoya has mainly played at right midfield for the USA, but in the past week he has also trained on the left side and occasionally moved out to the left flank on Saturday against Poland.

“I could be on either side; I don’t really mind,” Bedoya said. “I think I’m a versatile player like that. I was training on the left … because we’re shorter on the left [on left wing players] than we are on the right.”

The Örebro midfielder, who’s been a pro for just a year-and-a-half, displays an assuredness which belies his age and experience. He knows his strong points – speed and movement off the ball – and on the heels of a full US World Cup camp back in May, he is brimming with confidence.

He will need every bit of it so that the nerves don’t get to him on Tuesday night. His parents, sister and grandfather are traveling to PPL Park. Family from New Jersey, where he was born, and friends from his former hometown of Miami will also be making the trek.

That’s not to mention everyone back in Colombia who will be tuning in. They’ve sent word to Bedoya to swap jerseys with Colombia forward Radamel Falcao, although the US midfielder would have preferred to claim the shirt of his boyhood idol, Iván Cordoba, who is not in the current squad.

“It’s a pretty big event,” Bedoya said. “I’m feeling the pressure a little, but it should be fun.”