Great Lakes water levels: Is water pulled out at Chicago the cause of low water levels?
I've heard for years that Chicago is taking water out of Lake Michigan to fill up the Mississippi River.

Many think that is the reason Lake Michigan and Lake Huron are so low right now.

So I'm here to do the math for you.

I think you are going to be shocked at what role the diversion of Lake Michigan water in Illinois has to do with our current lake levels.

The first graphic shows the average annual amount of water diverted out of Lake Michigan in the "Chicago area."

It would be inaccurate to just say Chicago because water is actually pulled out of Lake Michigan at three places: Wilmette, Chicago, and Calumet.

Notice the large drop in the amount diverted in the 1930s. That is when some of the water pulled out of Lake Michigan began being returned after usage.

Since 1940 the amount of water being pulled out of Lake Michigan in Illinois has been relatively the same.

In the late 1960s, Illinois plegded to take out no more than 3200 cubic feet per second annually.

In 1998, Michigan and a few other states found that Illinois was diverting more than the 3200 cubic feet per second.

The Illinois Department of Natural Resources told me that Illinois then dropped their diversion amount, and has now "paid back" the extra withdrawals of the late 1990s.

But does this water outflow affect lake levels?

I've been intensely curious about this also.

I did the math for you and me, and can now tell you Illinois' diversion of water out of Lake Michigan has an effect of less than one inch per year.

My math shows that if no other water came into the Great Lakes, the outflows near the Chicago area would drop Lake Michigan and Lake Huron by only seven-tenths of one inch per year.

Here's the math:

3200 cubic feet per second is the maximum outflow. Of that, 820 cubic feet per second is runoff that actually should go into Lake Michigan but doesn't.

So let's use 2380 cubic feet per second as the number.

Now math teachers all over will go wild with excitement. You math haters, don't worry. I'll get you through it.

2380 cubic feet per second X 60 seconds in a minute X 60 minutes in an hour X 24 hours in a day X 365 days in a year equals 75 billion cubic feet per year passing out of Lake Michigan.

There are 7.48 gallons of water in a cubic foot.

So 561 billion gallons of water are pulled out of Lake Michigan yearly along the Illinois shoreline.

One inch of water over all of Lake Michigan and Lake Huron is 800 billion gallons of water.

That's how I came up with seven-tenths of an inch of Lake Michigan - Lake Huron water is used by the Chicago area each year, at a maximum.

In fact, the usage has been going down. Since 1994, the domestic water usage from the Chicago area is down 25 percent, from 1200 million gallons per day to 900 million gallons per day.



Is that a significant amount of water loss?

My first thought was that's not much effect. But I'm sitting here having a slight change of mind.

Seven-tenths of an inch every year for ten years would equal seven inches of water on Lake Michigan and Lake Huron.

It should also be pointed out that we don't just lose water. Two man-made diversions into Lake Superior bring in 25 percent more water to the Great Lakes than the Chicago area takes out.

This year Lake Michigan and Lake Huron dropped 11 inches in the fall, recording record low levels.

The withdrawal near Chicago was way down, and looks like it will be the lowest water withdrawal since 1900.

So the fast drop this past fall was definitely not caused by pulling water out of Lake Michigan in the Chicago area to "fill up the Mississippi River."

What do you think? Is that a significant water withdrawal from Lake Michigan?

I've done the math on the St. Clair River also. I'll have that in a blog for you early next week.

And yes I now have the data on the impact of bottled water. I'll have that for you next week also.