Brian Ellis backed by Grand Rapids Chamber, Right to Life over Rep. Justin Amash
These people have gotten to know me and see what I stand for. - Brian Ellis

GRAND RAPIDS, MI — Local businessman Brian Ellis, the Republican challenger to U.S. Rep. Justin Amash, added key endorsements to his bid for Congress this week.

The political action committees of the Grand Rapids Area Chamber of Commerce and Right to Life of Michigan each chose Ellis over the sitting congressman in the race for Michigan's Third Congressional District. Each had endorsed Amash in prior elections.

Earlier: Rep. Justin Amash rejects invitation to debate with Brian Ellis after apparent agreement last fall

The backing from the two high-profile groups increases the divide between the two men, cementing what is often portrayed as an establishment candidate versus Tea Party incumbent by the Aug. 5 primary.

"As I present myself and make my case for conservative Republican solutions to move the country forward, and contrast that with how Justin has voted ... people are coming my way," Ellis said, "and it's been that way since day one."

Andy Johnston, vice president of government affairs at the chamber, said both Amash and Ellis participated in their endorsement process prior to the announcement. He explained the candidates' pasts are vetted, they answer questionnaires and submit to in-person interviews.

Those who align more closely with chamber priorities and positions, largely comprised of business-focused interests, earn the endorsements. A statement praised Ellis for his commitment to policies that would "create economic opportunity and eliminate hurdles to job growth.”

"In the end, the PAC ... felt that Brian was the best candidate to represent the West Michigan business community in Washington with solution-oriented ideas," Johnston said.

Some local business leaders were part of an Ellis campaign letter distributed last fall to solicit donations. They slammed Amash for several votes, charging he was part of the chaos in Washington that led the nation toward default on its debts.

Connie Lemmink, a spokeswoman from the Amash campaign, sent the following statement:

"Justin is 100 percent pro-life and the top conservative in Congress, while Ellis wants Michigan to expand Obamacare, voted for Common Core and doled out Jennifer Granholm's corporate welfare," it read.

Right to Life of Michigan, a group that previously had backed Amash but later withdrew support after a series of controversial votes, also announced Ellis as its choice. It commended the businessman for his "commitment ... to the protection of human life, born and unborn," a statement read.

In 2012, the group cited Amash's two "present" votes against defunding Planned Parenthood — a vote Amash said would be unconstitutional by selecting a single entity in a piece of legislation — and a vote against a bill to outlaw sex-selection abortions as reasons to pull support.

Amash argued that bill wouldn't have prevented a single abortion, which he is against.

FactCheck.org: Brian Ellis ad against Rep. Justin Amash misses mark on abortion stance

"These people have gotten to know me and see what I stand for," Ellis said. "They're drawn to my campaign because of that."

Andrew Krietz covers breaking, politics and transportation news for MLive | The Grand Rapids Press. Email him at akrietz@mlive.com or follow him on Twitter.