If we are to guard against ignorance... (Quotation) « Thomas Jefferson’s Monticello
Quotation: "If we are to guard against ignorance and remain free, it is the responsibility of every American to be informed."

Variations:

"If a nation expects to be ignorant and free in a state of civilization, it expects what never was and never will be.[1] If we are to guard against ignorance and remain free, it is the responsibility of every American to be informed."

Sources consulted: Searching on the phrase "guard against ignorance"

Earliest known appearance in print: 1981[2][3]

Other attributions: None known.

Status: We currently have no evidence to confirm that Thomas Jefferson ever said or wrote, "If we are to guard against ignorance and remain free, it is the responsibility of every American to be informed."

Comments: This quotation may well have originated in Ronald Reagan's statement for National Library Week in 1981, in which he said, "If we are to guard against ignorance and remain free, as Jefferson cautioned, it is the responsibility of every American to be informed." Reagan does not specifically attribute this wording to Jefferson, so we believe that Reagan's paraphrase has become mistaken for Jefferson's exact words.

Footnotes

↑ This portion of the quotation is genuine; see Quotations on Education (6 January 1816 letter to Charles Yancey). ↑ Ronald Reagan's statement for National Library Week, referenced in Budget Reconciliation: Hearings Before the Committee on Post Office and Civil Service (Washington: GPO, 1981), 179. ↑ To establish the earliest appearance of this phrase in print, the following sources were searched for the phrase, "democracy is nothing more than mob rule": Google Books, Google Scholar, Amazon.com, Internet Archive, America's Historical Newspapers, American Broadsides and Ephemera Series I, Early American Imprints Series I and II, Early English Books Online, Eighteenth Century Collections Online, 19th Century U.S. Newspapers, American Periodicals Series Online, JSTOR.

See Also

Further Sources