Airports Authority Opens Phase 2 Contractor Price Proposals
April 19, 2013

Airports Authority Opens Contractor Price Proposals

for Phase 2 of the Dulles Corridor Metrorail Project

Next Segment of Silver Line Moves Closer to Construction

The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority on Friday opened and publicly read price proposals from five pre-qualified contractor teams seeking to build the major portion of Phase 2 of the Silver Line. Phase 2 is an 11.4-mile segment of the Silver Line, consisting of six stations and running from Reston, Va., through Washington Dulles International Airport and into Ashburn in eastern Loudoun County, Va. The entire Silver Line will extend 23 miles, connecting to Metrorail’s existing Orange Line.

An award of this Phase 2 contract will occur after a review to validate that each proposal properly responds to the solicitation. This final review process will take place after the Friday, April 19, price proposal submission.

“Today is a significant step toward the selection of the design-build contractor for Phase 2,” said Pat Nowakowski, Executive Director of the Dulles Corridor Metrorail Project. “It moves us even closer to completing one of the nation’s major public transportation projects.”

The names of the teams and their price proposals for the design-build contract, which were read in public, are listed in alphabetical order:

Bechtel Transit Partners

Bechtel Infrastructure Corporation

Price Proposal: $1,191,978,777.00

Capital Rail Constructors

Clark Construction Group, LLC

Kiewit Infrastructure South Co.

Price Proposal: $1,177,777,000.00

Dulles APC Railbuilders

Archer Western Contractors, LLC

PCL Civil Constructors, Inc.

Corman Construction, Inc.

Price Proposal: $1,285,000,000.00

Dulles Metrorail Connectors

Skanska USA Civil Southeast / Granite Construction Company

G.A. & F.C. Wagman, Inc. / Trumbull Corporation

Facchina Construction Company, Inc.

Price Proposal: $1,325,470,000.00

Silver Line Constructors

Fluor Enterprises, Inc. / Tutor Perini Corporation / Stacy and Witbeck, Inc.

Price Proposal: $1,378,646,479.00

The price proposals were submitted as part of a competitive procurement, which began in July 2012. In March of this year, these teams submitted technical proposals that were found to meet the technical requirements of the contract. Contract award is expected in May, with a notice to proceed anticipated in July.

“As part of this substantial price competition, we have been involved in an extensive, collaborative process with some of the most qualified and successful engineering and construction companies in the world,” Nowakowski said.

This contract is the largest of three total design-build packages for Phase 2 and represents approximately 50% of Phase 2 work. The stations are at Reston Town Center, Herndon, Innovation Center, Washington Dulles International Airport, Route 606 and Route 772/Ashburn. This contract does not include the rail yard, garages or professional services.

Phase 1 of the project is currently under construction and is now 90 percent complete. Construction of Phase 2 is anticipated to be completed in 2018.

The Silver Line project is being undertaken in partnership with Loudoun and Fairfax counties and the Commonwealth of Virginia, and will be transferred to the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority for operation upon completion.

The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority was established in 1987 by the governments of Virginia and the District of Columbia to manage and operate Washington’s Ronald Reagan National and Dulles International airports, which together serve more than 40 million passengers a year. The Airports Authority also operates and maintains the Dulles Airport Access Road and the Dulles Toll Road and manages construction of the Silver Line project, a 23-mile extension of the Washington region’s Metrorail system into Loudoun County, Va. No taxpayer money is used to operate the toll road, which is funded by toll revenues, or the airports, which are funded through aircraft landing fees, rents and revenues from concessions. The Silver Line construction is funded by a combination of toll-road revenues, airport contributions and federal, state and local government appropriations. The Airports Authority is led by a 17- member board of directors appointed by the governors of Virginia, Maryland, the mayor of Washington, D.C., and the president of the United States.