Airports Authority Awards Contract for Phase 2 of Silver Line
For Immediate Release

May 15, 2013

Airports Authority Awards Contract

for Phase 2 of the Silver Line

May Board Meeting Includes Next Steps of Phase 2;

New Employees Added to Airports Authority Leadership Team

The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, at its May board meeting, announced the award of the major design-build portion of Phase 2 of Silver Line to Capital Rail Constructors, a joint venture consisting of Clark Construction Group and Kiewit Infrastructure South Co. The contract, which was officially awarded on May 14, formally names the team to design and build the 11.4-mile segment of the Silver Line, consisting of six stations and running from Reston, Va., through Washington Dulles International Airport and into Ashburn in eastern Loudoun County, Va.

“This is the first of many milestones to come for the second phase of the Silver Line,” said Jack Potter, President and CEO. “The Phase 2 contract, awarded through a competitive bid process, and with the coordination and collaboration of our project partners, is moving forward to construction. Its completion will improve the transportation options for those traveling through the region and serve as a major driver for the local economy.”

This contract is the largest of several Phase 2 procurement packages and represents approximately 50 percent of Phase 2 work. The stations are at Reston Town Center, Herndon, Innovation Center, Washington Dulles International Airport, Route 606 and Route 772/Ashburn.

The Silver Line project is being undertaken in partnership with Loudoun and Fairfax counties and the Commonwealth of Virginia, and will be transferred to the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority for operation upon completion.

Phase 1 of the project, which runs from Falls Church, Va., to Wiehle Ave. in Reston, Va., is currently under construction and is now more than 90 percent complete. Construction of Phase 2 is anticipated to be completed in 2018.

Other business at the monthly Board meeting included the appointment of two senior leadership positions at the Airports Authority. Anthony Vegliante was named the new vice president for human resources and Goutam Kundu will serve as the new vice president for technology.

“We welcome the addition of these individuals to the Airports Authority and look forward to filling these two important positions on our senior management team,” said Chairman Michael Curto. “They bring a breadth of knowledge to the Airports Authority from their respective areas of expertise and we look forward to working with them in their roles.” For more information about Vegliante and Kundu, visit www.mwaa.com/6148.htm.

The Airports Authority board also approved a contract with Jacobs Engineering, a support services firm utilized during Phase 1 of the Silver Line, to continue providing project management services during Phase 2. Additionally, rental car concessions contracts were approved for Dulles International Airport. Rental companies include Advantage, Avis, Budget, Dollar/Thrifty, Enterprise, Hertz and Vanguard (Alamo/National). The new contract is scheduled to begin July 1.

The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority was established in 1987 by the governments of Virginia and the District of Columbia to manage and operate Washington’s Ronald Reagan National and Dulles International airports, which together serve more than 40 million passengers a year. The Airports Authority also operates and maintains the Dulles Airport Access Road and the Dulles Toll Road and manages construction of the Silver Line project, a 23-mile extension of the Washington region’s Metrorail system into Loudoun County, Va. No taxpayer money is used to operate the toll road, which is funded by toll revenues, or the airports, which are funded through aircraft landing fees, rents and revenues from concessions. The Silver Line construction is funded by a combination of toll-road revenues, airport contributions and federal, state and local government appropriations. The Airports Authority is led by a 17-member board of directors appointed by the governors of Virginia, Maryland, the mayor of Washington, D.C., and the president of the United States.