Navigator Registration Qualifications
NAVIGATOR REGISTRATION

TYPE AND CLASS:

00-58 Navigator

There is Florida law regarding the registering and regulation of the "Navigator" position created by the federal health care reform.

The law requires individuals acting as a "navigator" under PPACA to be registered with the Florida Department of Financial Services. Under PPACA, individuals and small businesses are able to purchase private health insurance through the Federally-facilitated Marketplace (FFM).

"Navigator" means an individual authorized by an exchange to serve as a navigator, or who works on behalf of an entity authorized by an exchange to serve as a navigator, pursuant to 42 U.S.C. s. 18031(i)(1), who facilitates the selection of a qualified health plan through the exchange and performs any other duties specified under 42 U.S.C. s. 18031(i)(3).

Alert: CMS 2018 Assister Certification Training and Bulletin Now Available

On Friday, August 4, 2017, CMS released the Assister Certification Training for Plan Year 2018. The training is hosted by the Marketplace Learning Management System (MLMS), which is the online web-based training platform for assisters providing application and enrollment assistance to consumers in Federally-Facilitated Exchanges (FFEs), including State Partnership Exchanges (SPEs), and State-based Exchanges using the Federal platform (SBE-FPs). The training can be accessed through the CMS Enterprise Portal by logging in or registering as a new user at https://portal.cms.gov/wps/portal/unauthportal/registration. Existing users can login at https://portal.cms.gov.

On August 7, 2017, CMS released the 2017 Assister Certification Bulletin, which provides guidance on training, certification, and recertification requirements and procedures for navigators, certified application counselors CACs, and CAC designated organizations (CDOs) in the FFEs for plan year 2018.

Individuals interested in becoming Navigators should contact the entities that are awarded Navigator grants by the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) for potential employment opportunities. Navigators are not hired directly by the federal government or the Marketplace.

The training curriculum for Navigators is available on the Marketplace website - http://marketplace.cms.gov. Please know that completion of the federal navigator curriculum does not automatically qualify an individual to become a navigator.

Certified Marketplace Application Counselors are not required to be registered as a navigator by the Florida Department of Financial Services (DFS) as they are not regulated by DFS. If you are a certified Marketplace Application Counselor, please do not apply for registration as a Florida navigator.

If you are already registered in Florida as a navigator, you do not need to re-apply, re-qualify, or re-register with the DFS. Please be sure to check your registration status via your MyProfile account. You only need to email your Marketplace Navigator certificate for the 2018 enrollment period to the Department.



State Qualifications:

To be registered as a navigator, the individual must

Be a natural person at least 18 years of age.

Be United States citizen or legal alien who possesses work authorization from the United States Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services.

Apply for the registration by answering all of the questions and paying the fees to complete the online application. [Click here to review fees]

[Click here to apply]

[Fingerprinting fees are not included and must be paid directly to vendor]

Provide official certification that he or she has successfully completed all required training by the federal government and has been certified by them as a Marketplace Navigator for the 2018 enrollment period . The certificate of completion that states it is "not an official certification record" is not sufficient. Please provide the official certificate that has the navigator's unique ID number assigned by HHS and the organization they are employed. Email it to AgentLicensing@MyFloridaCFO.com.

certification that he or she has successfully completed all required training by the federal government and has been certified by them as a . The certificate of completion that states it is "not an official certification record" is sufficient. Please provide the official certificate that has the navigator's unique ID number assigned by HHS and the organization they are employed. Email it to AgentLicensing@MyFloridaCFO.com. Be fingerprinted for a criminal background check. [Click here and follow the instructions]



Once an application has been submitted, you may check your MyProfile account for the status of your application. Deficiencies will be listed under the pending registration application.

Special Note: