Bill White Pounds at Perry in the Piney Woods
TATUM, Texas - L.B.J. knew the roads of East Texas. Ann Richards and the Bush's drove them too.



Fact is, if you're looking to win big-time political office in the Lone Star State you better pull your weight in the Piney Woods.



In and around the small town of Tatum there's a 1000 or more votes to be had and a former big city mayor by the name of Bill White wants them all.

"How ya'll doing?," asks White to a group of townsfolk.

With his self described flashless, no-nonsense style, the self-made millionaire turned public servant presses the flesh and makes his pitch.

"People are ready for a new governor. They want somebody who shoots straight and has common sense," insists the former Houston Mayor who grew up in San Antonio.

White call these meet-and-greet sessions his "job interview" and in towns like Tatum where life is centered most days around schools and most fall Friday nights on the football field, education is a hot button topic and a place where Governor Rick Perry's leadership may be vulnerable.

White says there's no measure more troubling than a Texas dropout rate that's among the very highest in the nation.

"It's a lot easier to fix a knee these days than to fix what happens when a young person decides not to finish high school, right?"

White promised the school board more local control and fresh support for vocational programs.

He also took aim at Governor Perry's recent proposal to deny drop-outs a drivers license.

"You know the problem with that plan? That's been state law since 1989 and he's been responsible for enforcing it. We we are tired of this spin. We want people who treat us like adults," White said to a crowd of four dozen supporters and politically curious local residents.

Nell Hyatt was among the barbecue eating crowd in the Tatum high school cafeteria.

The house wife and great-grandmother called White "a straight shooter."

"Somebody you can trust. Somebody you can tell your problems to and maybe he can help you solve them or something," said Hyatt.

Down the road in Carthage at the Texas Country Music Hall of Fame, White turned up the political volume.

"Leadership is not dividing this state up into groups and playing people off against each other," exclaimed White who pledged to spur non-partisan co-operation in Austin.

"We'll be more interested in putting computers in our classrooms than putting politics in our class rooms," he added.

The big question is whether White's brand of change is compelling enough to inspire East Texas voters to make one.



"It's the Bible belt. It's conservative. It's a part of this state that doesn't like change in any form," says Sharon Ivey who is voting for White, in part, because of the favorable reports she's received from her Houston friends who were pleased with his performance leading the city.

What could benefit White in East Texas is a belief among many that Rick Perry has over stayed his welcome in the state's highest elective office.

"It is an incumbency year too and to the extent Bill White can say Rick Perry has been there too long, than he's likely to make some headway," veteran political reporter Wayne Slater of the Dallas Morning News says.

Ivey believes to make that message truly resonate, the mayor will need to hit the road and head north again.

To prevail in the Piney Woods, they say, you've got to make it personal.