ON THE CAMPAIGN TRAIL: Election Day Arrives for Gillum and DeSantis
ORLANDO, Fla. — Election Day has arrived.

Andrew Gillum and Ron DeSantis and their surrogates spent the last few hours before Election Day crisscrossing the state to convince voters to support them.

Get Out the Vote events happening across Florida

Spectrum News is following the candidates

DECISION 2018: Latest News | Voting Guide

SPECTRUM NEWS APP USERS: Direct Link to our LIVE Feed

Republican Ron DeSantis made stops in the Bay area, Orlando and Jacksonville Monday.

He campaigned in Volusia County on Sunday. The gubernatorial hopeful was joined by former New York City Mayor Rudy Giuliani and Attorney General Pam Bondi.

You can see the DeSantis campaign's event schedule on Facebook .

Meanwhile, his opponent Democratic candidate Andrew Gillum campaigned in the Bay area Monday.

During the weekend, Gillum was in Orlando for a rally at the University of Central Florida. Gillum was joined by Sen. Bill Nelson, who is running against Gov. Rick Scott for Senate.

You can see the Gillum campaign's event schedule on Facebook .

Surrogates campaigning for Gillum have included former Attorney General Eric Holder and Sen. Bernie Sanders. Former President Barack Obama appeared in Miami with Gillum and Sen. Bill Nelson this past week.

Time-stamped updates:

Sunday:

12 a.m.:

The room is almost full! The Volusia County REC Headquarter Office says 888 people RSVP’d to come see @RonDeSantisFL They expect at least 400 will actually show. @MyNews13 @BN9 pic.twitter.com/GZVgVUcy47 — Erin Murray News 13 (@emurray1) November 4, 2018

7 a.m.: Andrew Gillum has events in Winter Park and Miami today. The 'Final Push to the Polls for Gillum!' event will be held at 9 a.m. in Winter Park. Gillum will then head to Miami for a 1 p.m. and 5 p.m. event at the African Heritage Cultural Arts Center.

Ron DeSantis is rallying in South Daytona at 1:30 p.m. before heading to Boca Raton for an event at 4 p.m. and then to Lynn Haven for a 6 p.m. event.

Saturday:

3:50 p.m.: Gillum appeared at a free West Palm Beach concert with singer Jimmy Buffett before more than 1,000 people.

NOW: Democratic Gubernatorial hopeful @AndrewGillum in West Palm Beach with running mate @ChrisKingFL and @NelsonForSenate - Singer Jimmy Buffett is holding a free rally concert to push early voting, day after Miami rally with Pres Obama. @MyNews13 @BN9 pic.twitter.com/HQLlji5NDh — Greg Angel (@NewsGuyGreg) November 3, 2018

.@AndrewGillum tells a West Palm Beach crowd one victim of yesterday’s #tallahasseeshooting sustained six gunshot wounds. “It underscores what we have to do just three days from now when we send an unapologetic message to the NRA that their time is up.” #flgov pic.twitter.com/QgcaJAIVnP — Troy Kinsey (@TroyKinsey) November 3, 2018

12:20 p.m.: Gillum took the stage at the University of Central Florida to rally voters. His tone at the rally was serious, focused largely on gun reform and taking on the National Rifle Association.

Backstage, he reflected on how the tone of politics should not include violence.

“You can be for your candidate, you can point out his differences ... our nation deserves better, and this state deserves better," Gillum remarked.

— Reporter Krystel Knowles

11:30 a.m.: Democratic leaders, such as Sen. Bill Nelson, helped rally a crowd of supporters.

Senator Bill Nelson at UCF https://t.co/vJfNQPBWCs — Krystel Knowles (@KnowlesKrystel) November 3, 2018

As of Saturday AM: 4.4+ million votes cast so far for Nov 6 election. GOP with large lead (67K) in vote by mail; Dems with narrow (11K) lead in early vote turnout. @MyNews13 @BN9 #ElectionDay pic.twitter.com/W6IKxQ1Ku4 — Greg Angel (@NewsGuyGreg) November 3, 2018

Gubernatorial Candidate Andrew Gillum will take the stage at UCF for the “get out the vote” event @MyNews13 #Midterms2018#ElectionDay#BeAVoter pic.twitter.com/3qpX6x5UrI — Krystel Knowles (@KnowlesKrystel) November 3, 2018

The stage is set for this afternoon’s @jimmybuffett concert for @AndrewGillum & the #Florida Dem ticket in West Palm Beach. Gillum to join Buffett on stage at 2pm. #flgov pic.twitter.com/EVaqF7CT9D — Troy Kinsey (@TroyKinsey) November 3, 2018

10:30 a.m.: Gillum will take the stage at UCF on Saturday for the "Get Out The Vote" event.

3 DAYS LEFT: until the next governor is elected, today Gubernatorial Candidate Andrew Gillum will take the stage at UCF for the “get out the vote” event @MyNews13 pic.twitter.com/4F1ogYm9qR — Krystel Knowles (@KnowlesKrystel) November 3, 2018

SPECTRUM NEWS APP USERS: Direct Link to our LIVE Feed