What are the rules for election recounts in Florida?
The state of Florida did not invent close elections and recounts — it only seems that way.

And with the state's presidential primary days away, it seems like a good time to look at what has happened in the past, could happen in the future and what rules are in place should there be another close vote count.

Twenty U.S. states, including Florida, and the District of Columbia conduct automatic recounts if the vote margin between the top two candidates is within certain parameters. In Florida, a recount of the ballots takes place if the vote margin is 0.5 percent or less.

Of course, never has this more famously come into play than during the 2000 presidential election. The election between Al Gore and George W. Bush was so close, it took five weeks to determine a winner — and it all hinged on Florida.

On Election Night 2000, fewer than 600 votes separated the candidates.

Court proceedings, more recounts and hangings chads followed before the U.S. Supreme Court issued a 5–4 decision to reverse the Florida Supreme Court’s recount order, awarding the White House to Bush.

The tally eventually saw Bush win Florida 271 to 266 in the electoral vote count, while Gore won the popular vote over Bush by some 500,000 votes.

In the 2010 gubernatorial race, Rick Scott defeated Alex Sink by a 1.2 percent margin, narrowly avoiding a mandatory recount.

So, let's say a primary vote ends up super close in our state. What exactly would happen then?

Again, the vote margin would have to be 0.5 percent or less.

First, according to Florida statutes, paper ballots would be retabulated using automatic tabulating equipment. Then, if the vote margin is 0.25 percent or less, a manual recount is called for. However, this manual recount applies only to those ballots sorted by the automatic tabulating equipment as having either undervotes or overvotes.

In less legalese, this means that moving to a hand count would only happen if the total number of ballots with undervotes and overvotes could change the results of the election.

So in other words, go vote, keep an eye on the returns March 15 and hope for the best. After all, this is Florida.