Hillary Clinton at Palm Beach State College:
>>Photos: Hillary Clinton rally at PBSC

Clinton even directed people to head right from the rally to the Lantana Road Palm Beach County Library branch, just three miles away. It’s one of 15 sites where early voting started Monday and runs through Nov. 6, just two days before Clinton faces off with GOP nominee, and part-time Palm Beacher, Donald Trump.

“We need to work for the next 13 days, and here in Florida, voting could not be easier,” Clinton told a crowd in a gymnasium at the college west of Lake Worth. “It is so clear how high the stakes are.”

Clinton staffers, quoting the local fire marshal, said the gym was at its capacity of 2,100, and those who didn’t get in watched video in an auxiliary room.

In a reference to the tumultuous 2000 presidential recount, of which Palm Beach County was Ground Zero, the former First Lady said of her husband’s Number Two, “We can’t take our foot off the gas, even for a short time. Every vote counts. Just ask my friend, former Vice President Al Gore.”

Clinton noted that more than 200 million people nationwide, more than 50 million of those young people, are registered to vote. And she said 10 million nationwide already have cast ballots early or by mail, “2 million of them right here in Florida.”

Clinton’s operatives suggested Wednesday this won’t be her last visit to Florida before Election Day.

She even gave a shoutout to Republicans and independents who might be at her rally, saying, “It’s not just what we’re against. It’s what we’re for.”

Clinton again attacked Trump’s refusal to say he’d accept the Nov. 8 vote, saying that, as Secretary of State, she visited countries that really do rig their elections.

And she repeated her Trump mantra of “When he goes low, we go high. And boy, has he gone low.”

The candidate pivoted to Florida issues, saying the only proof people need of climate change is flooded Miami streets. Taking a dig at Gov. Rick Scott, she said, “You’ve got a governor who has directed his state government to never say the words or write the words ‘climate change.” Scott’s office responded later with a statement saying, “Those claims are inaccurate. DEP (the Florida Department of Environmental Protection) has no such policy in place.”

And while Clinton didn’t refer at the rally to this week’s news that premiums for the Affordable Care Act were shooting up, State Rep. Blaise Ingoglia, R-Spring Hill, chairman of the Republican Party of Florida, did.

“On the heels of Obamacare premiums increasing at an average of 25 percent, Secretary Clinton’s visit to the Sunshine State will be a stark reminder of how big government policies like Obamacare will continue stifling our economy, restricting small business expansion and killing jobs,” he said Tuesday in a written statement.

Clinton told the crowd at Palm Beach State, “We need to build the economy from the middle up and the bottom up. Not the top down.” She called for raising the federal minimum wage, saying, “No one who works full time should still be in poverty.” And she said of the middle class, “If you make $250,000 or less, your income taxes won’t go up. Period.”

She even gave props to the people at the top.

”I love having the support of real billionaires. Donald gives a bad name to billionaires,” Clinton said. She said Trump “paid probably less taxes than everyone here.” Later, noting a figure that half of all undocumented immigrants nevertheless pay taxes, she quipped, “which means they paid more than Donald Trump.”

Clinton saved some of her harsher remarks for the idea of equal pay for women. She said when they are cheated, so are their families. Aiming her ire at her opponent, she said, “Don’t let anyone tell you it’s a woman issue. If standing up for equal pay is playing the women’s card, then deal me in.”

Noting that, as she spoke, Trump was dedicating a new complex in Washington, D.C., she said, “tell your friends voting for Trump he relied on undocumented workers and used overseas products and sued to make his costs lower.”

As she did Tuesday in Broward County, Clinton also put in a plug for U.S. Senate candidate and U.S. Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Jupiter, who she said, unlike GOP incumbent Marco Rubio, “has not been afraid to stand up to Donald Trump.”

And she talked up Randy Perkins, who’s running for Murphy’s former seat, although she did call him “Randy Parker.”

One of Clinton’s warm-up speakers was U.S. Rep. Lois Frankel, D-West Palm Beach. The former West Palm Beach mayor also worked the crowd as people waiting for the rally to start. Asked about a new Bloomberg poll that, unlike other recent surveys, puts Trump ahead nationally, Frankel said, “We always knew Florida was going to close. That’s why Hillary’s here.”