Medicare Advantage Florida payments for 2016 announced
Members of Congress welcomed Monday what they viewed as good news from federal officials on Medicare Advantage payments for 2016.

On average, Medicare Advantage plans will see an increase of their payments of 1.25 percent, compared to a decrease of nearly 1 percent proposed in February, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services officials said.

“Last month, 239 members of Congress, Republicans and Democrats, took a stand against unnecessary and dangerous cuts to the Medicare Advantage program,” said Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Jupiter. “If imposed, these cuts would have cut services for senior citizens, limited options, and driven up health care costs.”

Murphy was one of the House members who wrote a letter against proposed cuts, and both of Florida’s U.S. Senators signed their chamber’s version.

“For seniors on fixed incomes struggling to get by, the additional burden would have been unaffordable,” Murphy said Monday. “We cannot continue to chip away at this critical program, and I am proud that CMS is listening to this broad coalition of members.”

Medicare Advantage plans will see a total revenue increase of 3.25 percent after factoring in an expected boost in the number of patients classified as sicker, said Sean Cavanaugh, deputy administrator at CMS. The announcement came after markets closed Monday.

Insurance companies and advocacy groups said they were still digesting the numbers late in the day, but had warned before the announcement government payments were not keeping up with the needs of the program.

America’s Health Insurance Plans, a group representing insurers, figured proposed cuts announced in February amounted to another 1.2 percent cut for 2016 after decreases of more than 10 percent the previous two years. They saw a cumulative impact on 1.5 million Florida beneficiaries of between $80 to $100 a month — and more than $90 in Palm Beach County.

Nationally, more than 30 percent of Medicare beneficiaries have chosen to enroll in Medicare Advantage plans, officials say. The plans are described as popular with enrollees because of an emphasis on improving health outcomes through programs that emphasize preventive care, care coordination and management of chronic conditions.

Critics say cutbacks may be justified to reduce taxpayer costs in a government program where fraud cases have put a spotlight on waste and abuse.

In February, a grand jury in West Palm Beach indicted a doctor, Isaac Kojo Anakwah Thompson, related to accusations he cheated Medicare out of about $2.1 million by claiming patients were sicker than they were. He has pleaded not guilty.

There’s also room for insurance companies to tighten their belts, argued Patrick Burns, co-director of Taxpayers Against Fraud Education Fund, a Washington, D.C.-based group that supports whistle blowers in fraud cases.

“The one thing that never seems to go down are insurance companies salaries, benefits, and stock options,” Burns said.