Cerabino: Why does Trump hire foreign workers at Mar-A-Lago?
I’m feeling sorry for Donald Trump and that hell hole he runs on Palm Beach.

As you know, Trump is going to be “the greatest job creator president that God ever created.” So it’s not very helpful that as he promises to bring employment of U.S. citizens to new heights, he relies on lots of foreign workers to staff his Mar-a-Lago Club on Palm Beach.

For at least the past seven years, Trump has been requesting from the U.S. Labor Department 70 to 90 foreign workers every year under the H2B visa program to work as cooks, waiters and housekeepers at Mar-a-Lago, according to an investigation done by Jim DeFede of CBS-4 TV in Miami.

The H2 visa program Trump is using started in 1943 to import Jamaicans to cut sugar cane in the United States. It has since split into an H2A program for agricultural workers to plant and harvest crops and the H2B program for foreign workers needed to do the landscaping, forestry, construction and hotel cleaning jobs.

These are supposed to be seasonal jobs that American workers are unwilling or unable to do. The Labor Department caps the H2B visas granted in each year at 66,000 foreign workers.

+ Bruce Bennett Donald and Melania Trump stand for the national anthem at the start of The Trump Invitational $125,000 Grand Prix at The ... read more Bruce Bennett ×

That means in all of the United States, a vast county with an impressive supply of crappy jobs, we import 66,000 workers to do the worst of the worst menial labor that American workers won’t do.

And among those awful jobs is working at Trump’s Palm Beach private club.

I had no idea that Mar-a-Lago was such a pit of despair. Trump called it “paradise” in his “Art of the Deal” book, but I guess if you work there it’s more like the high-society version of chopping sugar cane in the South Florida sun.

+ Frank Cerabino ×

“Swing low, sweet chariot, comin’ for to carry these cocktails poolside.”

Let’s face it, if you run a roadside no-tell motel on U.S. 1, you’re expected to find American workers to change the nubby sheets. Or if you need a griddle cook at the Titusville Waffle House, don’t even bother asking the U.S. government to import for you a desperate Romanian willing to work 16 hours a day for poverty wages.

And if you run any of the other high-end resorts in Palm Beach County — where hospitality jobs are the biggest private source of employment — you’re expected to use American workers. A hospitality career expo looking for those very workers was held Friday in Palm Beach Gardens.

“We work with over 120 area hotels and clubs placing people for seasonal work,” said Tom Veenstra, the senior director of support services at CareerSource Palm Beach County, a job placement service. “We have two hospitality-specific recruiters who do recruiting for these type of jobs.”

But if you run what Trump describes as “one of the most highly regarded private clubs in the world” you can count on federal government assistance to get foreigners to work there for $10 to $12 an hour — far below the estimated $16-an-hour living wage in Palm Beach County.

Trump explained his woes on MSNBC this week.

“Getting help in Palm Beach during the season is almost impossible,” he said. “So we tend to get help from different places including Europe. So we go through a very legal process and bring people in through legal visas.”

I had no idea that Donald Trump, God’s gift to American job creation, was himself hopelessly mired in the invasion of foreigners looking for work in America.

Poor Donald. He may need to build a bigger wall around Mar-a-Lago.

Or maybe hire some American workers.

Following the DeFede story, Mar-a-Lago staffers placed 50 job openings with CareerSource, Veenstra said.

Imagine that. Maybe working at Mar-a-Lago isn’t like chopping sugar cane after all.