We take a look back at the road that created Florida
Twenty years after Henry Flagler brought his railroad and private rail cars full of swells to Florida in the 1890s, Henry Ford’s Model T and Carl Fisher’s Dixie Highway brought everyone else.

Beginning in 1915 and for decades afterward, “The Dixie” was the artery that delivered the tourists who became residents, transforming America’s last frontier into a balmy, palmy middle-class paradise.

In towns such as West Palm Beach, Dixie was the main drag where courthouses and businesses were built. Dixie spawned theme motels, juice stands and wacky roadside attractions.

They’re almost all gone in 21st century Florida, but stretches of Dixie — truncated, relocated and sometimes renamed — remain.

In the highway’s 100th birthday year, we’re still driving Dixie, the road that created Florida.

A rough, rutted road

For intrepid tourists and adventurers at the dawn of the Automobile Age, a trip south on “The Dixie” was a grueling, often dangerous journey.

It could take 10 days to two weeks to drive on a Tin Lizzie’s narrow tires from Chicago to Miami, down the Deep South’s dirt roads and Florida’s lonely sand tracks.

Coming into Palm Beach County, Dixie followed the dry ridge that Flagler’s railroad crews had surveyed two decades earlier.

“The FEC had taken the high ground, so basically they had whatever was left,” said Lake Park historian L.J. Parker. “When they came to a lake or a sinkhole, they moved the road to the other side of the tracks.”

Today, the road is still called Dixie Highway in downtown West Palm Beach, but farther north the city’s Evergreen and Poinsettia avenues also follow the century-old route.

After U.S. 1 was built in the 1920s, the highway became known as Old Dixie in Lake Park and Delray Beach. Alternate A1A through Palm Beach Gardens follows Dixie’s old track. In Riviera Beach, Dixie was recently renamed President Barack Obama Highway.

Its location sometimes shifted. In Boca Raton, today’s Dixie is on the east side of the tracks, but the road’s original route is on the west side, now known as Southwest First Avenue.

Dixie Highway, argues historian Tammy Ingram, modernized the South by providing its first good farm-to-market roads while simultaneously creating the dream of a winter Florida vacation.

“Auto tourism opened up Florida to middle class tourism. You didn’t need a train depot anymore,” said Ingram, author of “Dixie Highway: Road Building and the Making of the Modern South” and a history professor at the University of Charleston.

Credit goes to Carl Fisher, the founder of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway and an early automobile enthusiast. He helped form the Dixie Highway Association in 1914 to create a reliable route to remote and undeveloped Florida.

His idea was to cobble together the country’s existing north-south roads and improve them, creating an interstate highway. (He’d done the same thing earlier with his transcontinental Lincoln Highway, connecting New York to San Francisco.) His genius was persuading states and cities to tax themselves into paying for improving those existing roads.

Unlike Flagler, who used his personal fortune to build his railroad, Fisher didn’t spend a dime on road construction.

‘Not a trip for faint of heart’

At first, Dixie was hardly worthy of the name “highway.” Much of it was a rutted sand track through Florida’s piney woods and coastal scrub. Nevertheless, it still funneled tourists and new residents into the state, which ultimately resulted in real estate sales.

Which was Fisher’s idea from the start.

He wanted a way to get Midwesterners down to his latest project: a mangrove swamp he was busy transforming into Miami Beach.

When it officially opened in the fall of 1915, the road wandered south via two meandering, gerrymandered routes. The eastern route started in Detroit then entered Florida at Jacksonville before following the Atlantic coast. The western route left Chicago, connecting Tallahassee with Orlando then continued down the peninsula’s west coast.

Eventually, the combined Dixie Highway routes stretched 5,786 miles across 10 states from the Canadian border at Sault Sainte Marie in Michigan’s Upper Peninsula to Miami on Biscayne Bay.

“Before that, you had to find your own way down without maps or road signs,” said Susan Gillis, curator at the Boca Raton Historical Society, which is sponsoring a lecture on the history of Dixie Highway later this month.

In 1916, a Palm Beach Post article encouraged locals to welcome a 500-car cavalcade that was to start in Cincinnati in October and run “the entire length of the Dixie Highway” through West Palm Beach ending in Miami.

“It was very treacherous, but that was part of the appeal,” said Ingram. “It was not a trip for the faint of heart. You left early and timed it so you were hitting major towns to eat lunch, get gas, have a place to stay overnight. You carried supplies including extra tires and gas. Wealthy people would have a driver and mechanic go with them.”

Florida’s torrential downpours were big trouble for those early motorists.

Yet, thousands came and stayed, starting Florida’s 1920s land boom.

By 1920, Motor Travel magazine wrote that Florida “no longer lay beyond arduous and impassable sands … just around the corner from Stygian cypress swamps …”

But many of those who followed Dixie to the boom did a U-turn during the bust that began in 1926.

By May of 1928, Boca Raton was so desperate for tourists it erected a painted plywood camel over the road to attract Shriners headed to a national convention in Miami. A sign advertised that its new town hall (now the city’s history museum) had restrooms.

A month later during a Miami Elks convention, said Gillis, the city added antlers to transform the camel into an elk.

Today, most of what remains of Dixie’s original route through Palm Beach is Old Dixie, a workingman’s road lined with thrift shops and car repair places.

But a tiny abandoned stretch of road in North Palm Beach offers a glimpse of how the road once looked.

Old Dixie dead-ends at the south bank of the C-17 canal/Earman River. The old roadbed once led to a bridge that burned in 1933. Shading the cracked roadbed is a line of the Australian pines once planted along Dixie as a windbreak.

It’s a lonely forgotten spot. Four wood storks stood on the bank on a recent afternoon.

“Time kind of passed her by,” said Gillis of the road that created Florida.