Florida panther dodges a bullet, but development still threatens
The panther won’t be culled after all.

The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC), taking a big step back from a policy proposal that pointed to the thinning of a panther population unfairly seen as a threat to to humans, voted for a much milder set of policies Wednesday to protect the endangered state symbol.

But as discussion wore on for three hours at the commission’s meeting in Fort Lauderdale, it became clear that a continuing future for the panther is by no means assured. FWC officials should feel obligated to make that happen.

Earlier this summer, the FWC raised plenty of alarms by drafting a position paper that said panther populations are “straining and currently exceed the tolerance of landowners, residents and recreationists in the region,” as seen by the killing of livestock on ranches and crashes with cars on the roadways. That draft was largely influenced by Commissioner Leisa Priddy — who owns a 9,300-acre cattle ranch not far from the Florida Panther National Wildlife Refuge in Immokalee.

Luckily, Commissioner Ron Bergeron, who says he’s never had problems with the panthers at his Everglades-area property, objected. And many members of the public objected, too.

+ The Florida panther, an animal that once roamed throughout the American Southeast, is now largely confined to a territory between Fort ... read more ×

The revised draft proposal toned down much of the talk about human-panther conflicts. Instead it emphasizes the need to strengthen panther recovery and conservation.

That’s great. But the core of the policy statement backs away from long-held plans to establish two more panther populations in Central or North Florida, besides the one that exists in Southwest Florida. And it puts the onus of creating those potential habitats on the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, instead of Florida’s own wildlife agency.

Great progress has been made in restoring the panther population. As recently as the early 1980s, there were only an estimated 20 to 30 of the animals. But in 1995, wildlife officials introduced several female panthers and now there is a population estimated at 180, according to FWC staff estimates — a nice rebound. But according to the policy paper, they have “fully occupied all available panther habitat in Southwest Florida.”

That’s not an enormous area. An animal that once roamed throughout the American Southeast is now largely confined to a territory between Fort Lauderdale and Naples north of Alligator Alley.

“There’s really no Florida panther. There’s a Collier/Lee/Hendry County panther,” said Matthew Schwartz, executive director of the South Florida Wildlands Association.

Schwartz noted that the FWC policy paper had almost nothing to say about the most crucial threat to the panther’s future: the loss of habitat to development. Central Florida is rapidly filling with houses, roads and strip malls, just as South Florida has. Even Everglades restoration has eaten away at panther habitat, when it sets aside acreage for water storage.

According to the ranchers, farmers and hunters who spoke at Wednesday’s meeting, these panthers have become incredible nuisances, destroying deer and hog populations as they gobble up all the available prey, and nabbing cattle, too.

The FWC, to its credit, pledges in its new policy statement to increase educational efforts to “recognize, report and respond” to panther encounters with livestock or humans. Bergeron noted that panthers don’t attack humans. He said people are more likely to be killed by dogs or falling coconuts.

Commissioners also supported the idea of compensating ranchers and others who lose animals to panthers, and to work with the Florida Department of Transportation for more and better panther road crossings.

What we’d really like to see is the FWC showing up at county commission meetings when local officials weigh permits for a new subdivision, shopping center or power plant — and to energetically explain the impacts those developments would have on the panther and its ability to hunt for the food it needs.

But we’re not holding our breath. The current FWC commissioners are nearly all developers and builders.

The panther has been saved for today. Its long-term prospects should have all of us worried.