Democratic Senate foes Grayson, Murphy spar over effectiveness
Democratic Reps. Patrick Murphy of Jupiter and Alan Grayson of Orlando — rivals in their party’s 2016 Senate primary — are tangling over their effectiveness as legislators after a website ranked Murphy among the “least effective” members of Congress.

Grayson and Republicans are promoting an InsideGov.com report — called “deeply flawed” by the Murphy camp — that puts Murphy 21st on its “least effective” list because no Murphy-sponsored bill has made it out of a House committee. The Murphy camp says the report fails to account for legislation he’s worked on with other members or tacked on to other bills, or money he’s helped steer towards Everglades restoration and the Indian River Lagoon.

+ Alan Grayson ×

“It is clear that InsideGov has no idea how Congress really works,” said Murphy campaign spokesman Joshua Karp. “This irresponsible and inaccurate report ignores Patrick’s numerous successes bringing legislators together and cutting through the dysfunction in Washington.”

Murphy introduced 23 bills during his freshman term in 2013-14, the period measured by InsideGov. None made it out of a committee in the GOP-controlled House. But the main chunk of a Murphy bill on student loans was added as an amendment to a bill that passed the House, and a Murphy bill dealing with disaster recovery for small businesses was inserted word-for-word into legislation that cleared the House Small Business Committee.

Murphy also helped draft a small-business bill that President Barack Obama signed into law last year. That legislation listed Rep. Blaine Luetkemeyer, R-Mo., as lead sponsor and Murphy as one of six co-sponsors. When the bill came up on the House floor in May 2014, then-Rep. (now U.S. Sen.) Shelley Moore Capito, R-W.Va., thanked “Mr. Luetkemeyer and Mr. Murphy of Florida for drafting the legislation before us this afternoon and for working together on the Financial Services Committee.”

+ Patrick Murphy ×

Murphy also got six amendments passed on the House floor, including one to boost Army Corps of Engineers construction spending and one requiring competitive bids on defense contracts.

Those efforts don’t show up in the InsideGov ratings of the 35 least effective members of Congress, which it based on data from the congressional tracking site GovTrack.us. According to GovTrack, there were 10,637 bills introduced in the 113th Congress. Only 2,066, or 19.4 percent, made it out of a committee and only 266, or 2.5 percent, became law.

Grayson introduced 96 bills in the 113th Congress — more than any other member, according to GovTrack — and got two out of committee. One was a resolution urging Afghanistan to pursue a “transparent, credible and inclusive run-off presidential election” in 2014. The other was a bill allowing foreign service employees to designate beneficiaries of their death benefits.

Grayson also sponsored three bills that were rolled into other bills that were reported out of a committee. And nine Grayson bills to extend expiring tax credits were included in a massive Ways and Means Committee package that became law. Grayson also offered 38 floor amendments during the 113th Congress; 21 were adopted.

GovTrack founder Josh Tauberer says the statistics his website publishes are only one way to evaluate a legislator’s effectiveness. They don’t measure committee work, bills that get folded into other legislation, wrangling for appropriations or constituent-service work.

Rep. Lois Frankel, D-West Palm Beach, who ranked No. 14 on the InsideGov “least effective” list, also took issue with the report.

“Our work is not just about casting big bills,” said Frankel, a former state House member and West Palm Beach mayor. “I spend most of my time on very practical things. I sort of wear my mayor’s hat.”

•

There could soon be 10 Republicans running for the Palm Beach-Treasure Coast District 18 House seat that Murphy is leaving to run for Senate. At last week’s Palm Beach County GOP Lobsterfest, grower Rick Roth was invited to speak as a District 18 candidate; he said he’ll make a decision in the fall. Marc Freeman, a physician who opened a campaign last month for Frankel’s District 22 seat, also declared at Lobsterfest that he’ll switch to more Republican-friendly District 18.

•

Trumpmentum? Financial adviser Paul Spain, another one of the Republicans running in District 18, is embracing GOP presidential poll-topper Donald Trump and businesswoman Carly Fiorina in his campaign.

“What the public is saying to you with Donald Trump and Carly Fiorini (sic), they want a businessperson,” Spain told the Lobsterfest crowd. “I’m a businessperson. They want someone who can see a problem and fix a problem. The time for talking is over. It’s time for action in this nation.”