Man in chicken suit gives buzz to White’s hopes
AUSTIN — A chicken suit and jibes over GOP Gov. Rick Perry's work schedule do not a campaign make, but they're putting some sparkle into Democrat Bill White's achingly earnest effort to unseat the nearly 10-year incumbent.

For Democrats, who've been a long time between successful statewide races, a good shtick is a step forward.

“We stood up to Rick Perry,” said the Texas Democratic Trust's Phillip Martin, 26. He came up with the idea for the chicken-suited heckler to help disrupt a Perry campaign press conference by suggesting Perry's afraid to debate the Democrat.

“Since I was 16 years old, Rick Perry's been governor, and I've been working now for nearly 10 years to try to knock him out,” said Martin, son of veteran Democratic strategist Ed Martin. “That's one of the best punches in the face we got to the Rick Perry campaign.”

White's camp seemed to get under Perry's skin with another tactic — touting schedules that White said show Perry spent an average of seven hours a week on state business from January through May.

“If they've made anybody that can outwork me yet, please introduce me to him or her,” Perry bristled. “Texans know I am mobile, I am agile, and I'm going to continue doing work for ‘em 24-7. Just because it doesn't show up on my schedule doesn't mean I'm not out working for the people of the state of Texas. Thank you very much.”

Perry's camp also consistently returns fire on the debate issue, reiterating that Perry won't debate unless White releases more tax returns. White, after balking, released returns for his years as Houston mayor, but Perry also wants White to release them for his time as deputy energy secretary under Clinton and as Democratic Party chairman.

“The people of Texas want a leader like Governor Perry who has made the Texas economy one of the strongest in the nation, not someone like Bill White who is afraid to release his tax returns and profited from his time as mayor of Houston during Hurricane Rita,” Perry spokesman Mark Miner said. White defends his record as mayor and has called Perry's charges a lie.

While they may not change the campaign's course, Martin said stunts like the chicken heckler show the ability of White's camp and other Democrats to quickly organize enthusiastic supporters.

“It carries over not just in the chicken-suit realm, but in the kind of real, tangible politics that will actually make a difference going into the fall," said Martin.