Edgewood to close Coronado/Escobar school Unanimous board accepts panel's recommendation amid shortfall.









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-5', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 5', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});





Photo: TOM REEL, Tom Reel/Express-News Image 1 of / 5 Caption Close Image 1 of 5 METRO Frank Saldana expresses his desire to keep an old school open at a public hearing for discussion of the Edgewood ISD Long Range Planning committee recomendation to close Coronado/Escobar Elementary on Tuesday, April 19. Tom Reel/Staff less METRO Frank Saldana expresses his desire to keep an old school open at a public hearing for discussion of the Edgewood ISD Long Range Planning committee recomendation to close Coronado/Escobar Elementary on ... more Photo: TOM REEL, Tom Reel/Express-News Image 2 of 5 METRO Monica Gaona expresses her opinion at a public hearing for discussion of the Edgewood ISD Long Range Planning committee recomendation to close Coronado/Escobar Elementary on Tuesday, April 19. Tom Reel/Staff less METRO Monica Gaona expresses her opinion at a public hearing for discussion of the Edgewood ISD Long Range Planning committee recomendation to close Coronado/Escobar Elementary on Tuesday, April 19. Tom ... more Photo: TOM REEL, Tom Reel/Express-News Image 3 of 5 METRO Edgewood superintendent Elizabeth Garza addresses school board members at a public hearing for discussion of the Edgewood ISD Long Range Planning committee recomendation to close Coronado/Escobar Elementary on Tuesday, April 19. On the left is Sonia Elizondo, on the right are Joe Guerra (school board president) and Theresa Martinez. Tom Reel/Staff less METRO Edgewood superintendent Elizabeth Garza addresses school board members at a public hearing for discussion of the Edgewood ISD Long Range Planning committee recomendation to close Coronado/Escobar ... more Photo: TOM REEL, Tom Reel/Express-News Image 4 of 5 Coronado/Escobar Elementary School Coronado/Escobar Elementary School Photo: BILLY CALZADA/gcalzada@express-news.net Image 5 of 5 Edgewood to close Coronado/Escobar school 1 / 5 Back to Gallery

Edgewood Independent School District’s board of trustees unanimously voted Tuesday night to close Coronado/Escobar Elementary School — the first school closure in Bexar County related to anticipated state budget cuts.

After six people pleaded for the school to be spared, board members voted 6-0 for the closure, effective at the end of the school year.

The move was recommended by the district’s long-range facilities committee, a group of about 80 parents, residents and administrators.

“If we could keep Coronado, I think we would have tried to find a way, but in order for us to be able to survive in this district, we have to make some tough decisions, and tough decisions include closing schools,” board member Johnny Perez told the audience at the Edgewood Fine Arts Academy.

“I don’t think we have a lot of choice.”

The board voted last month to close an elementary school to avoid layoffs as Edgewood struggles to meet an anticipated $7.7 million shortfall next school year.

Local Channel Now Playing: Now Playing SAPD makes arrest in 2015 'Hell's Gate' murder case mysa

Gregg Popovich: LaMarcus Aldridge Asked to be Traded Last Summer SITime

Search for drunk man last seen at S.A. bar ends in rush to the hospital mysa

SAPD: Robber made man get on ground, then shot him mysa

Alleged stalker at apartment complex on camera mysa

Church Shooting Victim Goes Home on Fire Truck AP

Motorcyclist being tailed by police crashes in North Side mysa

San Antonio's Confluence Park seen from the sky mysa

Woman hit by driver after running into North Side street mysa

Mayor and others discuss the symphony's new schedule mysa

Closing the elementary school will save $1 million a year in salaries, with up to another $3 million in annual savings from not having to pay for the school’s maintenance and operations. Teachers who want to stay with the district will be moved to other campuses.

District officials said the school was first on the chopping block because Coronado/Escobar, built in 1952, needed at least $3.3 million in repairs and had the lowest elementary school population, with 509 students.

Also, Garza said the district’s newer schools have better amenities and the space to accommodate Coronado/Escobar’s students, which would be more efficient for Edgewood.

Coronado/Escobar got its name when Coronado Elementary School, named after explorer Francisco Coronado, was closed and Escobar Junior High School became an elementary school in 1987. The junior high was named for Eleuterio Escobar, a local education advocate.

The board also voted Tuesday to allow the district to redraw its boundaries and reassign students among its remaining 13 elementary schools. All schools will be affected.

The crowd of about 40 people remained relatively subdued throughout the hourlong meeting, though some said the soon-to-be vacant school will become an eyesore and that the decision was made too quickly.

Others expressed discontent with how students would be reassigned.

“Are the students going to get the same attention in these new classrooms?” Juan Hernandez, whose daughter attends Coronado/Escobar, asked the board. “I worry about how our children are going to be able to adjust.”