New frontier for DPS is stopping smuggling

HIDALGO COUNTY — It was an unlucky day for the drug mules scrambling to reach a stash house near Mission.

Their black Ford F-250 pickup, its bed and cab loaded with 1,200 pounds of pot, was spotted by law enforcement officers on a recent afternoon, and within minutes a Texas Department of Public Safety helicopter swooped overhead.

The driver turned his truck around and headed for the river.

The chopper shadowed the pickup as it sped over unpaved roads, weaving through the network of irrigation channels and farmland gently sloping toward the Rio Grande. Below the Anzalduas International Bridge, the truck hit the water.

The driver and his passenger swam across to the Mexican side of the river, while Border Patrol agents swarmed the truck and confiscated the load.

“I think he took a wrong turn there, because normally there would have been two or three rafts and about three or four people to take (the drugs) across,” said Capt. Stacy Holland, one of two helicopter pilots flying patrols out of Edinburg on the day of the chase.

The smugglers escaped in a so-called “splashdown,” the term used when traffickers on the run from U.S. officers high-tail it back to the river. Such escape attempts have become more frequent, DPS said, since the department bolstered its presence on the border with more troopers, technology, equipment and weapons.

The Legislature has provided more than $600 million for border security since 2007, with most of the money given to DPS to target drug and human smugglers. The border operation today represents a small army, with specialized Ranger Reconnaissance Teams, new intelligence centers, patrol boats, helicopters and surveillance cameras watching for traffickers.

Even a high-altitude spy plane soon will be deployed.

It's a departure from DPS' traditional roles as highway patrolmen and a support service to local law enforcement agencies.

The new strategy is based on “the idea of unifying the efforts and recognizing that there's insufficient resources for Border Patrol to secure the border,” said DPS Director Steve McCraw. “How do we work together to amplify border security?”

Border security was a keystone of Gov. Rick Perry's 2010 re-election campaign and his aborted bid for the GOP presidential nomination, and the issue has received bipartisan support in the Legislature.

But civil-rights advocates and others question the need for DPS' involvement in border security when the Border Patrol is at an all-time high in personnel and funding. Meanwhile, they say, there is no indication that beefing up border security has hurt Mexico's drug cartels.

“That money could perhaps be used for other purposes, as we already have Texas Parks and Wildlife” patrolling the river in boats, said Zapata County Sheriff Sigifredo Gonzalez. “Ranger Recon Teams? I don't really know what they've done as we're not privy to that information. DPS is doing the best job they can, but I do, however, feel that their way of working is totally different from local law enforcement.”

Swift response

Cable viewers are now privy to the militarylike missions. Last year, Discovery Channel aired “Texas Drug Wars,” a one-hour special that followed troopers, Rangers and pilots as they chase border smugglers.

In one segment, a trafficker fleeing in a pickup started throwing caltrops — nails welded together to puncture tires. A DPS chopper raced in with a marksman, hanging from its open door, who shot out the truck's tires.

But the dangerous maneuver was unsuccessful, and the smuggler managed to splash down near the ferry crossing at Los Ebanos.

“There's been an increasingly confrontational nature in the criminals and the cartel operatives we're dealing with right now,” McCraw said. “Some of these pursuits, they don't care, they're desperate.”

But while DPS and some border residents said traffickers are becoming more brazen, the department couldn't provide statistics to show an increase in confrontations between smugglers and troopers. But the department did provide data showing that troopers in Hidalgo County are involved in far more pursuits than any other county in the state, and that of the top 10 counties for DPS chases, five are on the border and three of the top four are in the Rio Grande Valley.

It's still a far cry from the actual war zone across the river in Mexico. Cities along the Rio Grande are among the safest in Texas, but that's not much consolation for those who live in remote, highly trafficked areas on the border, particularly in a 20-mile stretch from Los Ebanos downstream to Mission.

The conflicts between traffickers and U.S. law enforcement rarely boil over into violence, but when they do, authorities north of the border have responded swiftly. In October, when local gang members working for the Gulf Cartel tried to shoot their way out of a traffic stop, one deputy was wounded and a gang member was killed. And last summer, when smugglers in Mexico lobbed six shots at Texas Parks and Wildlife Department game wardens on the Rio Grande, U.S. law enforcement responded with a 300-round fusillade.

Confrontations have started to creep from rural areas along the river into more populated areas. In March, more than 15,000 people at the Rio Grande Valley Livestock Show watched as a smuggler, his vehicle loaded with immigrants and DPS troopers on his tail, barreled past the ticket booths and onto the fairgrounds.

“I couldn't believe that was happening here,” said Arnold Medellin, the head groundskeeper at the livestock show who had a front-row seat as troopers overwhelmed the smugger and rounded up his charges. “Lately, it's one thing after another.”

Controversial programs

One of the first DPS efforts was the launch of Operation Border Star, a controversial program started in 2007 that provides money to local law enforcement agencies along the Rio Grande.

In 2011, the Legislature set aside more than $10 million for DPS to distribute directly to local law enforcement agencies for border security. But Border Star came under criticism from the American Civil Liberties Union of Texas. A 2009 report from the group found that Border Star encouraged participating agencies to conduct traffic stops that rarely yielded drug seizures or asset forfeiture.

“They're using this money that's supposed to be supplementing federal (drug enforcement) work, and using it for busting a street-level dealer,” said Krystal Gomez, advocacy and policy counsel with the ACLU of Texas Brownsville office.

DPS officials say Border Star has a value beyond providing extra cash to agencies along the Rio Grande: All 40 departments that take part in the program must submit information about their law enforcement activity to DPS, such as when and where pursuits and drug seizures occur, in order to continue receiving money.

In 2009, Perry and DPS announced the deployment of Ranger Reconnaissance Teams, specially trained and heavily armed units that are dispatched to hot spots on the border. The agency won't discuss much about their operations other than to say they have investigative and tactical abilities and are often sent to rural areas. The Ranger teams have seized 78,000 pounds of drugs and arrested 76 people, according to DPS. They've also referred 1,103 illegal immigrants to federal agents.

DPS' investigative efforts have yielded mixed results. In April 2010, sheriff's deputies in Zapata County told the Rangers that a group of hit men for the Zetas gang had crossed the border to kill a man in Rio Grande City, according to an arrest warrant affidavit. The Rangers arrested five people. But 90 days later, prosecutors didn't have enough information to indict the suspects, and a judge ordered them released from jail. They were turned over to federal authorities and deported, according to prosecutors.

The Rangers eventually submitted the results of their investigation to the district attorney's office for Webb and Zapata counties. The suspects were indicted on criminal conspiracy charges. They remain fugitives in Mexico.

In another effort, the department is installing 500 cameras along the border, part of an electronic monitoring program called Operation Drawbridge. It's an update of the much-criticized Texas Border Watch Program, a multimillion-dollar effort by the state to set up video cameras along the border. It was recently canceled after only a few dozen cameras were put in place over more than three years and unimpressive results.

When a Drawbridge camera is triggered, it sends an image to DPS' Border Security Operations Center in Austin. If it shows something of interest — immigrants or drug mules — the image is saved and added to the stream of information DPS shares with other agencies.

“If you have a crew over here that's cranking out shots at Border Patrol, that's engaging in pursuits and throwing out caltrops, we would try to target that crew,” said Texas Ranger Capt. Aaron Grigsby, who supervises the Austin operations center.

‘Hell to pay'

Hidalgo County Sheriff Lupe Treviño said he didn't know DPS was running helicopter patrols on the Rio Grande. The department has been most helpful to him when filling its traditional role backing up local law enforcement, Treviño said.

“The best thing about DPS, from my perspective, is that they are there when you need them. I don't see them initiating any groundbreaking type of initiative, or I don't see them really hitting the front line that hard, but I do see them as an excellent resource,” he said. “If it wasn't for DPS and the manpower and assets and resources that they make available to us when we need them, I'd be up the proverbial creek. I've had manhunts when we've had 25, 30 DPS troopers show up. Their helicopter is super instrumental to our manhunts and our investigations.”

Valley residents reported that traffickers are getting more brazen, openly hauling drugs through private property and intimidating landowners. The confrontational behavior appears to be a response to the increased law enforcement presence, said Jo Jo White, director of Hidalgo and Cameron Counties Irrigation District No. 9. An employee who's paid to maintain a pumping station on the Rio Grande recently announced he was quitting after traffickers threatened him and broke into a district-owned office near his house.

“These guys are still going to get (drugs) through somehow,” White said. “Please, just protect my guys.”

The harder law enforcement pushes on the cartels, the more the narcos push back, said Holland, the helicopter pilot.

“DPS has plussed up their enforcement effort. Border Patrol has plussed up,” he said. “Well, what's actually happened is we've applied pressure. When you apply pressure, you see the methods, the means and the routes become more desperate. That's when you're seeing the caltrops and the splashdowns.”

And while the situation on the U.S. side of the border isn't comparable to the actual war zone in Mexico, there are signs of spillover. In Arizona, drug mules and immigrant smugglers carry rifles for protection from groups of armed bandits, said Grigsby, the Ranger captain. DPS is trying to keep that from happening in Texas, he said.

“If you're even thinking of sending armed escorts with your loads, there's going to be hell to pay,” Grigsby said.

jbuch@express-news.net