Ted Cruz touts small businesses, bashes Obamacare at Mi Tierra in San Antonio

U.S. Senator Ted Cruz, R-Texas, meets with members of the San Antonio's Hispanic Chamber of Commerce on Tuesday, April 18, 2017, at Mi Tierra Cafe & Bakery. U.S. Senator Ted Cruz, R-Texas, meets with members of the San Antonio's Hispanic Chamber of Commerce on Tuesday, April 18, 2017, at Mi Tierra Cafe & Bakery. Photo: Tyler White / San Antonio Express-News Photo: Tyler White / San Antonio Express-News Image 1 of / 9 Caption Close Ted Cruz touts small businesses, bashes Obamacare at Mi Tierra in San Antonio 1 / 9 Back to Gallery

U.S. Senator Ted Cruz, R-Texas, made a pit stop in the Alamo City Tuesday afternoon at Mi Tierra Cafe & Bakery, where he discussed business issues with members of San Antonio's Hispanic Chamber of Commerce.

Forty business leaders were part of the event, where job growth, economic development, small business and education were topics of discussion, according to the chamber's Facebook page.

Cruz said during the meeting that some of his priorities going forward are repealing Obamacare, along with tax and immigration reform.

"It was a pleasure to sit and listen to their concerns," Cruz said of his meeting at Mi Tierra.

READ MORE: 'Missing Ted Cruz' posters pop up around Texas city

One person with a stake in small business, Donald J. Gonzales, of Estrada Hinojosa Investment Bankers, approved of Cruz's message at the Mi Tierra meeting.

"It was great to hear how he sees them (Cruz's goals) all being important and critical for the success of small business," Gonzales said.

While speaking with media, Cruz discussed what he would do in order to help small businesses thrive in the current economic climate, saying two-thirds of all jobs come from small businesses.

"Small businesses grow when you see regulations under control, taxes under control," Cruz said. "If you want to see the economy take off, you reduce the taxes, you simplify the tax code and you reduce regulations on small businesses."

He said small businesses across Texas and San Antonio want "relief" from "crushing" taxes and regulations.

Cruz also commented on Obamacare, calling it "the biggest job killer in the country." He mentioned that the first effort in the House of Representatives to repeal Obamacare did not come to a "successful conclusion," but said Congress is "just getting started."

RELATED: Beto O'Rourke: What you need to know about Ted Cruz's Democrat challenger

He said he hopes to find some common ground on the topic of healthcare reform. He said the biggest issue with Obamacare at this point is that premiums need to be lowered.

"Families are struggling and can't afford to get health insurance for their families," he said. "Our objective has to be lower premiums so that health insurance is more accessible, more affordable, people can care for their families. If we do that we'll have succeeded, and if we don't we'll have failed."

The senator also paid a visit to the San Antonio Toyota manufacturing facility while in town, which provided another look at the economic landscape of the region.

“For him to see that kind of production is right here with our suppliers, it sends the message that it’s made in America,” Mario Lozoya, spokesman for Toyota Motor Manufacturing Texas, said of Cruz’s visit.

Cruz's 2018 Senate election competition, U.S. Rep. Beto O'Rourke, D-El Paso, is also visiting the Alamo City Tuesday. O'Rourke is meeting supporters at Southerleigh Fine Food & Brewery at 6 p.m.

Text "NEWS" to 77453 for breaking news alerts from mySA.com

Staff reporter Rye Druzin contributed to this story.

kbradshaw@express-news.net

Twitter: @kbrad5

twhite@mysa.com

Twitter: @tylerlwhite