Gay by choice? James runs with opinion

AUSTIN – First it was failed presidential candidate Herman Cain, then “Sex and the City” star Cynthia Nixon and now U.S. Senate candidate Craig James.

It's not a fantasy dinner party. Instead, all three have made headlines with their views on whether people choose to be gay.

Cain said back in October that he thought being gay was a choice.

Nixon has walked back a quote in New York Times Magazine that being gay was a choice for her, clarifying that she's bisexual and chose to be in a gay relationship.

James, a former football standout and ESPN analyst, lofted the gay-by-choice comment at a Dallas debate a couple of weeks ago, then repeated it at a Texas Tribune forum in Austin. When I asked how he came to that conclusion, James — who attends Prestonwood Baptist Church — said, “I just believe based on my faith that the Lord created Adam and Eve, male and female, and my faith is where I draw from my conclusion that it's a choice.”

Such statements concern people who think they make it easier to justify discrimination or efforts to “straighten out” gay people. So I asked other major U.S. Senate candidates whether they believe being gay is a choice, starting with former Dallas mayor Tom Leppert, who said, “I think it's likely a combination of factors and these may differ by individual, but I'm not going to hold myself up as an expert.”

Leppert has been taken to task by GOP opponents James and Ted Cruz for marching in a couple of gay rights parades. He has said he opposes gay marriage but that as mayor, his job was to represent everyone.

On to Cruz, the former state solicitor general who prides himself on tough talk but ignored the question I e-mailed in favor of the one he wanted to answer: “I believe that engaging in homosexual conduct is a choice, and I do not believe that unelected judges should force States to adopt gay marriage, against the wishes of the people. Marriage is a fundamental building block of our society, and I have a proven record of standing and fighting to protect traditional marriage between one man and one woman.”

Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst answered: “I do not know. I am persuaded that the gay lifestyle is a choice. As a public policy goal, I support promoting the traditional American family, which is under assault and in need of assistance. I believe marriage is between a man and a woman. I believe a mom and a dad provide the best environment in which to raise children.”

On the Democratic side of the race, former state Rep. Paul Sadler said, “I don't believe sexual orientation is a matter of choice. A statement that a person is gay by choice clearly demonstrates a failure to understand the difference between sexual orientation and specific conduct. The real question is whether or not we are going to continue to allow discrimination based on sexual orientation. I do not believe discrimination based on sexual orientation is in the best spirit of the American tradition.”

The Log Cabin Republicans' Christian Berle said, “The idea that a person chooses to be gay or lesbian has been discredited by every major professional medical organization, starting with the American Psychological Association and the American Medical Association. ”

Now voters have one more issue to weigh as they choose a candidate.

pfikac@express-news.net