Immigration is lawmakers' hot potato Some sort of crackdown on illegal immigration seems certain to emerge from next year's legislative session, though what the law will entail remains to be seen. More politics

Some sort of crackdown on illegal immigration seems certain to emerge from next year's legislative session, though what the law will entail remains to be seen.

Conservative grass-roots activists have clamored for reform, and Republicans dramatically widened their majority in the Texas House and maintained their dominance in the Senate in last week's elections.

Lawmakers filed a handful of bills Monday targeting illegal immigration. They range from legislation requiring government agencies to verify employees' work status to bills that are similar to a controversial provision of Arizona's immigration law - which a federal judge has temporarily blocked - allowing police to arrest someone they suspect of being here illegally.

Local Channel Now Playing: Now Playing Man found dead in rollover wreck at busy S.A. intersection mysa

Young ukeleleist writes songs of comfort premiummysa

Woman killed in fiery rollover crash on U.S. 281 mysa

Video of San Antonio dad's Christmas hover board accident goes viral on social media mysa

Summers enjoying trip home with TCU

Bexar County identifies woman killed in deputy involved shooting Fox7

San Antonio hospital offers needed treatment for critically-ill man KRIV

Deputies shoot, kill boy at Texas trailer park Fox4

Texas Boy Killed When Deputies Fire at Suspect AP

Man arrested in fatal shooting of 3-year-old in November mysa

Almost all bills change significantly as they wend through the legislative process, but immigration will have more forces pushing and pulling it than others.

It faces opposition from the business community and with legal challenges to Arizona's law still pending, it's unclear what states can do about illegal immigration.

It also will share the stage with other contentious issues - such as the budget deficit, redistricting and voter ID.

In the past, many controversial bills have been killed by maneuvering on the House floor and a rule in the Senate that requires approval from two-thirds of senators to bring a bill up for debate. But Republican Senators brushed that rule aside in 2009 in an effort to push a voter ID bill through the chamber.

The Texas GOP also expanded its House majority to 24 seats, limiting Democrats' options.

What sort of immigration law passes will depend on how fatigued and how acrimonious lawmakers are when the bill comes to the forefront, said Bill Miller, an Austin political consultant.

"There's a high probability that something will pass, but what that something is and what it does is a whole different ballgame," Miller said.

Proponents of the legislation also can expect a fight from the business community, said Robert Stein, a political science professor at Rice University, especially if the economy begins to improve.

"To the guy who's running that small business, the roofer, the cementer, that's a cheap labor force that he can hire up that's non-union and he can use to make a recovery," Stein said.

Texas businesses - particularly in the hospitality, agriculture and construction industries - rely on immigrant labor, said Bill Hammond, president of the Texas Association of Business. Legislation seen as discriminatory could hurt Texas' tourism and convention business, he said.

The illegal immigration issue should be handled at the national level, he said.

Looming over any immigration legislation is the pending legal challenge of Arizona's law. A federal judge has temporarily blocked provisions of that law on the grounds that immigration enforcement is the federal government's jurisdiction.

Even if the law survives that challenge, it's certain to face later challenges on the grounds it's discriminatory, said Scot Powe, a law professor at the University of Texas at Austin.

"You need an example of an American citizen or somebody with a green card being improperly hassled under the law to bring that challenge, and I think that challenge is an ironclad winner," Powe said. Gov. Rick Perry said he won't comment on the merits of legislation that hasn't reached his desk. Speaking in San Antonio on Tuesday, Perry said he has concerns about Arizona's law because it puts new burdens on law enforcement, but said he thinks the state was well within its rights when it passed the bill.

"We'll go through the process and we'll have a very rigorous, open and appropriate discussion on this issue," Perry said. "Here's the bigger problem ... the federal government has been an abject failure at one of their base responsibilities. In Article 4 of the Constitution it talks about defending our borders, and they have not done that."

Sen. Dan Patrick, R-Houston, said a bill he filed avoids putting an unnecessary burden on police.

Patrick's bill would require police to ask anyone stopped for another offense whether they are in Texas legally if they have a reasonable suspicion to believe the person is here illegally. Patrick said law enforcement agencies wanted that question to be required, instead of being optional, to avoid complaints of profiling.

His bill would give law enforcement the discretion to arrest a person - with reasonable suspicion, Patrick said. A woman coming back from the grocery store with children in the car probably wouldn't be arrested, even if she does not speak English and has no identifying documents, he said.

"The focus of my bill is to identify the bad guys and to get the bad guys off the street and turned over to" U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, Patrick said.

A large flow of conservative legislation will come from House Republicans, including immigration bills, and Senate Democrats should not have "a de facto veto over conservative legislation," Patrick said. There are 19 Republicans in the 31-seat Senate, just shy of the two-thirds required to bring a bill up for debate.

"What's the point of being in the majority as Republicans if we are going to allow a handful of Democrats to stop the will of the majority of the people?" Patrick asked.

Immigration will be "the emotional, divisive issue of the session," said Sen. Leticia Van de Putte, D-San Antonio, leader of the Senate Democratic Caucus.

Van de Putte said she doesn't sense any strong movement to suspend the two-thirds rule, which she noted protected Republicans in the past during big Democratic majorities and would do so again in the future when political power shifts back to Democrats.

Rep. Joaquín Castro, whose district runs from downtown to the Northwest Side, isn't so sure. While he thinks a law like Arizona's would be unconstitutional and divisive, Castro said Democrats will have a hard time blocking it.

"I think Republicans are dead set on passing Arizona-style legislation and I think they have the numbers to pass it," Castro said.