Accurate census count key for Texas
WASHINGTON — Census undercounts have historically plagued Texas, and with billions of federal dollars at stake for health care, schools and immunizations, officials say the state could lose millions if the count is not accurate in 2010.

With the census just a year away, communities have organized “Complete Count Committees” to urge residents to participate.

An audit of the past census, conducted almost a decade ago, found that 373,567 Texans were not counted, or 1.76 percent of the state's population, for an estimated loss of $2,913 per person — or $1 billion — in federal funds from 2002 to 2012.

That census was recalculated, and it was determined that there was a half a percent nationwide overcount, which shows the difficulties in getting an exact figure.

If the undercount had been allowed to stand, losses for Medicaid, child care, block grants, vocational services and other services would have been dire. And the nation's eight largest counties, including Harris and Dallas in Texas, would have lost more than $100 million each in federal funds, according to the audit for the U.S. Census Monitoring Board.

Nowhere was the undercount more pronounced than in counties along the U.S.-Mexico border, where unincorporated subdivisions known as colonias are located, say local officials who believe that even with the recalculations, the census missed a lot of their populations.

“We in South Texas were hurt with the 2000 census, because the colonias were undercounted in a drastic way,” said Juan Vargas, Webb County economic development director.

The county is still recovering from it, he said.

The census missed half the people living in colonias near Laredo, shortchanging the most impoverished people in need of federal funds, Vargas said, and adjustments to the head count are still continuing. Local leaders have been forced to do their own surveys to give a more accurate portrayal of the fast-growing region when applying for funds.

Populations of homeless and undocumented immigrants also were undercounted in San Antonio and Houston.

President Barack Obama has tapped Robert Groves to be census director. Groves identified multiple-family homes and language barriers as “an issue that every census-taking operation faces.”

“And the solutions are not simple,” Groves added. “But they are the challenge that we face.”

In 2000, Webb County officials say, about 12,000 people in the colonias were missed because of educational, language and cultural barriers.

“Census takers said people wouldn't answer the door,” Vargas said. “I don't know if that is cultural, living along the border with a myth about the government coming to your door.

“But we haven't been able to put our finger on a solution.”

To improve the count, return calls to homes are highly successful despite their cost, Groves recently told the Senate.

And while some people prefer to speak with an enumerator in their homes, others like the anonymity of a self-administered questionnaire or a Web-based survey, he said.

So the census is doing both.

Groves also said he was concerned about a persistent undercount of minorities, but in the 2010 census he has ruled out the practice of sampling, a political lightning rod that has sparked Republican opposition because minorities traditionally vote Democratic.

The census will be used to apportion 435 seats in the U.S. House of Representatives and to draw local political lines within the states.

Texas could gain two or more congressional seats as it and other Sun Belt states continue to grow, said Tony Quinn, co-editor of the California Target Book, which provides nonpartisan analysis of elections.

California, for the first time in recent history, is not expected to gain seats; its population growth has been offset by residents leaving the state, he said.

Census data also is used to dole out $300 billion in federal funds annually.

Last year, Texas received more than $26.2 billion in federal funds, according to figures from the state comptroller's office. That does not include federal grants that went directly to cities, counties and school districts.

Hispanic groups, such as the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials, say about 3 percent of the minority group was undercounted — about 1 million Latinos — nationwide.

“Unfortunately, the Latino population has never been fully counted,” said Arturo Vargas, NALEO executive director.

According to census data, nearly a third of the Texas population is Hispanic and Hispanics make up much of the state's recent population growth, with higher growth in the state's southern region, from San Antonio south and from El Paso east along the border. Those areas also benefit the most from federal funds.

Last year, Texas was named the most improved state for childhood immunizations by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Helping to boost the number of immunizations for polio, measles, hepatitis, diphtheria and tetanus was San Antonio — the most improved metropolitan area in Texas, according to the CDC.

Census data helped identify areas where children needed the immunizations, including some of San Antonio's poorer neighborhoods, and helped secure enough federal funding for the medicine. Metropolitan Health District received $2.3 million in federal funds for immunization services last year.

“It's based on population reporting,” said Dr. Fernando Guerra, the district's director.

Texas cities use census data to lure private industry and government agencies and other public entities to a region.

“It's part of our bread and butter,” said Patrick Jankowski, vice president of research for the Greater Houston Partnership. “If the census data didn't exist, my job would be nearly impossible.”

Houston has used census data to market itself in competition with other metro areas, such as Miami, Los Angeles, Atlanta and Seattle.

“The economic development business lives on data,” Jankowski said, noting his counterparts in other cities “will be going to the exact same data source” to make their pitch to potential employers.

For providers of health services, such as Metropolitan Health District, a lot is riding on the accuracy of the next census and its ability to count all communities.

Without that, Guerra said, “we would be hard pressed to keep up with the responsibilities that we have.”