House panel seeking good science — not science fiction

This week, world governments continue meeting in Paris to negotiate climate change regulations. The president has pledged to cut U.S. carbon emissions by 28 percent by 2025. But to meet this arbitrary goal, he intends to bypass Congress and the American people and impose costly, job-killing regulations.

These regulations will only burden Americans with more bureaucracy and higher costs — all for little environmental benefit. In other words, it’s all pain and no gain.

The EPA’s Power Plan is the cornerstone of the president’s Paris climate pledge. Yet the EPA’s own data show that this regulation would reduce sea level rise by only 1/100th of an inch, the thickness of three sheets of paper. This would be laughable if it weren’t for the tremendous costs it imposes on the American people.

Texans will be hit even harder than those in other states. The Electric Reliability Council of Texas (ERCOT) has estimated that the Obama administration’s Power Plan will cause energy costs in Texas to rise as much as 16 percent per year. This means the price of everything from milk to bread to other consumer goods will increase as well.

A world-respected climate scientist testified before Congress last week that even if all the pledges by all the nations were implemented, it would only reduce global warming by less than one-third of one degree Fahrenheit.

As chairman of the House Science, Space, and Technology Committee, my only goal is to protect the American people from unnecessary and burdensome regulations and to force the Obama administration to tell the truth. For example, I recently asked the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) to provide the committee with information about its decision to change the way it analyzes temperature data. Its employees had altered historical climate data to get politically correct results in an attempt to disprove the 18 year lack of global temperature increases.

NOAA’s report ignored temperatures collected by satellites. This data, considered by many to be the most objective, has clearly showed no warming for the past two decades. NOAA and this administration simply chose to ignore the satellite data so they could get the results they wanted. Almost every other study has found no increase in global temperature in recent years.

When the Science committee raised concerns about NOAA’s report, the agency refused to explain its findings and provide documents to the committee. The American people have a right to see the data and know the motivations behind this study and others.

The Science committee’s actions pose a real threat to the Obama administration’s political agenda of scaring people into giving the government more control over their lives. Environmental extremists have constructed a house of cards that might collapse when subjected to scrutiny.

Climate scientists welcome outside critiques, which are an integral part of the scientific method. Real scientists never claim certainty and always avoid exaggeration. Alarmists, on the other hand, promote a political agenda and dismiss any opposition.

The climate is always changing and human activity likely plays some role. But what climate alarmists say is sometimes untrue and often exaggerated. We should rely on good science, not science fiction, when we evaluate climate change.

Biased news coverage of climate change is one reason why the American people feel that they cannot trust the national media. A recent Rasmussen poll found that 61 percent of likely U.S. voters do not trust the political news they receive from the national media.

This is why I feel that liberal media bias is a threat to the American people. If the American people can’t get the facts about the environment or other subjects, they can’t make good decisions. And if they can’t make good decisions, our own democracy is at risk.

San Antonio Republican Lamar Smith represents the 21st Congressional District of Texas.