Population shift could alter politics in Texas
AUSTIN — They say demographics is destiny, and if so, Texas Republicans will have to try harder in the coming years if they want to keep the state in the red column.

School enrollment shows the state's population transformation is well under way, and Hispanics are expected to surpass the Anglo population sometime between 2015 and 2020, according to the Texas State Data Center.

Hispanics will make up 78 percent of Texas' population growth between now and 2040, while African Americans will account for 6 percent and Anglos only 4 percent, according to the center.

Republicans gained political supremacy in Texas some 15 years ago and today hold all 29 statewide elected offices. But the party has had a hard time keeping Hispanics in statewide office and an even harder time attracting Hispanic voters.

Texas Democrats have been getting about 70 percent of the Hispanic vote, said Jerry Polinard, a political science professor at UT-Pan American in Edinburg and expert on Mexican American political behavior.

There are no Hispanics among the 96 Republicans in the 181-member Legislature, and their support for voter ID bills and efforts to enlist local police in enforcing federal immigration law “reinforce that the Republican Party is anti-Latino,” Polinard said.

Opposing the nomination of Sonia Sotomayor to the U.S. Supreme Court, as Texas' two Republican senators did last year, won't inspire Hispanic enthusiasm, either, Polinard said.

The Texas GOP platform demands abolition of bilingual education and supports legislation that would ban noncitizen children from attending public schools.

Its plank on unauthorized immigration is, “No amnesty! No how. No way.”

The 15-member State Board of Education, which is rewriting social studies curriculum standards for public schools, is two-thirds Anglo — and all of its Anglo members and none of its minority members are Republicans. Its draft proposal, set for a final vote this Friday, has been fiercely criticized as Anglo and conservative triumphalism that skimps minority contributions.