White hammers Perry on education, accountability
Bill White returned to his old elementary alma mater Tuesday and hammered Gov. Rick Perry for what he called a lack of accountability in the state's public-education system.

The Democratic nominee for governor stood in front of Castle Hills Elementary, backed by 22 local supporters, and said “restrictions and mandates” imposed on Texas public schools amount to a “scandal that's been long developing.”

White has consistently attempted to depict Perry as a self-serving career politician who shuns all accountability, and he came to San Antonio armed with two recent examples to make his case.

After noting Perry has declined opportunities to debate — unless or until White releases his tax returns from his mid-'90s stint as U.S. deputy energy secretary — or appear before newspaper editorial boards, White accused Perry of “ducking out” of an El Paso high school forum and a Monday KTSA Radio interview.

“The students in El Paso high schools had taken the initiative to ask the gubernatorial candidates to talk about voting, civic responsibilities and their visions for Texas,” White said. “He told them he had a scheduling conflict and couldn't show up, and while I was answering questions from the students, he tweeted that he'd just been running with his dog around Town Lake.”

Perry also cited scheduling issues last month when he didn't accept an invitation from the Edgewood Independent School District to join White at a civics forum.

On Monday, Perry appeared on Jack Riccardi's KTSA show, but abruptly cut the interview short after one segment, saying he had another commitment.

Mark Miner, spokesman for the Perry campaign, said White is “out of touch” with the real concerns of Texans.

“He shouldn't have press conferences outside, because the sun made him lose his mind,” Miner said. “People want to hear about the issues that are important to this state. They don't want to hear Bill White whining all the time.”

White, whose parents taught more than 70 years combined at San Antonio public schools, has put education at the center of his campaign. He argues that schools are forced to teach to standardized tests and need stronger incentives to bring down dropout rates.