City Council should pass human-rights ordinance

Photo: Courtesy Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Democrat Leticia Van de Putte represents Texas Senate District 26 in Bexar County. Democrat Leticia Van de Putte represents Texas Senate District 26 in Bexar County. Photo: Courtesy City Council should pass human-rights ordinance 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

I know firsthand what it's like to experience discrimination simply because of who you are. Fifty years ago, I was a little girl who got scolded by a teacher for speaking Spanish during recess. I also know that those sentiments are not indicative of who we are as San Antonians.

That's why I'm hopeful the San Antonio City Council will pass updates to the city code ensuring that the city, and those who contract with the city, will not discriminate against their employees because of their sexual orientation, gender identity, or veterans' status. These common-sense updates also ensure fair treatment in housing and public accommodations and will bring San Antonio in line with the codes of cities such as Dallas, Fort Worth, and Austin. But, they'll also make sure our city's laws reflect our city's values.

I was fortunate, in an age when women weren't always allowed the same opportunities as men, to have parents who convinced me that I could do anything. As an educator, my mother pushed me academically. And, whenever people would comment to my father that I was pretty, he would reply, “She's the smartest in her class.” These are values our city should promote — ensuring equal access to opportunities based on dedication and talent, not on who we love or who we are.

With respect to those who have come before us, we know that change is constant. The image of Texas is of cowboys — vaqueros — fighting to tame a wild frontier. But now we have a 21st century powerhouse economy. Our small-town past steadily changed into a high-rise present — and today, six of the 20 largest cities in the United States are right here in Texas.

We'll continue to change — I believe for the better. I can't think of any better time in history to be living in Texas than right now. Texans have always boasted that this is a land of opportunity, and this has never been truer than today.

As chairwoman of the Senate Veteran Affairs and Military Installations Committee, I was blessed to meet Staff Sergeant Eric Alva. In 2003, this San Antonio native became the first Marine to be seriously injured in the Iraq War, when he stepped on a land mine and lost his right leg.

He fought for us. He fought for you. He very nearly died for our country, and still suffers for it every day. And yet, here in his home state and his home city, he can be denied or fired from a job just because he is gay. It's not right that a man who fought to protect this country is not protected at home — that a man who loves his country is discriminated against because of who he loves.

Updating the city's non-discrimination ordinance acknowledges the importance of ensuring that all members of our community are treated with fairness and dignity. Together we can make this possible, together we will erase harmful inequalities that threaten our city's quality of life.

Thankfully, I will not have to stand alone, because San Antonians are with us. We all know and respect people like Eric.