37 released from jail Wednesday after 'sanctuary’ policy goes into effect
A new policy limiting Travis County Jail’s cooperation with immigration authorities paved the way for the release of 37 suspected unauthorized immigrants on Wednesday.

Travis County Sheriff Sally Hernandez’s policy ended blanket compliance with federal immigration detention requests for people in custody at the county jail suspected of being undocumented immigrants.



On Wednesday, the day the policy went into effect, the sheriff’s office declined 196 detention requests that U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement made for suspected undocumented immigrants. Thirty detention requests were honored, according to the sheriff’s office.



Once the so-called ICE detainers were removed, 37 people were able to bail out Wednesday. Had the detainers remained in place, inmates would still have been able to post bail, but they would have been released into ICE custody for possible deportation.

Austin attorney George Lobb helped secure bail for three inmates on Wednesday who had their ICE detainers removed once Travis County Sheriff Sally Hernandez’s policy took effect.

“I started at 2 a.m.,” Lobb said. “I said ‘Hey the party started at midnight. I don’t want to be late.’”

Under the new policy, the county jail only automatically honors ICE detention requests for inmates charged with or convicted of a narrow scope of crimes that include capital murder, murder and aggravated sexual assault. In every other case, the sheriff’s office will comply with ICE requests only if presented with a warrant or judicial order.

“Sanctuary cities” are broadly defined as communities that don’t fully comply with federal immigration requests.

Advocates on both sides of the issue say Travis County’s policy is the most liberal in Texas and among the most liberal in the nation.

It’s placed a spotlight on Hernandez and Travis County that has attracted ire from state lawmakers and a vow from Gov. Greg Abbott to oust Hernandez from office if she doesn’t reverse course. Abbott cancelled $1.5 million in state grant funding to Travis County on Wednesday for criminal justice programs in retaliation to the policy taking effect.

On Thursday, state lawmakers were hearing lengthy testimony on SB 4, which would eliminate sanctuary cities.

Follow live: Texas Senate hearing for bill that would ban “sanctuary cities.”

Some local immigrant activist groups worried that the issue might bring newfound attention to the county and make it a target of federal immigration authorities.

Since Hernandez’s policy began, several Austin immigration activist groups have been on high alert as rumors of sweeping raids from federal immigration authorities have swirled. The growing thought is that ICE officials are planning to detain undocumented immigrants in response to the Travis County Jail’s new policy.

Immigrant Services Network of Austin posted a message on their website stating that an ICE fugitive apprehension operation was underway in Austin. The American-Statesman has not been able to confirm that information.

“Attorneys should be prepared to handle cases with clients on probation and with outstanding orders,” the message said. “It would be a good idea to keep ‘know your rights materials’ available.”

When asked Wednesday about any increased enforcement operations in Austin, an ICE spokeswoman said the agency will not provide further information about operations in Austin without specific information about the date and time of any action.



American Gateways, which provides legal assistance and education for immigrants, shifted its priorities on Wednesday in response to the new county jail policy. Interim executive director Robert Painter said they are focusing on getting information to immigrants about what they should do if they come into contact with ICE agents.

“There is some concern that Travis County has attracted a lot of attention for taking this stand in Texas,” Painter said. “If someone is in fear of being targeted, they should probably come to our office.”

Grassroots Leadership executive director Bob Libal said his organization has been on high alert since Wednesday.

“There is a fear that the Trump administration may turn to retaliation,” Libal said. “It is par for the course for an administration run by Steve Bannon. ... This is part of the playbook. Attack people that provide any critique or resistance.”