Could Austin, Travis County face funding hit over immigration...
Last spring, the Travis County sheriff’s office wanted to apply for an $89,455 state grant for a coordinator to help elderly crime victims. The agency eyed another grant that could provide at least $128,123 for deputies’ body cameras.

The grants might have seemed like free money, but both would have required county officials to “(1) notify (the Department of Homeland Security) of all information requested by DHS related to illegal aliens in the custody of the (sheriff’s office), and (2) detain such aliens” for the duration of the funding.

Travis County commissioners were preparing for a shift in local immigration policy. They let the money go.

Those weren’t tough decisions with only a couple of hundred thousand dollars on the line. But after Nov. 8, questions about how much funding Travis County and Austin are willing to forgo for what kind of immigration policy might become more common.

President-elect Donald Trump has vowed to “cancel all federal funding to sanctuary cities.” Several bills introduced for Texas legislators to consider in the upcoming legislative session would withhold funding from sanctuary cities, require local authorities to check the immigration status of people detained or require them to cooperate with “detainer” requests to hold people suspected of residing in the country illegally.

Austin’s current budget includes nearly $43 million in federal grants, many administered through state agencies, which cover the salaries of 266 city employees as well as other program costs. Travis County received more than $10 million last year in federal money and more than $4.7 million in state funds.

Related Could Austin, Travis County face funding hit over immigration stance? Jay Janner ×

None of that has been jeopardized due to immigration policies, as the city and county have generally cooperated with federal immigration authorities. But that could change.

Sheriff-elect Sally Hernandez was critical during her campaign of departing Sheriff Greg Hamilton’s cooperation with federal requests to hold jail inmates for deportation but has recently declined to say how — or whether — she would change the policy.

And local Democratic leaders are trying to calm some residents’ deportation fears and take a stand, even if they don’t know what that means yet.

“Before they come for you, they have to come for me,” Austin City Council Member Greg Casar said during a “Commit to Safety” news conference Thursday with seven other city and county leaders.

A sanctuary?

While some national news organizations have called Austin a sanctuary city, the city and county don’t meet the even vague criteria of what that is, officials said.

Austin has no ordinances prohibiting police from asking about people’s immigration status. But police don’t routinely do so unless it’s relevant to a case, Austin Police Chief Art Acevedo said.

Everyone arrested is booked into the Travis County Jail, where Immigration and Customs Enforcement officials receive inmate fingerprints and can ask that certain individuals be held for potential federal deportation. Hamilton’s sheriff’s office has never refused to hold an immigrant for ICE, sheriff’s spokeswoman Kristen Dark said.

The previous Austin City Council took the symbolic stand in 2014 of passing a resolution opposing the jail’s cooperation with ICE, arguing that the practice breaks up families when a person is deported after an arrest for a low-level offense. ICE has requested about 9,500 detainers at the jail in the past 10 years, with driving while intoxicated being the most common offense bringing those inmates to the jail in the first place.

County Judge Sarah Eckhart said in a news conference on immigration Monday that she expects the jail to begin holding only inmates whom ICE wants for public safety reasons — not solely immigration — and only if ICE gets a warrant. But Hernandez alone sets the jail’s policy, not the Travis County Commissioners Court, and she has declined to say what she will do.

At Thursday’s news conference, Hernandez vowed that “the sheriff’s office will not be part of a deportation force” and said she would keep her campaign promise of a progressive immigration policy. But she wouldn’t say what that meant or whether it meant ending cooperation with ICE requests.

Katie Naranjo, a consultant for Hernandez, said Hernandez has a more progressive viewpoint than Hamilton and is likely to have a more progressive immigrant policy. But Hernandez has shifted from a campaign statement that a renewed community relationship means “getting ICE out of the jail.”

She will not rule anything out — including the current cooperation with ICE — until after meeting with the federal agency, local officials, victims rights organizations, civil rights organizations and others.

“When we have finished talking to stakeholders, we will have a policy,” Naranjo said. “Until then, we need the flexibility of people not freaking out.”

Funding at risk

Acevedo said Trump’s post-election comments, which have shifted from his campaign rhetoric of deporting all unauthorized immigrants to a softer message of deporting criminals first, are no different from President Barack Obama’s policies. But local officials would fight “tooth and nail” against any legislative requirement to check people’s immigration status, he said, because it hurts public safety if witnesses to crimes are afraid to talk to the police.

Mayors of some cities, including Chicago, New York, Seattle and Santa Fe, N.M., have said in recent weeks that they’re prepared to take the hit of losing federal funding if it becomes contingent on police routinely checking whether people are in the country legally.

If Austin and Travis County take that route, millions of dollars could be at stake.

Federal dollars in Austin pay for bomb-sniffing dogs at the airport, public art pieces, health care for the uninsured, housing for people with AIDS, childhood nutrition efforts, flood protection, police body cameras and other functions.

In the county, federal funds last year paid for such things as helping low-income households keep the lights on, protecting against flooding, making homes more energy-efficient and repairing Frate Barker Road. State money paid for replacing car parts for low-income people, combating car theft, improving and reimbursing indigent defense programs, and other things.

Mayor Steve Adler said it’s too soon to say whether orders from a new president or Legislature could affect Austin’s policies or revenue.

“If there are mandates that come down to us, then we’re going to have to look at them and make a decision, but it’s such a hypothetical question,” he said. “Anyone in the city would be concerned about losing revenue, but that hasn’t happened yet, and we need to be vigilant on these issues.”

But count Adler among those concerned about 2016’s rhetoric on deportation and other issues.

“You can’t look into the eyes of some of the communities (potentially affected) and not share the fear that you see,” he said.