Austin has failed to collect administrative fee from Lyft and...
The companies do pay a $1 per pickup fee for customers picked up at Austin-Bergstrom airport.

But that annual fee won’t be due until year’s end, giving Uber and Lyft a free ride through December.

Uber and Lyft, despite having operated in Austin for 18 months under a city law saying ride-hailing companies would be charged an administrative fee, have not paid that fee.

The companies are not in arrears, however. The October 2014 ordinance that allowed Lyft and Uber to operate in Austin said a fee to cover city costs for overseeing ride-hailing “will be set by separate ordinance.” But the old council left office at the end of 2014 without taking further action.

The city’s three cab companies, meanwhile, have continued to pay $450 a year for each of their more than 900 permits, or more than $400,000 annually.

“It is very ridiculous, their sitting on a billion dollars in collected money and not paying their share,” said Solomon Kassa, founder and president of Lone Star Cab. He has 161 permits and pays $72,450 a year. “I don’t know who to blame. But I am very frustrated. What they are doing is not right.”

The current council spelled out a fee in the new ride-hailing ordinance passed in December 2015, which has drawn the most attention for its requirement that drivers with the apps must undergo fingerprint background checks. But that ordinance didn’t take effect until Feb. 28, and the two companies will owe nothing on that fee until at least the end of 2016.

+ Ralph Barrera Though they weren’t charged an administrative fee for their first 15 months of operation in Austin, Uber and Lyft have been ... read more Ralph Barrera ×

Lyft and Uber have made payments on a separate city fee, though. Since March 2015, under agreements signed with the city Aviation Department to operate at Austin-Bergstrom International Airport, the companies have paid $1 for each customer picked up at the airport. Uber spokeswoman Jenn Mullin said the company has paid more than $200,000.

But despite the huge expenditure of city time and energy on the ride-hailing issue, the administrative fee has been a dry well.

“The general understanding at the time was that the fees would be set at whatever the cost of administering the (ride-hailing) program was,” said Chris Riley, a former council member and staunch ride-hailing advocate who sponsored the October 2014 ordinance.

“It was, ‘Let’s have the staff look at it and come up with a cost,’ ” said Riley, who lives in Brooklyn now and is getting a master’s in urban place-making and management at Pratt Institute.

With the transition in governance — 10 of the 11 council members who took office in January 2015 were new to office — the rail-hailing fee question languished.

Council Member Ann Kitchen sponsored the December 2015 ride-hailing ordinance. Its requirement for ride-hailing drivers to be fingerprinted, given Uber and Lyft’s fervent opposition and a later petition drive to force a May 7 vote on an alternate law, has gotten all the attention.

But the December law, approved 9-2 by the council, also spelled out a fee regimen.

Ride-hailing companies may choose to pay a fee one of three ways: 1 percent of their annual gross revenue from operations in Austin; a figure calculated by multiplying the city’s taxi permit fee by a company’s total corps of ride-hailing drivers (which would yield several million dollars a year, rendering it an unacceptable choice for the companies); or a comparable figure based on total miles driven in a year.

Beyond that, the ordinance also said each company would pay an additional 1 percent of its gross Austin revenue to feed a “compliant driver education fund.” It provided an out, however. If a ride-hailing company participates in a “safety assurance program,” also laid out in the December ordinance, it will not have to pay that additional fee.

Neither that fund nor the safety program exists in any tangible way at this point, Kitchen acknowledged Monday. Nonetheless, she said, both Uber and Lyft, because of their resistance to fingerprinting, will owe the additional 1 percent. The program includes “good-faith efforts to onboard drivers who have completed the fingerprint-based background check process,” the December ordinance says.

“Which they’re sort of not doing,” Kitchen said dryly.

Not so, Mullin said. If Proposition 1 loses May 7, keeping a fingerprint requirement in city law, the companies would either cease operations here or comply with fingerprinting, she said. So, if Uber and Lyft remain in Austin, she said, they probably would not end up owing the added 1 percent fee.

If Proposition 1 passes, the December 2015 ordinance would be erased from the City Code and replaced by a new ordinance crafted by Uber and Lyft. Similar in many ways to the October 2014 law, the Proposition 1 ordinance includes a company ride-hailing fee of 1 percent of annual Austin gross revenue.

It does not include the possibility of that additional 1 percent for a safety program.