Herman: Legislator has plan to bring Texas gold bullion home
We’re about to talk about a legislator’s bullion proposal so please take a moment here and get all your soup and broth jokes out of the way.

OK, now we can proceed as adults (kind of a new approach for me).

Sophomore Rep. Giovanni Capriglione, R-Southlake, is taking another stab at passing legislation creating an official Texas Bullion Depository. Think Fort Knox, sort of.

Capriglione’s idea, when explained by him, seems to make sense. But his similar 2013 effort went nowhere, partially because he filed it late, he was a freshman, and the bill became a favorite of folks who sound kind of fringy to some.

"I think the perception of it was that it was assumed to be some sort of anti-federal government deal," he told me.

Indeed, folks who testified in favor of it at a House subcommittee in 2013 included some fiscal doom-and-gloomers banking on gold.

So, wiser, Capriglione is back with HB 483, a whittled-down, less-controversial-in-his-mind version of his bill.

"I cleaned it up," he said. "I reserve the right to get smarter, and what I’ve learned is you don’t need a lot of adjectives."

The new bill is 7,648 words, down from 10,355 in 2013. Among the passages deleted was a reference to a "system for precious metals-denominated intergovernmental payments and settlements" between agencies and with private citizens. Also gone is a section referring to the depository as part of a "mechanism by which the system … is able to function in the event of a systemic dislocation in a national or international financial system."

All Capriglione says he’s trying to do is create a place for the state to store its gold bullion and that of paying customers.

I picture Fort Giovanni.

I’m picturing way wrong, Capriglione said. He envisions the state leasing space in a private-sector vault. This would be a money-making venture for the state in two ways. First, private folks would pay to store their precious metals. In 2013, the plan left him "inundated from people all over the world who said they would like to store their gold in Texas."

Who knew?

The bullion storage business is centered in New York City and Delaware. And that gets us to the second part of the profit deal here. Texas now pays to store its gold in NYC. When Capriglione checked in 2013, the University of Texas Investment Management Company paid to store its 6,643 gold bars — worth around $1 billion — in what he calls the Hong Kong Shanghai Bank in New York.

Says UTIMCO CEO Bruce Zimmerman: The gold holdings now are down to about $725 million. He was not immediately sure how many gold bars that is. They’re stored in Manhattan at HSBC Bank, which charges an annual fee of less than one-tenth of 1 percent per year.

HSBC is a British multinational bank that started as the Hong Kong and Shanghai Banking Corp.

Much money could be saved and made, says Capriglione, by storing Texas’ gold in Texas.

I envision the Texas gold being moved here in a pickup truck convoy. Again, I probably envision wrong.

"Last time we looked at this, there were estimates that it could make up to $20 million or $50 million in revenue from storing gold," Capriglione said.

The official fiscal note on the 2013 bill said the estimated two-year impact on state revenue would be negative $14.2 million. It also said, "There could be an indeterminate revenue gain to general revenue from the fees, charges or other payments received from the depository operations."

Though trying to steer clear this time of anti-federal government talk, Capriglione did say, "If you go back in history and when you look at when the federal government took gold from individuals, this could be a barrier to doing that because it would essentially be the state that had ownership of the gold and (private citizens) would have an account."

"Conceptually," he said of the whole deal, "it sounds like a movie type of thing."

Maybe more of a cartoon. Capriglione said this of his visit to a gold storage vault: "There were bags of gold. It was like something out of Scrooge McDuck."