Wear: I-35 buzzing with projects, planning
Want a better Interstate 35 through Central Texas? Got $1.9 billion?

That loud number is quietly tucked onto page 8 of a plan the Texas Department of Transportation completed in August for overhauling the area’s transportation problem child. Make that “problem grandfather,” given that much of the road was completed in the 1950s.

The plan includes dozens of projects small and, in one case, large, to improve traffic flow on the area’s main vein. To do it all, the TxDOT plan says, would take $1.25 billion to $1.9 billion. And when government gives you a range of costs, especially for something that may take awhile to get done, it’s usually safest to go with the bigger number.

But here’s the good news: Almost $260 million of that has been “identified,” the report says, TxDOT lingo for being pretty much in hand. The other 85 percent or so will have to come, the report says, from local bond elections, state or federal transportation loans, traditional TxDOT gas tax funding (such as it is these days) and borrowing through bonds that would be paid back from tolls.

Tolls? Yes. If you haven’t been paying close attention, you may not know that Congress last year OK’d putting toll lanes on interstate highways. Not on existing lanes, mind you, but on added capacity. And TxDOT for the past few years, in conjunction with the city of Austin, has been studying not only myriad intersection and frontage road changes to improve I-35 but also the addition of a new lane on each side.

The Austin City Council last week approved another $2 million that, along with a like amount of money TxDOT has pledged, will continue planning of those new lanes. Odds are they will be “express lanes” like what is about to be added to MoPac Boulevard north of Lady Bird Lake. Tolled lanes, in other words. And where there are tolls, there is access to borrowed money to actually get something done.

Beyond that — and the report doesn’t count this unhatched chicken — Texas voters next year will be asked to approve a constitutional amendment that would direct more than $1 billion a year to TxDOT. Over the typical decade-long planning and construction period for highway projects, that would be more than $10 billion. Austin’s share of that would typically be about 10 percent, or about $1 billion.

All those sources get you pretty darn close to $1.9 billion.

Now the better news: Work on many of those smaller projects, from environmental clearance studies to actual construction in a few cases, is going on right now up and down I-35 from Georgetown to San Marcos.

A sampling:

Work should start by late this year on a new “collector-distributor,” basically a bypass lane alongside the freeway’s lanes of the sort at West 35th Street and MoPac Boulevard, on northbound I-35 at Parmer Lane. Cost: $3 million.

The “gooseneck” project at the East 51st Street interchange, a $3 million project funded by the city of Austin, should begin construction early next year. The city is also studying the possibility of altering the west side of that intersection, replacing a stoplight for the frontage roads with a roundabout, but that’s in the early stages of discussion and design.

TxDOT plans to break ground early next year on a “diverging diamond” remake of the frontage road intersections and overpass at RM 1431 in Williamson County. Cost: $4 million

But those projects are only a small sampling of what is going on. That 86-page report released in August includes a long list of projects. And TxDOT officials last week rattled off a litany of I-35 planning going on through the area.

TxDOT in one way or another has been working on I-35 improvement plans since the 1980s. Two major studies died on shelves, in 1994 and 2004, victims of lack of funding and lack of will.

This time, with the area’s population approaching 2 million, finding the will doesn’t seem to be a problem. The money, finally, seems likely to follow.