Judge allows Rosemary Lehmberg to remain district attorney
Capping an eight-month saga that has captivated the public, a judge ruled Wednesday that Travis County District Attorney Rosemary Lehmberg can keep her job after a drunken driving arrest, bad behavior in jail and, most recently, a civil case to force her from office.

Following three days of testimony that aired her drinking habits and physical ailments, visiting Judge David Peeples of San Antonio said he wouldn’t remove Lehmberg as the top felony prosecutor in the county.

After the ruling was read Wednesday, Lehmberg held back tears as she hugged her supporters.

Outside the courtroom, she again apologized for her conduct the night she was taken into custody, and she pledged to do everything in her power to “make sure there’s never a repeat.”

“I just want to thank everyone who supported me in my attempt to regain the confidence of this community,” she said.

+ Ralph Barrera Travis County District Attorney Rosemary Lehmberg was allowed to stay on the job after visiting Judge David Peoples ruled in her ... read more Ralph Barrera ×

Dan Richards, one of her lawyers, said he was ecstatic. “You can recover from alcoholism, and you can continue your career,” he said.

The decision was the last hurdle Lehmberg faced in retaining her position amid political pressure and calls for her resignation beginning April 12, when sheriff’s deputies found her sitting in her car with an open bottle of vodka in the passenger’s seat. During several hours in jail that night, she was described by officials as combative, and much of her time behind bars was captured on videos that were later released to the public, fueling efforts to oust her.

Jim Collins, an assistant county attorney who prosecuted the case, left the courtroom without commenting. But he had tried to convince Peeples that Lehmberg wasn’t likely to stay sober and that keeping her in office would harm public interest.

The evidence covered Lehmberg’s struggles with alcohol and her difficult transition from an instrumental behind-the-scenes player at the district attorney’s office to an elected political leader. Testimony also revealed new details about the night she was arrested.

Lehmberg quickly pleaded guilty to the DWI charge and was sentenced to 45 days in jail. She checked herself into a treatment center in Tucson, Ariz., shortly after her release, and she said Tuesday that she has started seeing a psychotherapist and attending a weekly group recovery meeting.

She hasn’t had a drink since her plane ride to Tucson, she testified.

Longtime criminal judges and lawyers who took the stand Wednesday all testified that they had never seen the district attorney intoxicated or impaired while performing her duties. They described Lehmberg, who many had worked with for years, as a careful prosecutor and a hands-on boss, whose decisions were respected and whose removal would be detrimental to the office and the community.

Witnesses were restricted to answering questions about Lehmberg based on their experiences after the district attorney’s re-election in November 2012, but the judges and lawyers echoed each other on Lehmberg’s accessibility and active involvement in new programs.

First Assistant District Attorney John Neal, who would have temporarily served as district attorney if Lehmberg had been removed, said his colleague is “uniquely qualified to run the office.”

“She knows more about the office than anyone,” he testified Wednesday. “She was elected to run the office. Our attorneys, our staff trust her and trust her judgment. They trust her decisions.”

Neal touted Lehmberg’s efforts to salvage the office’s Public Integrity Unit after Gov. Rick Perry vetoed state funding he had threatened to cut if the district attorney didn’t resign.

County lawyers representing the state seldom cross-examined the defense witnesses, but they did ask some of the lawyers about their involvement in prior DWI cases of public officials, including those of County Judge Sam Biscoe and former County Commissioner Bob Honts.

Honts was arrested and charged with driving while intoxicated in 1986, but he was acquitted. Biscoe was charged in 2004, but his case was dismissed because medical issues could have caused symptoms that led to his arrest. In response to questions from Collins, attorney Allan Williams testified Wednesday that he had been a special prosecutor when he threw out Biscoe’s case.

No blood or breath samples had been collected in either of their cases, and no petitions had been filed for their removal, according to testimony. An analysis of Lehmberg’s blood, on the other hand, showed her blood alcohol level was 0.239 — nearly three times the legal limit.

The most elusive testimony Wednesday came from Travis County Attorney David Escamilla, who signed and filed the petition to remove Lehmberg but would only answer Richards’ questions as “the relator” in that lawsuit.

Escamilla didn’t appear in the courtroom, but in a recorded deposition video. He said he hadn’t “formulated an opinion” on whether he thought Lehmberg should be forced out.

In a written statement after the trial, Escamilla stood by his decision to take the case to court and said he was “left with no choice” because Lehmberg hadn’t fully complied with rehabilitation recommendations. However, he noted that Lehmberg had since begun doing so — facts he said he was unaware of until the trial.

“It has never been our contention that Ms. Lehmberg was incapable of showing up to work and carrying out her duties,” the statement read. “We have never identified any substantive evidence that she was unable to do so, and, in fact, we recognize that she has continued in the position of district attorney for almost eight months without further negative incident.”

Kerry O’Brien, who originally brought the petition against Lehmberg, said he was disappointed but assuaged by the removal process. “An impartial judge came in and made a decision, and, as a lawyer who respects the rule of law, I am satisfied with that,” he said.

Lehmberg said Tuesday that she could have resigned and avoided the humiliation and public criticism that included O’Brien’s efforts to oust her, but she said she had a responsibility to the Travis County residents who overwhelmingly re-elected her last year.

Lehmberg, who was first elected in 2008, testified that personal blows dealt during her re-election campaign against Austin attorney and former state District Judge Charlie Baird pained her but that she coped with the stress with alcohol.

On Wednesday, Baird told the American-Statesman that he supported Peeples’ decision. “I really thought this was an isolated incident, and I never felt it adversely affected the way she performed her duties as DA,” he said. “I am pleased for her, and I think the office will continue to run in a very professional manner.”

Retired Judge Mike Lynch, who was forced to testify Wednesday under a subpoena, later said he was “obviously happy with the outcome.”

“I think Rosemary’s been an exemplary public servant in the time I’ve known her, but for this incident, of course,” he said. “I think she is still an effective prosecutor and can be an even better one now that this is behind her.”

Escamilla said in his statement that he hopes Lehmberg will continue to receive professional treatment to address her “substantive issues with alcohol.”

“She has been given the second chance she asked for,” he said.