Travis County registers more than 90 percent of eligible voters
Travis County has surpassed its goal of registering 90 percent of its eligible voters, officials said Monday.

“Since the 2012 election, we’ve added over 80,000 registered voters, which helps us get over our 90 percent voter registration goal,” said Bruce Elfant, the Travis County tax assessor-collector and voter registrar.

The tax assessor’s office set the goal last January. After the 2012 election, when the county had 635,000 people (or 82 percent) of eligible voters registered. Over the next four years, the office created a text-to-register option, partnered with private groups and public entities to promote voter registration and pushed voter registration campaigns in local schools, Elfant said.

By Monday, he said, the county could safely say it had met its goal. The tax assessor’s office counted 713,871 registered voters, about 89.99 percent, but had about 11,000 applications it still had not processed. And with one more day of voter registration to go, Elfant said the county still had time to boost those numbers higher.

“It’s likely that by midnight on Tuesday, we will have 100,000 new registered voters than we did when we went to cast our vote in 2012,” Elfant said.

+ In 2012, Travis County set a goal to get 90 percent of its eligible voters registered. RICARDO B. BRAZZIELL/AMERICAN-STATESMAN ×

The announcement was one of three made by Elfant’s office Monday. It also unveiled a pilot project that will allow residents to come into the tax assessor’s office and fill out a voter registration form on a computer.

“Texas doesn’t have online voter registration yet, but this would save the county some taxpayer dollars and it would make the process more efficient and accurate because it would mean less data processing,” Elfant said. “And it would make things more accurate because of not having to read people’s handwriting and trying to beat deadlines.”

On Tuesday, the last day to register to vote in the presidential elections in Texas, the county will make a big push to get people registered before the deadline.

The county will have deputy registrars signing people up to vote at every Thundercloud Subs and Alamo Drafthouse in Travis County from 10 a.m. to 10 p.m. It also will set up voter registration tables along Speedway near the University of Texas until 6 p.m. After 6 p.m, students can sign up with registrars who will be outside the UT Tower until midnight. The Travis County tax office at 5501 Airport Boulevard will be open until midnight.

“We’re trying to make this as easy as possible,” Elfant said. “We want everyone who values their right to vote to make sure they’re registered.”

Registrars will have applications available in English and Spanish, Elfant said, and many of the county’s volunteers are bilingual.

Clarification: Travis County set the goal of registering 90 percent of eligible voters last January.