Donna Howard: Painless solutions for the Texas budget
Sept. 1 marked the start of the new fiscal year for the state of Texas, halfway through the $210 billion biennial budget passed in 2015. As we approach the next legislative session, set to begin in January, we’re already hearing dire warnings that fiscal constraints will require deep cuts.

Let’s take a deep breath. Although our fiscal outlook signals some challenges ahead, we actually have the economic strength and available tools to painlessly maintain our investment in Texans’ education, health care and infrastructure and avoid the fiscal disasters found in Kansas and Louisiana.

Without a doubt, persistent low oil prices have slowed the Texas economy. But, unlike busts in the past, our increasingly diversified economy has kept us out of a recession. In fact, Comptroller Glenn Hegar recently announced that “the current budget continues to work” and that the state will “end the fiscal year with a substantial balance.”

This contradiction between a healthy state economy and a gloomy budget forecast can be explained as a self-inflicted crisis as well. Despite ample warning throughout last legislative session that lower oil prices would impact state revenues, lawmakers rammed through a series of ill-advised tax cuts that provided little benefit to most Texans. And rather than appropriating available dollars directly to transportation, lawmakers opted for a constitutional amendment dedicating sales tax growth to the state’s highway fund. The bottom line is: Specialized tax cuts and dedicated funding have left us with billions less to ensure current levels of service.

The good news is we have the ability to avert a manufactured fiscal crisis and responsibly pay our commitments without forcing harmful cuts. Moreover, there are rather painless options that allow us to maintain our balanced budget without requiring any new fees or taxes.

+ Jay Janner Rep. Donna Howard questions Texas Department of Family and Protective Services Director Hank Whitman at a public hearing of the House ... read more Jay Janner ×

First and foremost, we can shore up critical programs by tapping into the Economic Stabilization Fund, also known as the Rainy Day Fund, until the economy rebounds as anticipated. This fund, which will soon have a balance of over $10 billion, was created specifically for times like this, in order to smooth over temporary dips in the economy. Second, we should finally adopt some form of Medicaid expansion and take advantage of the billions in federal taxes that Texans have already paid. With both the highest rate and number of uninsured residents in the nation, we can reap substantial benefits by bringing your tax dollars back to Texas, allowing us to provide better health care coverage, lower pressure on local property tax costs and reduce insurance premiums. Third, we must avoid any further self-inflicted budgetary missteps and say no to politicized efforts to eliminate the franchise tax or divert public dollars to private schools.

The truth is we can maintain current funding without cuts, but there’s more to do. Thirty-one percent of school districts are still receiving less funding per pupil than they did prior to the dramatic budget cuts of 2011. Pre-K spending is still below pre-2011 levels, and higher education funding is still less than it was a decade ago. Putting off payments has already caused additional challenges that must be addressed, such as the broken foster care system and the underfunded health care plan for our retired teachers, and may have led to the rising rate of maternal mortality. The state and its citizens can’t afford to backtrack and slash the budget, and it certainly makes no sense to do so when there are painless solutions at the ready.

It is neither conservative nor responsible to shortchange vital services when dollars are available. If state leaders give precedence to cuts over investment next session, it won’t be because they have to — it will be because they choose to. Tell them to take a deep breath and do the right thing.