Herman: Texas Ag Commissioner Sid Miller’s office is what...
Today we embark on a new periodic feature that could be the feel-good hit of the summer and beyond. Or, after this first installment, we may never hear of it again.

The concept is simple; tours of important local folks’ offices. We’re starting today with Sid Miller, everybody’s favorite current Texas agriculture commissioner. I recently had some fun with a photo tweeted out by Miller’s staff showing him at a meeting in his distinctive office. The office inspired me to ask folks to pinpoint the motif at work here. The winner was “Pa-paw hit the Powerball!”

So, that was funny. And it led to this invitation from a Miller aide: “Come on by the office for a visit and see for yourself!”

I did, but before we proceed I must tell you this: Some animals were harmed in the making of this office. Killed would be harmed, right?

In the reception area on the 11th floor of the Stephen F. Austin State Office Building, my eyes first were caught by Bob, a stuffed bobcat on a table near the boar head on the wall under a toy helicopter — with gunman aiming at the already dead boar — hanging from the ceiling. I can explain all of this. More accurately, Miller can explain all of this.

+ The office of Texas Agricultural Commissioner Sid Miller is lavishly decorated with items that include Texan artifacts, hunting trophies and an ... read more ×

There’s also a vintage scale. The Ag Department’s bailiwick includes “ensuring that equity prevails in all commercial transactions involving determinations of quantity.” A sign at the scale bears Proverbs 20:10: “False weights and measures – the Lord surely detests both of them.”

Let’s note that Miller’s office previously has drawn journalistic attention, including in the Dallas Morning News, which reported last year that Miller spent $33,000 of campaign money on office furniture, and in the Texas Observer, whose Patrick Michels in March noted the office features “an ornate tableau of expired wildlife lurking in every corner.”

Miller told me, “We didn’t spend any state money on any of the refurbishings,” adding, “probably three quarters of this stuff is probably my personal stuff.”

+ Gavels from the Texas House and hunting trophies are part of the decor at Miller’s office. ×

The voluble, quotable commish greeted me as he exited his private office into a waiting area that featured heads, horns and a Civil War-themed chess set.

“Every set of horns, every piece of artwork, every mount or head is all my personal stuff,” he said. “This horn furniture is all mine, personal.”

We headed into his personal office, also decidedly Texan — and Republican, with a desk ornament that says “Pray. It’s not illegal yet.”

+ Miller shows an antique scale. ×

There’s a mountain lion, a Native American headdress, some gavels from his Texas House days, some other dead animal heads and rodeo ribbons he’s won. Miller’s a real good calf roper.

I asked him what look he was going for in the office. “Agriculture Department,” he said, fleshing that out as “hooves, hair, hide, horns, heads.” He laughed and added “Firearms.”

We headed out of his private office, past the gun displayed on mounted horns. I didn’t think to ask whether that particular weapon was involved in the process that led to the mounting of those particular horns.

Back in the reception area, we gazed at the boar head on the wall. “You have to look close to see the helicopter,” Miller said. “That’s my shrine to my pork chopper bill.”

Miller, then a Stephenville state representative, sponsored the 2011 bill allowing sport hunting of hogs from helicopters. Previously, that aerial assault technique was legal only for chopper companies hired by landowners seeking to control hog populations on their land.

“It became law and we have 130 new businesses across Texas doing helicopter hog hunts. Took a liability and turned it into an asset,” Miller said. “It’s been great. It’s been eradicating hogs ever since.”

In a conference room, he showed me a gift given to him during a visit to China last summer.

“Nastiest place I’ve ever been in my life,” he said. “I didn’t see the sun shine hardly the whole 11 days I was there.”

The office has a wall with the photos of every Texas ag commissioner, including future GOP governor and periodic presidential candidate Rick Perry. Miller began 2016 as a Perry presidential campaign backer but now has gone full Trump.

“I’m for Trump all the way,” he said. “I think he’ll be really good. … If you hit Trump, he’ll hit you twice.”

And he’s sure the New York businessman will be great for Texas agriculture by cutting good deals for the state’s products on the expert market.

Miller would be happy to campaign with Trump “if he needs me, I doubt he does. He’s pretty independent.”

What, I asked, if he needs you to help redecorate the Oval Office?

“I could lend a hand to that,” he said. “I could put a Texas twang to that office.”

We both laughed at that notion. I didn’t ask if he wanted to be Trump’s ambassador to China.

Miller’s sure his office is an asset for the state.

“When we bring foreign buyers in here, even dignitaries, I mean we get them in this office, it just closes the deal. I mean everybody wants to do business with Texas,” Miller said. “And then you bring them in the ag commissioner’s office and they see the longhorn and the double-barrel shotgun and the headdress, it just kind of like, ‘Yeah, we’ll do business with you guys.’”

“This is the Agriculture Department,” the commish said. “It should reflect Texas agriculture. And I think we’ve accomplished that.”

Oh yeah. Big time. Watch my video tour, including Miller’s delight with the only fake dead animal on the walls — a Big Mouth Billy Bass that sings “Take Me to the River.” It’s hanging outside his office and could be the only not-for-real thing in an office outfitted for somebody’s vision of a real man.

“Kind of a man-cave look,” Miller said “Cowboy man-cave look.”

Who else has an office the rest of us need to see? It doesn’t have to be quite this Milleresque — “Sidtopia” is what I’ve heard it called — but we are looking for the unusual.