Mackowiak: Julian Castro is entirely unqualified for vice...
Let me begin this column as a Texan: It would be a proud moment for our state to have one of its own serve as vice president of the United States, regardless of party or ideology.

That said, Julian Castro, who is currently serving as secretary of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), is manifestly unqualified to be vice president and sit just one heartbeat away from the presidency. We know that Hillary Clinton is 69 years old and has had some health problems in recent years. Her choice of running mate takes on added significance given this reality.

As a conservative, I would not favor any of her likely choices, though I would more strongly disapprove of hardcore liberals like U.S. Sens. Elizabeth Warren or Bernie Sanders, whose ideology is way outside the mainstream.

ANOTHER VIEW:Why Clinton should choose HUD Secretary Julian Castro for VP

HUD secretary is not serious preparation to be president. But let’s be serious: HUD secretary is one small slice of domestic policy. It ignores entirely foreign policy and national security, the most important responsibilities for any president — or vice president. You could fit the entirety of Castro’s knowledge of foreign policy and national security on a bubble gum wrapper.

+ Illustration by M. Scott Byers. ×

He is unknown to world leaders, has almost surely never received a classified intelligence briefing, and has never served in Congress. His sole executive role before HUD was as a part-time mayor.

For five years, Castro served as mayor of San Antonio, which claims to be the nation’s seventh-largest city. It misleadingly claims only the population in the city limits, not the metro area.

Under San Antonio’s system of government, the city manager runs the city — not the mayor, whose power is very limited. But don’t take my word for it. WOAI-AM, a news radio station in San Antonio, once named Castro the fourth most powerful person in his city. The city manager, Sheryl Sculley, was first.

RELATED READ:Will Julián Castro be Hillary Clinton’s vice presidential candidate?

Castro’s five years as mayor peaked when he campaigned for and passed a sales tax increase to fund his universal pre-K initiative. Other than that, his actual accomplishments on issues like crime and public education were very limited.

As National Review’s Jim Geraghty has written: “Castro is indeed a lot like the Barack Obama of 2004: a subject of endless glowing media profiles, touted as the voice of an entire ethnic group, charisma by the bucketful … and (has) a short record of quite modest achievements. The vast majority of the discussion about Castro focuses on his enormous potential and what is to come, not on his accomplishments and what he has done.”

The most significant accomplishment of Castro is probably that he was offered the keynote address at the 2012 Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, N.C.

It was his national debut, even though the Castro PR machine had been running at full speed since at least 2010, when The New York Times Magazine profiled him.

What are Castro’s views on defeating Islamic State? Isolating Russia? Brexit? Monetary policy? Tax reform? It would be impossible to know.

Politically, I do not believe Castro makes sense. His nomination will raise serious questions about his qualifications, forcing Hillary Clinton’s campaign on the defense. He doesn’t make Texas a blue state. He doesn’t speak Spanish. He has no constituency. Housing issues will not be central to this campaign.

The selection of a Latino running mate surely has some appeal, given Donald Trump’s historic weakness with Hispanic voters. But former U.S. Sen. Ken Salazar of Colorado would be a credible choice, as would U.S. Rep. Xavier Becerra of California.

Perhaps most seriously, how Castro earned a living while serving as mayor will come under intense scrutiny. In 2009, his first year as mayor, Castro received a seven-figure referral fee from notorious personal injury lawyer Mikal Watts, a major Obama donor. What Castro did to earn this fee, which smells like a dirty financial gift from a wealthy trial lawyer to a sitting elected official, will receive a lot of attention — especially since Watts was indicted on federal fraud charges in 2015.

Castro has been a “rising star” in the Democratic Party since 2009. He is unquestionably unqualified to be vice president.