Moorhead: Texas needs to address poverty, pollution and...
Pope Francis’ address to Congress explored a range of seemingly disparate topics ranging from poverty and needs of families, to climate change and violence, to religious intolerance and political polarization. The pope’s assessment of the world’s needs and America’s potential role in addressing them was an elegant theological argument for Triple Bottom Line (3BL) thinking on a global scale.

Conceptually, 3BL is a system of thinking about the interconnectedness of human society, the environment, and the economy, or the “three P’s” — people, planet, and profits. It’s the basis for accounting systems that include human, natural and financial capital.

The pope invited American political leaders to embrace just this approach by integrating management of wealth, natural resources, and technology to build a “modern, inclusive, sustainable” future. Texas could blaze a trail toward that future — but first we need to address three very different “P’s”: poverty, pollution and polarization.

In pleading for economic justice, Pope Francis didn’t recite data about poverty in Texas — but had he chosen to, he couldn’t have picked a better week to do it. On Sept. 16, the Census Bureau released new poverty estimates. Texas once again outstripped the national poverty rate, as we have done since at least 1959. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 2014 more than 4 million Texans — more than 16 percent — lived below 100 percent of the Federal Poverty Level.

The poverty picture is bleaker in Texas for women than it is for men, especially for children and seniors—two groups Pope Francis commended to political leaders’ particular care. About 24 percent of Texas children are poor compared to 21 percent of all American children. But nationally, boys and girls under 17 are poor at about the same rate; in Texas, 25 percent of girls are poor, compared to 23 percent of boys. The situation is worse for seniors: Texans over 65 are just one percentage point poorer, at 11 percent, than the U.S. average — but more than 15 percent of Texas senior women are poor, compared to just under 7 percent for senior men and 12 percent of senior women nationally.

+ Bee Moorhead is executive director of Texas Interfaith Center for Public Policy/Texas Impact. ×

In calling for climate protection, Pope Francis didn’t allude to the recent EPA methane rule hearing in Dallas — but Texas’ resistance to methane regulation has implications for both human health and the natural world. Methane is responsible for about 25 percent of global warming; reducing methane would also cut other air pollution that causes cancer and asthma.

The oil and gas industry is the largest industrial source of methane pollution, emitting more than 7 million metric tons each year. But Texas state regulators have declined to establish methane standards, and lawmakers recently stripped local authority to supplement state oversight.

In urging Americans to “support each other with respect for differences,” Pope Francis didn’t mention Sandra Bland or Ahmed Mohamed, but Texans listening surely got the message: racial and religious tensions permeate our state. According to a recent UT/Texas Tribune poll, Texans are even polarized about the extent of our division.

For example, fewer than half of tea party adherents believe Muslims are discriminated against in the U.S. compared to nearly three-quarters of all Texans; 29 percent of urban voters feel Hispanics face “a lot” of discrimination, compared to 10 percent of rural voters. The pope didn’t mention Texas by name, but Texas is currently functioning as a domestic microcosm of many of the concerns he highlighted.

By applying 3BL thinking at a state level, Texas could lead the nation in advancing Pope Francis’ vision — one shared by leaders of many faith traditions throughout the world — of a global community in which every human person flourishes in a climate of peace, freedom and dignity.