Support Hinojosa in House District 49, Workman in District 47
When the Legislature next convenes in January 2017, Texas House District 49 will be represented for the first time in a quarter-century by someone who isn’t Elliott Naishtat. We recommend voters in the March 1 Democratic primary make that someone Gina Hinojosa.

Hinojosa, a civil rights and employment attorney, is one of seven Democrats running to succeed Naishtat, who announced Dec. 10 that he would not seek re-election to the seat he has held since 1991. Because House District 49 is firmly Democratic — the vaguely hammer-shaped district stretches vertically through the heart of Austin’s most liberal neighborhoods and includes all or part of several politically influential Central Austin neighborhoods — no Republicans are running for the seat. So the Democratic primary is the general election for all intents and purposes.

We previously supported Hinojosa when she ran for the Austin school board in 2012. She was one of four new members elected that year as part of a backlash against the previous board and then-Superintendent Meria Carstarphen after they had rammed past the objections of parents, teachers and community leaders a plan to turn Allan Elementary in East Austin over to IDEA Public Schools. As we wrote at the time, we were confident Hinojosa “would work to restore balance with an independent voice honed in fighting legal battles for the poor and immigrant workers. The board needs trustees who can help rebuild public trust. … Hinojosa can immediately lead in that effort.”

And indeed she did. The other trustees selected her as the board’s vice president as soon as they convened — they later elevated her to president in January 2015, a position she recently gave up to run for the District 49 seat — and her calm, steady leadership helped create an environment that enabled the potentially unruly new board to move beyond the time- and resource-draining controversies they inherited. We haven’t spared Hinojosa our criticism — we criticized the board when it abandoned its rules so interim Superintendent Paul Cruz could be named a finalist for the job — but she skillfully has met the challenges placed before her.

With seven candidates in the race, it’s a certainty there will be a runoff. Hinojosa’s toughest challenger is Heather Way, who possesses an impressive résumé as a lawyer, University of Texas law professor and affordable housing advocate. Way has had a hand in drafting numerous bills at the Legislature and lobbying for their passage. If elected, there’s no doubt she would arrive at the Capitol ready to work.

+ Laura Skelding District 49 candidate Gina Hinojosa Laura Skelding ×

Hinojosa and Way are considered the leading candidates in the race. Both describe themselves as progressive Democrats (Way further specifies that she is “an Elizabeth Warren Democrat”), and it is doubtful there is any difference in how each would vote on bills affecting public education, public health, economic inequality, transportation, the environment — name your major issue here. Both are passionate, informed and prepared.

So a key consideration becomes how effectively each would function in a Republican-controlled Legislature that is always primed to lash out at Austin at the slightest provocation. In a chamber often defined by relationships as much as anything else, Hinojosa strikes us as the candidate who can most effectively protect Austin’s interests and priorities while advocating for them at the same time.

The other candidates in the race are Huey Rey Fischer, a former legislative staffer, including for state Rep. Eddie Rodriguez of Austin; lawyer Blake Rocap, a former staffer on the House Pensions Committee and a lobbyist for NARAL Pro-Choice Texas and the ACLU of Texas; defense lawyer and former prosecutor Matt Shrum; and lawyers Aspen Dunaway and Kenton Johnson. Any one of these candidates could emerge as a campaign surprise if Hinojosa and Way split the primary vote just so.

Ralph Barrera District 47 candidate Paul Workman

Texas House District 47

Where our decision to endorse Hinojosa took some debate, the question of whom we would endorse in the GOP primary for House District 47, which includes most of western Travis County, was quickly answered. Republicans should continue to support Paul Workman, a member of the Texas House since 2011.

Reliably pro-business, anti-regulation, anti-tax, a consistent critic of Austin Energy — it’s absurd anyone would doubt Workman’s conservative credentials. Yet he faces a challenge from his right from Jay Wiley, an attorney who ran for the District 6 seat on the Austin City Council in 2014. Wiley didn’t strike us then as a full-frontal, unwilling-to-compromise conservative, but he has re-emerged to run against Workman promising rigid adherence to principle and purity.

When pressed on positions on issues directly facing district constituents — schools, roads, transportation — Wiley retreated to national talking points. Republican voters who want District 47’s interests represented shouldn’t be distracted. Workman is the effective conservative in the race.

The winner of the Republican primary will face Democrat Ana Jordan in November’s general election. She is unopposed in the Democratic primary.

Voter registration for the March 1 primaries ends Feb. 1. Early voting is Feb. 16-26.