Abbott: Vote to save your time and money
Traveling around this great state, I’ve heard two loud and clear messages: You’re tired of being stuck in traffic, and you’re tired of seeing your property taxes go up and up. That’s why I made road funding an emergency priority this past legislative session and why I insisted on meaningful property tax reduction.

It’s your turn to speak again. If you want to build better roads and cut your property taxes, I invite you to vote early in the 2015 election.

Road congestion costs rush hour drivers in Austin and Dallas more than $1,000 a year. And in Houston, it’s even more—almost $1,500 a year. But traffic is not just a “big city” problem. It hits every family’s wallet. As Texas continues to grow, congestion is growing in communities of every size.

By voting for Proposition 7 on the Constitutional Amendment ballot, you will be directing an unprecedented $4 billion a year to the state highway fund for the building and repairing of Texas roads — without adding a penny in new fees, tolls, taxes or debt. And none of this money can be used for toll roads.

Proposition 7 does not raise your taxes. Instead, it constitutionally dedicates sales taxes already collected: $2.5 billion will come from state sale tax revenue plus about $1.5 billion from taxes paid when people purchase or rent motor vehicles in Texas.

If you want better roads, vote for Proposition 7. You are making sure there is money in the bank for large road projects. I’ve directed the Texas Transportation Commission to address the worst traffic chokepoints and work with planners to get new roads built swiftly and effectively.

If you also want to save on your property taxes, vote for Proposition 1 on the Constitutional Amendment ballot. It’s time for homeowners — not the government — to truly own their own property. And this is a first step.

By voting for Proposition 1 on the statewide ballot, you will be protecting more of your home’s value from being taxed. Your homestead exemption will increase from $15,000 to $25,000. Property tax savings will vary by district, but it’s your money; you should get to keep more of it.

Other measures on the constitutional amendment ballot include Proposition 2. We owe more than our thanks to those who serve in uniform and the families who serve by their sides. Proposition 2 cuts property taxes for spouses of totally disabled veterans who died before 2011. Voters already approved this for spouses of totally disabled veterans who died after 2011.

And finally, Proposition 6 protects your rights as a Texan to hunt and fish. Texans have long lived off the bounty of the land. Hunting and fishing are family traditions, and we know how to conserve our natural resources for future generations.

Make your voice heard. I urge you to vote. Early voting runs through Oct. 30, and Election Day is Nov. 3.

Remember to bring your voter registration, photo I.D. and a friend. For more information on polling locations, visit votetexas.gov.