Prosecutor on the defense: Travis County District Attorney...
Key players

Travis County District Attorney Rosemary Lehmberg — Pleaded guilty to driving while intoxicated and served jail time after her drunken driving arrest on April 12, but the embattled district attorney has faced several efforts to force her out of office since. A civil trial to remove her on grounds she was intoxicated off duty is expected to start Monday.

Dan Richards — Lead lawyer on the legal team defending Lehmberg in the removal trial.

Kerry O’Brien — Austin attorney who initially filed the petition to remove Lehmberg from office and who has been a vocal critic in the months following her arrest, including creating and regularly updating a Facebook page that calls for her ouster.

Travis County Attorney David Escamilla — In part to clean up procedural problems, Escamilla dismissed O’Brien’s petition and immediately filed a new but similar suit. His office is representing the state in the case against Lehmberg.

Executive Assistant County Attorney James Collins —Lead counsel for the state in the case.

Gov. Rick Perry — If Lehmberg is removed, he will appoint her replacement.

Expert reporting

Investigative reporter Tony Plohetski has covered Travis County criminal justice issues for more than a decade and was first to report Lehmberg’s April arrest. Public safety reporter Ciara O’Rourke has since covered Lehmberg’s sentencing and efforts to remove her from office.

Timeline of Rosemary Lehmberg’s career

1974: Earns law degree from St. Mary’s University.

1975: Licensed to practice law in the state of Texas.

1976: Starts working at the Travis County district attorney’s office, where she later serves as chief of the trial, career criminal, special crimes, major crimes and public integrity divisions.

1988: Becomes director of the district attorney’s office’s family justice division and later helps found what is now known as the Center for Child Protection.

1997: Becomes longtime District Attorney Ronnie Earle’s top deputy as the county’s first assistant district attorney.

April 2008: Defeats Assistant District Attorney Mindy Montford in a Democratic primary runoff with 65 percent of the vote.

January 2009: Becomes the first female district attorney in Travis County history.

May 2012: Defeats Charlie Baird in the Democratic primary for district attorney with 74 percent of the vote.

November 2012: Wins the 2012 general election unopposed.

April 12: Arrested by Travis County sheriff’s deputies on a drunken driving charge on RM 620 near Lake Travis.

April 17: Attorney Kerry O’Brien files a petition in Travis County civil court to remove Lehmberg from office.

April 19: Pleads guilty to DWI and is sentenced to 45 days in jail.

May 9: Released from jail after serving about half of her sentence because of good behavior.

June 11: American-Statesman reports that Gov. Rick Perry has been pushing for Lehmberg to resign and is threatening to withhold state funding from her office’s Public Integrity Unit.

Oct. 4: A special grand jury finds no criminal wrongdoing in Lehmberg’s behavior during her jail booking process.

Oct. 18: Jury selection in a civil case to remove Lehmberg from office is put off after she waives her right to a jury trial.