Proposed Texas rules: Fetal remains must be buried or cremated
Pro-choice activists gird for new round of anti-abortion legislation in Texas.

An abortion rights advocate said the rules are intended to shame Texas women seeking an abortion.

Less than a week after the U.S. Supreme Court struck down Texas’ abortion regulations as overly restrictive, the state’s health officials published new proposed rules on disposing of fetal remains.

An aborted fetus must be buried or cremated, according to rules proposed this month by the Texas Health and Human Services Commission at the behest of Gov. Greg Abbott. The move “affirms the value and dignity of all life,” said Abbott spokeswoman Ciara Matthews.

Abortion rights advocates said the effort is part of a wider attack on women’s rights.

Heather Busby, executive director of NARAL Pro-Choice Texas, called the proposal “a frightening preview of the avalanche of anti-abortion legislation that Texas lawmakers will propose next session.”

The rules are part of the governor’s “Life initiative,” Matthews said, which is meant “to protect the unborn and prevent the sale of baby body parts,” according to Abbott’s website.

WATCH: Abortion demonstrators square off at the Capitol

The proposed rules wouldn’t apply to fetal tissue donated for research, according to Carrie Williams, a spokeswoman for the state Department of State Health Services.

Current rules allow fetal remains, as with other medical tissue, to be ground and discharged into a sewer system, incinerated or disinfected followed by disposal in a landfill, or “an approved alternate treatment process, provided that the process renders the item as unrecognizable, followed by deposition in a sanitary landfill.”

“We believe that Texas law should be changed to assure that the bodies of the victims of abortion are not treated like medical waste,” said Joe Pojman, executive director of Texas Alliance for Life. “These proposed rule validate the dignity of those unborn babies whose lives are unfortunately lost to abortion.”

REVIEW: Check out our live tweets in April of a Texas committee’s review of fetal tissue practices

Preliminary research on the new proposal began in January, and the final drafting of the rules happened at the beginning of June, Williams said. They were submitted to the Texas Register on June 20 and published on July 1.

In late June, the Supreme Court struck down Texas regulations — requiring abortions to be performed in hospital-like surgical centers and doctors to have admitting privileges in nearby hospitals — that would have closed more than half of the state’s abortion clinics.

The court rejected arguments from Texas Republican officials who insisted that the restrictions were intended to protect the health and safety of women seeking an abortion, finding instead that the regulations amounted to an improper barrier for women seeking an abortion.

According to the new proposal on the Texas Register, the consequence of the proposed disposal rules “will be enhanced protection of the health and safety of the public,” according to Renee Clack, director of the health care quality section at the Department of State Health Services.

Busby called the proposed rules a “new low for our state’s leaders who are committed to making abortion inaccessible and shaming Texans who have abortions.”

“A person who needs an abortion will unfairly bear the burden of these new regulations and every abortion patient deserves to be treated with dignity and respect,” she said.

The public has until the end of July to submit comments on the proposals. The rule is likely to take effect in September.