Wear: An Austin cabby says she welcomes the fingerprinting...
She says that prints are necessary, and that different rules for ride-hailing amounts to unfair competition.

Riddering must be printed every year, for the city or Cap Metro, a process that took an hour including travel.

There was a period in Austin cab history, Hannah Riddering says, when fingerprinting wasn’t required of taxi drivers.

Riddering, who’s been prowling the city’s streets since 1987 in a Yellow Cab, recalls a fellow cabby who “creeped me out.” If he was waiting at a cab stand, she’d just move on and look for other fares. After the guy divorced and moved away from the area, Riddering met with his ex-wife. She showed Riddering a criminal record on the guy, one she said she’d found in a bureau drawer after the split. It showed a series of sexual assaults earlier in the man’s life.

Riddering, chilled at that revelation, began to push for fingerprint-based criminal background checks as a prerequisite for hack licenses here. Not long after, the Austin City Council agreed and reinstituted a fingerprinting requirement, Riddering says.

Now, as basically every Austinite above the age of 9 knows, the City Council is several months into a battle with Uber and Lyft over whether ride-hailing drivers should have to be fingerprinted as well. We’re going to have an election on this subject May 7. “Yes” on the Ridesharing Works for Austin ballot initiative will mean no fingerprinting requirement for ride-hail drivers (but no change for cabbies, along with other ride-for-hire folks like shuttle, limo and pedicab drivers). A “no” vote will mean they’d have to be fingerprinted.

Uber and Lyft say “no” also will mean no Uber and Lyft in Austin, that both companies would shut down their apps here. They say the hassle and intrusiveness of fingerprinting will discourage potential drivers from applying and hurt the companies’ business model, and that their records-based background checks are sufficiently thorough. Fingerprinting’s advocates said biometric identifiers such as fingerprints are the only way to guarantee that the person applying has not assumed an alter ego, with the help of forged documents, to cover up a disreputable past.

+ Jay Janner Taxi driver Hannah Riddering, shown picking up a blind passenger in 2008, says fingerprint-based background checks for drivers-for-hire is a small ... read more Jay Janner ×

You’ve heard or read all of this before, I’m sure.

But perhaps you haven’t heard from a cabby directly. So I took a ride with Riddering as she went to the North Austin location where IdentoGo, under a contract with the Texas Department of Public Safety, takes fingerprints from cabbies and other ground transportation drivers. The prints are then used for a Texas-only criminal background check by the DPS.

Riddering has to go every other year in March to maintain her chauffeur’s permit with the city of Austin, and in the off year she has to be fingerprinted, too, because she provides rides for people with disabilities under a Capital Metro program.

She picked me up at my Mueller home about 8:30 a.m. and we set off up Airport Boulevard in her Ford C-MAX Hybrid. I asked her about the argument by Lyft and Uber about the trouble of fingerprinting discouraging applicants.

“If it’s a burden on them, then it must be a burden on us,” she said. “That should be across the board.”

But, hearkening back to her long-ago taxi colleague, she said it is really not that big a deal to get fingerprints taken, and it’s a small burden well worth bearing.

“What this is about is making sure the people who have a history of violent crimes against persons are thoroughly scrutinized by outside officials, by people who are not directly involved with the company, before they are turned loose on the public,” Riddering said.

We pulled up to the DPS facility on Denson Drive about 8:55 a.m. Riddering was first in line inside and was asked to take a seat. Fourteen minutes later, after an intermediate trip to the counter to show them her license and other materials, Riddering was called back into the fingerprinting area. I was allowed to come along.

The IdentoGo worker took her through what has become a familiar routine for her. First the thumbprints, rolling them side to side to get a complete image on a digital screen, then the other four on each hand at one time. Again, with a side to side motion until the machine beeped to signal the job was done on each finger. No ink involved.

Then Riddering was photographed and paid the worker $25.53 with a credit card (Riddering had thought it would be $35). We were done, 22 minutes start to finish. Throw in the transportation to and from Denson Drive (assuming that the trip couldn’t be combined with a nearby fare), and a typical cabby (or ride-hailing driver) probably would have to invest about an hour.

The background check and driving record results, a clerk told Riddering, would be available for her to pick up on Denson Drive three business days later. She’ll have to take the results to a city office downtown. So that’s another couple of trips.

The fingerprinting, of course, is not the only disparity between cabbies and ride-hailing drivers. Cabs, unlike Lyft and Uber, have publicly regulated fares: $2.50 for the first eleventh of a mile and 20 cents for each eleventh after that. The ride-hailing companies typically charge about the same for a short ride but much less for longer ones, except during peak times when “surge” pricing kicks in.

The ride-hailing companies can also have unlimited numbers of cars on the streets, which explains the quicker-than-cab pickup times for Uber and Lyft. Austin by law allows just 900 cabs to operate (756 until last summer, when the council allowed 50 more permits for each of the city’s three cab franchises). And many riders say that ride-hail drivers are, on average, more genial and have cleaner cars, a perception that is hard to quantify or check out but works to the advantage of Lyft and Uber.

The net effect of all this, Riddering said, is that, according to her manager, Yellow Cab-dispatched rides have fallen off 22 percent in the past year. Taxi drivers, those who haven’t given up and surrendered their permits, are having to work longer hours to make the same money. Some would say that’s just the free market at work. Riddering has a much harsher assessment.

“That’s theft,” she said. “because it’s not fair. They’re doing what we do.”