Stressed immigration system launches ad campaign
To slow an unprecedented surge of immigrants entering the country illegally, U.S. immigration officials Wednesday announced an international public relations campaign to deter a seemingly endless flow of Central Americans, including about 50,000 unaccompanied minors who have overfilled short-term detention centers this year.

“If you come illegally into the U.S., you are not eligible for a path to citizenship,” R. Gil Kerlikowske, U.S. Customs and Border Protection commissioner, said in a warning to potential immigrants during a press conference on the banks of the Rio Grande.

“The journey is dangerous,” he said from Anzalduas Park, a hot spot for immigrant families crossing the nearby river. “Children will not get legal papers if they make it.”

Officials plan to advertise the warning, dubbed the “Dangers Awareness Campaign,” on TV, radio, billboards and on buses in Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala — countries where tens of thousands have fled since May due to gang violence and a widespread misunderstanding that President Barack Obama had loosened immigration laws.

Kerlikowske echoed Monday’s remarks by a visibly frustrated Obama, who castigated Republican House leaders for blocking immigration reform and vowed to take executive action to fix what he called a humanitarian crisis along the border.

Among other measures, Obama reassigned more than 260 Border Patrol agents to the Rio Grande Valley and requested $2 billion from Congress to speed deportations for thousands of children who made the journey alone.

The move to scare off would-be migrants comes amid criticism from GOP leaders who blamed the influx on Obama’s 2012 executive order, the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, which delayed deportation for child immigrants who entered illegally. Many Central Americans detained at the border say they came in part because they heard Obama had opened the border to children, officials have said.

Among Obama’s harshest critics is Gov. Rick Perry, who plans to testify Thursday in McAllen during a congressional hearing called by U.S. Rep. Michael McCaul, R-Austin, chairman of the House Homeland Security Committee.

Testimony in Thursday’s hearing will be included in the findings of a congressional working group focused on immigration.

The Obama administration has blamed the surge of immigrants on extreme poverty and violence in countries like Honduras, which has the highest murder rate in the world, according to United Nations research.

Ana Bulnes, a McAllen-based consul with the Honduran Consulate, said about 40 percent of the detained immigrants are Hondurans seeking asylum. That’s about 90 people a day, she said — many of whom report that both dangers at home and the false promise of “permisos,” or permission to stay in the U.S., spurred their long journey north.

Among those immigrants was Lilian Noemi Alfaro Gómez, a 26-year-old single mother who fled Honduras because she said she feared for her safety.

Alfaro said her 10-day journey to the border included several buses through Mexico, her surrender to U.S. Border Patrol agents and eventual release at the McAllen Central Station, the bus station where scores of similar families pass through each day.

Gripping her bus ticket tightly, Alfaro said Tuesday that she was headed for Austin, where she has two cousins.

“I wanted a better life for my daughter,” she said as 3-year-old Nahiely and other children scampered around or scribbled into coloring books at the bus station. “And when I heard President Obama offering permission, I started the trip to the U.S.”

McAllen has become the epicenter of the migration because its downtown bus station offers a convenient thoroughfare to larger cities such as San Antonio, Dallas, Houston and Austin, where freed migrants will meet family members with the expectation that they will appear in court for a future immigration hearing.

The journey to McAllen includes grueling travel through scorching desert terrain for women and children who often lack food, water and shelter. Many arrive dehydrated and in need of a shower and food. Some require medical attention.

“We’re actually doing a favor for the Houstons and San Antonios of the world because if we weren’t doing this, they would be hitting their cities in a lot worse condition than they’re receiving them,” McAllen Mayor Jim Darling said.

Much of McAllen’s response is centered on a volunteer-run shelter at the Sacred Heart Catholic Church near the bus station.

For mothers who haven’t had a good rest in days, volunteers occupy children in a makeshift play area. When families are ready to leave — they seldom stay for more than a day, officials say — volunteers help them purchase bus tickets to their final destinations.

Darling said his city has spent more than $70,000 responding to the influx and expects to spend $500,000 by the end of the year.

Darling said he is reluctant to declare a state of emergency in McAllen for fear of bad press and because the crisis is being managed. Still, the mayor traveled to Austin earlier this week to ask state and federal officials for money and resources.

“I’m worried about sustainability,” he said.

In addition to making clear the likelihood of deportation, Kerlikowske said U.S. advertising abroad will focus on the perils of the trek through the unforgiving Mexican terrain, as well as the high risk of robbery, violence and sexual assault that women and children face on the journey.

Since the influx began in May, Kerlikowske said, the Border Patrol has counted more than 220 deaths and identified 46 girls and women who reported being raped during their journey to South Texas.

“You are putting yourself and your children in grave danger,” he said.

Texas health officials also warn that the influx has increased the risk of infectious disease, particularly in detention centers operated by Immigration and Customs Enforcement, where unaccompanied minors have been held in large numbers in temporary quarters for longer periods than the facilities were designed to handle.

Those facilities are mandated to release immigrants to a permanent shelter or home within 72 hours, a target federal officials had failed to meet amid the influx. Now, however, detainees are being relocated within the time limit, Kerlikowske said.