Bohls: WGC-Dell, ACC, Day win big
And the winner of the World Golf Championship-Dell Match Play Championship is ….

Well, pretty much everybody.

Except Justin Thomas, Smylie Kaufman, Chris Wood and Daniel Berger, the only four golfers in the field who didn’t even halve a match and went home with 0-3 records.

Australian Jason Day was the deserving runaway winner, crushing Louis Oosthuizen 5 and 4 in the finals to win the first ever PGA Tournament in Austin without even the benefit of a practice round, but everything from the Austin Country Club members and volunteers to the testing Pete Dye course to Michael Dell’s sponsorship received high marks.

The tournament thrived even though favorite son Jordan Spieth failed to advance past the Round of 16, severe winds threatened to torment the golfers the first two days and the eventual champion began play without even the benefit of a practice round and considered withdrawing because of back pain.

+ Jay Janner Jordan Spieth plays Hole 13 at the World Golf Championships Dell Match Play at the Austin Country Club Wednesday. Jay Janner ×

Day, who won this event in 2014, merely walked the first seven holes on Tuesday. He got much more well-acquainted with the course over the next five days, playing an exhausting 101 holes by Sunday’s end.

Of course, all 64 of the world’s best players got exposed to the beauty and buzz of Austin.

“Austin is such a cool town,” PGA commissioner Tim Finchem said in a private sitdown with a half-dozen writers Sunday. “We’ve been wanting to be there since the Legends of Golf was played here (from 1978-1994). We’d like to stay for a long time. We’ve gotten a great reaction from around the world … so we have to say it’s a home run.”

Now that the PGA Tour has arrived, it doesn’t plan on leaving any time soon. And won’t unless the gracious hosts of the Austin Country Club grow weary of loaning out their course for two weeks every year, at least for the life of this tournament. They have a four-year contract with the PGA Tour, but ACC president Greg Meserole said he’s heard no grousing about the lack of access to their private club. Besides, the club receives a $1 million payday for its troubles.

“It’s been better than a dream,” Meserole said after the ceremony on the closing hole at No. 14. “I think we knocked it out of the park.”

Chairman and CEO Michael Dell didn’t use a baseball analogy although his company’s name does grace the home stadium of the Texas Rangers’ Triple-A team. Regardless, he attended the event every single day and walked with the final pairing the last three holes.

“It’s been fantastic,” Dell told the Statesman. “The reaction from the community has been overwhelmingly positive.”

Asked if he’d like to extend the agreement beyond four years, Dell said, “We’ll see. It’s a great start, and it’ll be even better next year, I’m sure. Golf’s a global sport. A billion people in 220 countries are watching this competition, and we’re selling in least 180 of them. And it’s interesting to see the finals are coming down to two golfers from around the world (Australia and South Africa).

On the same week the X Games announced it was pulling out of Austin, the why-not golf tournament that makes so much sense here pulled into town.

For the 68-year-old Finchem, he couldn’t wait.

“Austin’s the fastest-growing city in the country the last five years,” Finchem said. “It’s younger, and it’s high tech.”

The PGA Tour would love to tap into the tech industry more heavily and might, given Dell’s budding relationship as golf’s first high-profile title sponsor for a Tour stop of an event that’s jumped from Tucson to San Francisco and now to Austin.

Finchem called it “a signal that tech companies can prosper from the relationship with our sport and our players, and we think that’s a very positive thing, too.”

Last season represented what Finchem called “a banner year” as hot, young sensations like former Texas Longhorn Jordan Spieth and Day, the newly crowned No. 1, made off with three-fourths of the majors. Audience size peaked at 40 percent above the previous year’s measurables, and Finchem said the audience level has gone up an additional 5 percent through 19 events this season.

Finchem and the golfers raved about the size of the galleries all week. The event was sold out in September and had an increase of 31 percent in ticket sales over last year’s tourney held at Harding Park. To restock the merchandising tent, ACC had to reorder twice last week.

“Everything was top shelf,” Meserole said. “The only negative I heard all week was about some of the slopes of the greens, but that’s Pete Dye.”

The exuberant Finchem gushed during the trophy presentation, “In history, I don’t think we’ve ever had a better first-time event.”

Even with a second-time champion.