Wide range of abortion-rights supporters attack Texas law
Briefs from supporters of the Texas abortion regulations due at U.S. Supreme Court by Feb. 3.

Keenly aware that the fight over Texas abortion restrictions could produce a landmark ruling from the U.S. Supreme Court, opponents of the state law have deluged the nine justices with briefs from theologians, doctors, scientists, business executives, historians and women who have received abortions.

The input was designed to offer a broader perspective than the court typically receives from law professors, politicians and advocacy groups — though those perspectives are represented as well in 45 friend-of-the-court briefs recently filed in Washington.

The advocates urged the court to throw out the Texas regulations and establish legal standards clamping down on similar laws that, they say, are back-door attempts to close abortion clinics after previous efforts failed to overturn the constitutional right to abortion that the court established in 1973.

“The stakes in this case for women cannot be overstated,” said Cecile Richards, president of Planned Parenthood Federation of America, which also submitted a brief. “Texas paints a grim picture of what will become a reality across the country if the court upholds this shutdown law.”

Abortion opponents will have their chance to respond by Feb. 3, the deadline for amicus briefs from supporters of the Texas law. A similarly robust response is expected from the other side in the widely watched case.

Even on an issue as divisive as abortion, the Texas law is notable for the passions it has aroused — starting with the 2013 legislative session that stretched into two special sessions and featured deafening Capitol protests, late-night public hearings and a daylong filibuster by then-state Sen. Wendy Davis, a Democrat who also filed a brief with the high court.

Davis joined three other women, all current or former politicians, to discuss their earlier abortions to help the court understand their choices and the impact the Texas law, known as House Bill 2, could have on other women if it was allowed to be enforced, leaving about 10 clinics operating in the state’s largest cities — down from more than 40 when HB 2 was signed into law in July 2013.

In the brief, Davis recalled her abortion in 1994 for a nonviable tubal pregnancy that threatened her health and a wrenching and reluctant decision to end a 1996 pregnancy after tests discovered a brain abnormality that doctors said left her fetus with little or no chance of survival.

+ Jay Janner Former state Sen. Wendy Davis also filed a brief with the high court. Jay Janner ×

Davis and the other women told the court they were “grateful that they were able to exercise their constitutional rights in nearby doctor’s offices and abortion clinics without the burdens of travel, delay and additional expense that would be imposed on Texas women if HB 2 were to remain in force.”

The women also said they hoped their stories would help others confront the stigma often associated with abortion.

“One in every three women has an abortion during her lifetime,” the Davis brief said. “Yet very few women choose to openly discuss their experiences, a reflection of the cultural and social stigma attached to that choice.”

In a similar vein, 113 women — all law students, lawyers or law professors — also put their name on a brief emphasizing that, for most, their professional success would have been impossible without ready access to abortion, particularly for those who got pregnant as teens or college students.

“By drastically reducing — and threatening to eliminate — the number of abortion providers in Texas, and offering a model for other states to do the same, (HB 2 is) a direct affront to a fundamental liberty and to a woman’s right to control her destiny,” their brief said.

Many of the briefs urged the Supreme Court justices to force Texas and other states to justify regulations that can force clinics to close.

Republicans who guided HB 2 into law argued that their goal was to improve women’s health by requiring abortion doctors to gain admitting privileges in a nearby hospital and by requiring that all abortions be performed in hospital-like settings.

Abortion providers sued, arguing that the regulations — impossible for many clinics to meet — were unnecessary because they offered no health benefits for a relatively low-risk procedure.

U.S. District Judge Lee Yeakel of Austin agreed, ruling in August 2014 that the regulations created “a brutally effective system” designed to close abortion facilities, not improve women’s health, while placing an impermissible barrier on abortion access for poor, rural or disadvantaged women across Texas.

But a federal appeals court upheld the Texas law last June, saying in part that state legislators had an established interest in regulating medical procedures and didn’t have to prove that the new rules improved women’s health as advertised.

Many of the amicus briefs came from medical professionals and groups, including the American Medical Association and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists — that disputed the health benefits provided by the Texas regulations.

Five medical groups, including the National Physicians Alliance, argued that politicians are increasingly misusing their power to regulate health care to target abortion providers. “To prevent this end run,” they said, “courts must require some showing that a law or regulation that burdens constitutional rights … actually advances its asserted justification.”

Among other briefs:

• Forty-seven theologians and ethicists, including some who view abortion as a “grave sin,” called HB 2 “manifestly unjust and immoral” because it doesn’t promote the common good and was enacted under the false pretense of protecting women’s health, they said. “A law based on dishonesty is immoral, regardless of whether one favors its hidden objective,” they wrote. “HB 2 also cruelly imposes disproportionate burdens on the health and resources of women who can least bear them.”

• Travis County Judge Sarah Eckhardt and Commissioner Brigid Shea joined their counterparts from other cities, including New York, San Francisco and Boston, to urge the court to remember “the hardships imposed when women are compelled to travel long distances to an ever-dwindling number of clinics.” They also feared women seeking abortions would swamp clinics that remain open, leading to delays and later-term abortions that have higher risks.

• The Obama administration urged the justices to weigh whether HB 2 actually improves women’s health when determining if it and similar laws impose an improper “undue burden” on access to abortion — a standard articulated, but left largely undefined, by the Supreme Court in 1992.

• A brief signed by 20 current and former Republican officials, including state Rep. Sarah Davis of Houston, said HB 2 improperly intrudes into an intensely private decision for women and families in violation of party philosophies that prize individual liberty and a minimally intrusive government.