Bohls: Longhorns vs. Aggies, anyone? Please.
While I got ya, here are nine things and one crazy prediction:

1. Sadly, in spite of Charlie Strong’s otherwise encouraging words last week, I’m not expecting a Texas-Texas A&M football game any time soon. Texas AD Mike Perrin declined comment. So did A&M’s Scott Woodward, although he told TexAgs, “I’m against doing it at the end of the season (because of the LSU date). I’d like to do it at the beginning of the season. I think that makes more sense from my standpoint. We obviously have obligations with Power Five non-conference games going out a few years. It has to work for (Texas) as well. At the proper time, we’ll have discussions about it.” The absolute soonest could be 2020 unless one buys out a future opponent. Texas, starting in 2020, plays non-conference games against LSU, Arkansas, Ohio State twice and Michigan twice. Texas-Texas A&M would be a guaranteed sellout. A&M has one opening in 2018 and two openings in 2019, and didn’t A&M regent Tony Buzbee say the Aggies needed “some cupcakes?” Many other SEC teams play their rivals as non-conference games — Florida-Florida State, Georgia-Georgia Tech, South Carolina-Clemson — at the end, but I’d love to see an annual Labor Day kickoff between the Longhorns and Aggies.

2. Lance Berkman, 40, threw his name into what’s become a very big hat for the Texas baseball job. I’d still try to money-whip TCU’s Jim Schlossnagle, UCLA’s John Savage or Oklahoma State’s Josh Holliday and keep Dallas Baptist’s Dan Heefner on the back burner. Berkman, the former major-leaguer who hit 366 home runs over 15 seasons, coached Houston Second Baptist to a private-school state championship and openly wants the job. “I have not been contacted by anyone,” Berkman told me. “I’m in my prime. But whoever gets the Texas job has got to win the state of Texas back. Being in the high school ranks, I talk to a lot of coaches and kids, and they’re fired up about A&M, TCU and Texas Tech. You don’t hear anybody talking about Texas. It doesn’t have any momentum right now. You could only recruit the state of Texas and still have a chance to win the national championship every year. The other schools have stolen a little bit of fire from UT.” … I’m told Augie Garrido tried to bring on former Texas Rangers hitting coach Rudy Jaramillo to his staff to be paid out of summer baseball camp money, but the move was nixed because then-AD Steve Patterson couldn’t approve Jaramillo as a volunteer coach because Jaramillo couldn’t be paid out of that pot of money under NCAA compliance rules.

3. Longhorns golfer Scottie Scheffler tees it up at the U.S. Open on Thursday on an Oakmont course he’s never played after qualifying in Ohio to continue his torrid play of late. His coach, John Fields, said of Scheffler, it was “an amazing transformation with a 36-hole qualifier for the U.S. Open against an incredible field loaded with tour players. Does the course fit him? I don’t know if Oakmont fits anybody’s game. I think Angel Cabrera won there the last time at plus-5 (over par in 2007). I hear the rough is incredible right now, so thick that if you hit it there, you might not find it.”

4. Drew Brees, preparing for his 16th NFL season, said he doesn’t worry about concussions and makes a case that football may be safer than ever before. “Do you know what the second sport with the most concussions is? Women’s soccer,” Brees said. “But do you see anyone telling their daughters not to play soccer? And the third most dangerous sport? Cheerleading. You understand the risk with every sport you play.” Brees, though, said he plans to not let son Baylen play tackle football until high school.

+ Rodolfo Gonzalez Texas’ kicker Justin Tucker celebrates his game-winning 40-yard field goal over Texas A&M; on the final play of the game held ... read more Rodolfo Gonzalez ×

5. Did you see that Oklahoma State became the first team in 14 years to reach Omaha without ever trailing in a regional or super regional game? Georgia Tech was the last one to do it.

6. So tired of the intentional fouling in NBA games. I know the Tristan Thompsons of the world can negate the practice by improving their free throw shooting, but the ploy is so aesthetically ugly. What if the league adopted a rule that awards the fouled player three free throws, or one free throw and possession. … I wonder which is the hardest to officiate — flagrant fouls in the NBA, the strike zone in baseball or pass interference in football. I say the latter.

7. What a year for the Boomer Sooners. In addition to putting teams in the Final Four for football and men’s basketball, Oklahoma won national championships in men’s and women’s gymnastics and softball. OU was national runner-up in men’s tennis and reached the quarterfinals in men’s golf and had five Big 12 players of the year and five Big 12 coaches of the year. And they got a year of eligibility back for quarterback Baker Mayfield.

8. Sure, Texas didn’t make the NCAA baseball field, but Garrido had a respectable 6-7 record against Texas Tech, TCU and OSU, three teams that are in Omaha.

9. Was captivated by “13 Hours,” the intense real-life story of the Libyan raid on the U.S. compound at Benghazi in 2012 that resulted in the death of a U.S. ambassador. Was John Krasinski’s best work ever. Gave it eight ducks.

10. Crazy prediction: The Cavs will win the Finals.

Editor’s note: The original version of this story was updated to reflect the correct reasons why Rudy Jaramillo wasn’t added to Augie Garrido’s coaching staff.