Texas Senate OKs divisive tax credit scholarship bill
Following a slight delay, the Texas Senate gave preliminary approval Monday to a divisive bill designed to help thousands of public school students pay for tuition at private or religious institutions.

The 31-member upper chamber approved Sen. Larry Taylor’s Senate Bill 4 on a mixed, 18-12 vote after rejecting a handful of Democratic-proposed amendments to the measure.

One conservative Democrat, Sen. Eddie Lucio Jr. of Brownsville, voted for the bill. Two Republicans voted against it: Sens. Robert Nichols of Jacksonville and Konni Burton of Colleyville — the conservative successor of former Democratic Sen. Wendy Davis — who said it doesn’t go far enough.

The measure would provide up to $100 million in tax credits to businesses that donate money to a state-approved non-profit that doles out the funds to public school students to help pay for tuition at alternative schools.

Taylor, R-Friendswood, chairman of the Senate Education Committee, said Monday the program would help as many as 16,000 students escape low-performing schools. The measure is a top priority for Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick, a Republican who pushed similar legislation as a state senator from Houston.

The Senate likely will take a final vote on the bill Tuesday.

After that, it would head to the Texas House, where it faces an uncertain fate. In 2013, the lower chamber voted overwhelmingly to ban state money from being spent on such programs, which are part of the GOP-championed “school choice” movement.

More recently, the House’s top public education policymaker, Rep. Jimmie Don Aycock, R-Killeen, has expressed reservations, namely that it is difficult for the state to hold private schools to the same standards as public schools.

Taylor said Monday he attempted to address some of those concerns by requiring that participating private schools be accredited and administer annual exams. Sparsely populated areas would be excluded, too, he noted.

Taylor also argued that the measure is “not a voucher program,” a more divisive concept that gives state money directly to public school students for private school tuition. But opponents, who often call such tax credit scholarship programs “back door vouchers,” said Monday it is all the same thing.

Sen. José Menéndez of San Antonio, one of the Democrats who unsuccessfully attempted to amend the bill Monday, called the proposal “a short circuit around the whole voucher concept.”

Democrats, along with teacher and school groups, oppose such proposals in large part because they say it would divert students, and money, away from public schools they believe are already underfunded.

“At a time when neighborhood schools are being shortchanged, we are extremely disappointed that the Senate has voted to use tax dollars to fund a separate private school voucher system for a handful of select students,” Texas State Teachers Association President Noel Candelaria said Monday.

But Burton, the conservative senator, said Monday the measure isn’t what she had in mind.

“I am a strong supporter of school choice but believe that creating private school scholarships via franchise tax credit subsidies limits the scope of the program, creates a barrier to eliminating the franchise tax and blocks efforts at broader and fairer school choice,” she said in a statement explaining her ‘no’ vote.