Top Marijuana and Hemp Stocks To Invest In – Marijuana Hemp Stocks
Top Marijuana Stocks and Hemp Stocks To Invest In

In our previous article, we discussed the top marijuana stocks to invest in, we’ll be continuing in this article but with a slight difference, the stocks listed here fall under the under $2 billion market capitalization. Let’s begin.

Green Thumb Industry: Green thumb industry is a vertically integrated dispensaries. One thing to note about marijuana companies are that they are either growers or vertically integrated dispensaries. Green thumb has been empowered with the license to open 60 retail locations in eight markets in the U.S and for this expansion to be effective there will undoubtedly be a huge amount of spending, and with the U.S still giving out licenses and legalizing recreational use of cannabis. Boasting of a net worth of $1.7 billion it is sold OTC and also on major stock markets.

Cronos Group: Averaging 70,000 kilometers of cannabis production per output annually, the Cronos group is one of the high earners. It recently embarked on a partnership project with Cronos Grow Corporation to expand its cultivation facility to 850,000 square feet. It is one of those growers that have efficiently achieved peak performances. It is currently worth $1.5 billion and is on NASDAQ.

MedMen Enterprises: Medmen enterprises is one of the famously known vertically integrated dispensaries in the U.S, widely known for its normalization of the buying of cannabis, it currently has 5 cultivation facilities and 14 operating retail markets in 7 different states and is working on expanding it to 12 states due to it’s acquisition of PharmaCann, a medical cannabis research industry for $682 million. Even with that purchase the company is worth $1.5 billion and is currently on NASDAQ.

Acreage Holdings: Having top respected members of the U.S government on its board of directors. Acreage holding is a diversified company, planning on capitalizing on the booming marijuana industry and is planning on the implementation of cultivation facilities, retail offices for Over-The-Counter sales, marijuana production as a recreational drug and cannabis processing. It is currently on NYSE, NASDAQ and the OTC with a net worth of $1.2 billion.

Charlotte’s Web Holding: A major producer and marketer of hemp based CBD products it operates in more than 3,000 retail stores in the U.S, this has allowed it generate $48 million in sales since inception of the legalization of marijuana. With a net worth of $1.2 billion, its a stock that deserves your investment.

Trulieve Cannabis: Coming in last on this list, but nevertheless a worthy company, the Trulieve Cannabis company is presently the last of the billion caps companies. With the recent opening of its 22nd retail in Florida, it doesn’t look like it’s waning in strength and is a recommended investment for investors.

All these companies are legalised and ready for you. So why not invest and increase your income.