Immokalee farmworkers skeptical of promises, claims made by Democrat Bernie Sanders and other politicians
Democratic presidential candidate, Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt. speaks during a campaign rally, Tuesday, March 8, 2016, in Miami. (AP Photo/Alan Diaz)

By Maria Perez of the Naples Daily News

Sitting outside their trailer in Immokalee, chatting after a day of staking tomato plants, Javier Lozano and his co-workers said they didn't know Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders talked about Immokalee and how he helped improve conditions for some farmworkers.

In fact, Lozano, who came from Mexico five years ago, said he doesn't know who Sanders is.

He hadn't heard that Sanders, who mentioned Immokalee workers during a televised Miami debate Wednesday, is proposing to increase the minimum wage to $15 an hour. Lozano and his friends react skeptically.

"Politicians make promises all the time," Lozano said. "They promise things will change and then they don't do anything."

Many of the undocumented farmworkers returning to the trailers they rent in Immokalee after a day in the fields last week didn't know who Sanders is and also are skeptical about political promises. The Coalition of Immokalee Workers has thanked both Sanders and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, his primary opponent, for their help to improve labor conditions for tomato pickers. But other farmworker organizations said Sanders, who has featured their plight in a campaign commercial, has not done enough.

Lozano's crew usually stakes tomato plants or dumps the tomatoes picked into the trucks about eight hours a day, five or six days a week when there's work. They say they earn $10 an hour, and that the salaries have changed only a few cents an hour in the past five years. They use their pay for rent — $60 a week each for the five people who share a trailer — and for food. Some of the money goes to save for the future and to support their families they haven't seen in Mexico for years because they have no visas to come back here.

Victor Santos, sitting with the other workers, said he can barely support his wife, two children and parents in Mexico. For years, politicians have promised him and other undocumented workers that they will improve their situation.

"I'm going to keep waiting," Santos said jokingly about the minimum wage promise.

Sanders is well behind Clinton in the Democratic presidential primary and in Florida polls before Tuesday's election. In an appeal to Florida's Hispanic voters, the Vermont senator said last week he held a hearing in 2008 in the Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions to highlight poor working conditions of Immokalee's undocumented tomato pickers. His comment came after Clinton criticized him during the televised debate for voting against immigration reform.

At the Senate hearing, representatives from the Coalition of Immokalee Workers, and the Southern Poverty Law Center testified about those conditions.

"And the result of that hearing, and the work that many, many people did, was to significantly improve the wages and working conditions of those workers," Sanders said during the debate.

Sanders' campaign had released a video a few days earlier featuring an Immokalee woman talking about the Coalition of Immokalee Workers' campaign to improve working conditions and how Sanders helped by visiting Immokalee and holding the hearing.

The Coalition of Immokalee Workers said in an statement that the hearing held by Sanders gave their campaign to improve work conditions a boost at an important moment. Clinton, they said, cited their work while at the State Department as a model for a new supply-chain focus in that agency's anti-trafficking efforts, and recognized their Fair Food Program in 2014 with the Clinton Global Citizen Award.

Tomato growers that join the Fair Food Program have to comply with a workers protection code of conduct. The buyers that participate pay a premium, a penny per pound of tomatoes, that growers must pass on to tomato pickers and other nonsupervisory workers.

The premium passed to workers in the 2014-2015 growing season was a little more than $4 million, according to program reports. Since the program's initial 2010-2011 season, buyers paid nearly $19 million for this premium. Florida growers within the program employ about 30,000 workers, according to the programs' website.

Tirso Moreno, with the Farm Worker Association of Florida, said he doesn't know of any other issue where Sanders has gotten involved to help farmworkers. Clinton, he says, has pushed for immigration reform that would include undocumented farmworkers. But he also understands Sanders' reasons to oppose the immigration reform legislation in 2007.

Moreno says there are still many abuses in the fields, like companies not accounting for all the time farmworkers spend in the fields.

"There have been changes, but they aren't enough," he says. "We need to do a lot more work than what we are doing."

Give Kashkooli, political and legislative director at United Farm Workers of America, said their union has endorsed Clinton.

He said Sanders has done some positive things, but he voted against the immigration reform that included a provision negotiated by the union that would have provided undocumented farmworkers a path to become citizens.

Sanders said in the debate he opposed the legislation because of its provisions related to the guest worker programs, which, he said, the Southern Poverty Law Center has described as akin to slavery. But Kashkooli said Sanders later tried to extend one of those guest worker programs so the dairy industry could use it.

Outside their trailer in Immokalee, the workers say politicians have been saying for years they would improve the condition of farmworkers. Josue Ramirez, who used to pick tomatoes but now picks other vegetables, said salaries haven't changed much in years.

"Almost nothing has changed," he says.

Even President Barack Obama, who promised immigration reform, has been disappointing, he said.

"Obama said he was going to help all Hispanics, and what he is doing is throwing them out," Ramirez says. "Once they get their seat, they forget."