Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commissioners reverse course on panther policy vote
The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission has reversed course on the wording of a policy — adopted just a day earlier in front of a packed hearing room — about how it would work with a federal agency to rebuild endangered panther populations.

The changes, proposed by Commissioner Ron Bergeron, add a sentence about assisting the federal agency on expanding panther populations to other parts of Florida. It does not remove wording, however, about the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service taking the lead on panther range expansion.

DOCUMENT: Read the FWC's newest panther position paper.

“FWC will continue to partner with the USFWS and will assist with panther issues statewide within our available staff and budgetary resources,” the sentence reads.

The latest policy also adds a sentence about “assessing and improving the social acceptance of panthers in potential range expansion areas where panthers have been exceedingly rare or absent.”

The debate over the wording of the FWC’s panther policy had been watched closely. Opponents said they feared the policy signaled a weakening of support for panther recovery. Supporters said the policy rightly focused on managing increasing human conflicts with a growing panther population in Southwest Florida.

At the end of the commission’s meeting Thursday in Fort Lauderdale, commissioners voted to adopt changes that had been rejected Wednesday to shore up Florida’s partnership with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service on panther issues.

Thursday’s version was the third revision to the policy, first unveiled earlier this summer. More than 40 hunters, ranchers and environmentalists spoke for and against the policy Wednesday, but most of them were not at the meeting when commissioners unexpectedly revised the policy the third time.

Under the latest policy, the Conservation Commission would update its position in 12 months based on the progress of a federal review panel looking at potential revisions to the federal panther recovery plan.

That plan calls for establishing two new panther populations of at least 240 wildcats each in Florida or other parts of the Southeast, in addition to a population of 240 panthers in Southwest Florida.

Since a genetic restoration project, panther numbers have rebounded from fewer than 30 in the 1980s to an official estimate of as many as 180 wildcats today.

Hunters say the larger panther population has caused a decline in prey base like deer and hogs. Ranchers cite an increase in livestock attacks. Panther roadkills are at a record level.

In asking the Conservation Commission to reconsider its Wednesday vote rejecting Bergeron’s amendments, Commissioner Charles Roberts III said the “3-4 small amendments” did not get enough of a hearing the first time around. He also cited Commissioner Bo Rivard’s absence from Wednesday’s meeting.

Roberts characterized the amendments as clarifications of the policy approved Wednesday.

“As I read it, it only strengthens our position as to what we’d like to do moving forward,” Roberts said.

Commissioner Liesa Priddy, the Collier County rancher who was a driving force behind the new panther policy, did not support Bergeron’s amendments Wednesday but said Thursday: “I don’t really have a problem with these.”

She said commissioners had been asked to provide input and said that deadline had passed.

“Yet we come up with these four additional things none of us has had a chance to see at the last minute,” Priddy said.

Bergeron said the changes are intended to show the public that “we are listening.”

“I believe this will put a comfort level and a lot of confidence in our commission that we’re going to protect the panther,” he said.

Audubon of the Western Everglades policy advocate Brad Cornell said the revision was not a “big change” in terms of policy.

“I think this is a positive change in tone,” he said.