Estates residents alarmed by letter about possible neighborhood evacuation
If something goes wrong, if a well blows up, hazardous gases can be released. We help these people evacuate by finding out which ones have a working vehicle or any disabilities, so we can let emergency responders know what is needed."

The letter sent off alarms when it arrived in the mailboxes of some Golden Gate Estates residents.

Their neighborhood off 22nd Avenue SE near Desoto Boulevard needs an emergency evacuation plan because a company is planning an exploratory oil and gas well near their homes, the letter stated.

And there could be an explosion in the field being explored for gas and oil about five miles north of Interstate 75 and 15 miles east of Collier Boulevard in the rural estates near the western border of the Florida Panther National Wildlife Refuge.

Jamie and Pamela Duran were among the residents who received the letter and immediately began trying to learn more about why their safety was being monitored by Total Safety U.S. Inc.

The letter neighbors received from Total Safety U.S. gave few specifics about the project, but requested household information in the event of an emergency evacuation. The contingency plan is being created on behalf of Dan A. Hughes, a Texas-based oil and gas exploration company, according to the letter sent to residents in mid-April.

"We're in the middle. We handle the safety and writing of the contingency plan," said Jennifer Jones of Total Safety's office in Mobile, Ala., which handles projects in Florida.

All residents within a square mile of the potential drilling site received the letter.

"If something goes wrong, if a well blows up, hazardous gases can be released. We help these people evacuate by finding out which ones have a working vehicle or any disabilities, so we can let emergency responders know what is needed," Jones said.

Some Estates residents are left to wonder if the controversial fracking method is to be used near their homes.

Hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, is the process of drilling and injecting fluid into the ground at high pressure to fracture shale rocks to release natural gas inside. It takes millions of gallons of water, nearly 600 chemicals and toxins, as well as dozens of trucks to complete a fracturing job.

"We are aware that a company is considering filing for applications to explore for oil and gas in the area, but from what we have heard, the plan does not include fracking," said Dee Ann Miller, a spokeswoman with the Florida Department of Environmental Protection.

Details about the project remain unknown, Collier County government spokeswoman Connie Deane said, because no permits for digging, temporary roads or other activity were requested from county staff. She referred questions to the state agency.

Representatives from Dan A. Hughes initially agreed to a phone interview with the Daily News on Thursday. Instead, the company issued a prepared statement that went out to residents Friday. The statement, shared with the Daily News by Golden Gate Estates resident Peter Gaddy, reads:

"Hughes has recently entered into a mineral exploration leasing agreement with Collier Resources Company LLP to explore for oil in Collier County. Hughes is joining other exploration companies that are currently developing what is known as the Sunniland formation in Collier, Hendry and Lee counties. Hughes intends to seek permits to drill three test wells in eastern Collier County over the next year."

Permit applications haven't yet been submitted to DEP, but the company has been in touch with the agency about a project to explore for natural gas and oil by digging two gas wells in the Estates area, Miller said.

Kristin Kramer of Dan A. Hughes said about 50 residents could be affected.

"We understand the residents' concerns and that's why we are going to set up meetings with the community, perhaps through the Golden Gate Estates homeowners association," Kramer said.

According to the statement on behalf of Hughes, risks of evacuation in relation to drilling two or three wells are expected to be low.

"The Sunniland formation is a limestone formation and it has produced oil in Collier County since 1943. It is a standard practice both in Florida and throughout the U.S. to develop a hydrogen sulfide contingency plan that outlines the steps and procedures for onsite personnel to follow in the unlikely event that hydrogen sulfide is detected at the well location," according to Hughes' statement.

Hydrogen sulfide is generally associated with the production of natural gas.

"The oil formations in Southwest Florida produce little to no gas and Hughes does not expect to encounter hydrogen sulfide in any of the formations being tested in its drilling program," according to the statement.

Residents may be somewhat relieved that fracking isn't expected to be involved because it would put the health of their drinking and ground water at risk long-term, but they still have more questions than answers about what is happening near their homes.

"It was very poor communication on the end of the company wanting to drill the wells. They could have used a little more caress on the subject, instead of scaring all the neighbors with the evacuation letters," said Annette Kniola, of the Golden Gate Area Civic Association.

"Too many questions, never enough answers," she said.