Jeb Bush spins tales of his time in Tallahassee
Jeb Bush learned plenty during his eight years as Florida governor, he told a crowd at a United Christian Giving fundraiser in Fort Myers on Thursday.

The president's little brother and former president's son took few partisan shots, mostly entertaining the crowd with stories from "Mount Tallahassee."

From winning a bet on the 2003 World Series with New York Gov. George Pataki — he collected in Coney Island hot dogs and Empire apples — to recovering from the unprecedented spate of hurricanes in 2004 and 2005 to the 2000 election of his big brother to the White House, it was an eventful time, he said.

Bush did take a shot at Democrat John Edwards, joking with UCG founder Frank Helmrich that he needed a haircut.

"We're not talking about John Edwards' $400 haircuts," he said.."

He also took a poke at local land use rules, saying they almost scuttled his deal to bring the Scripps Research Institute to the state.

"It was a great idea, but it ran into local land-use problems," he said. "Uniquely Floridian, uniquely bizarre and uniquely dysfunctional."

Bush said he got 550,000 e-mails on his private account and another 2.5 million on his public account during his eight years as governor. That helped him stay in touch with the people of the state even though the capital is far removed geographically from most of the population.

He told two stories of suggestions he got, including a recommendation from an 11-year-old girl that he put trash cans at the toll booths on the Sunshine Skyway to reduce litter.

"DOT said no, of course," he said.

Bush said he asked one of his more important questions, one he learned from his mother.

"Why not?"

The bottom line is the iconic bridge now has trash cans — and less litter.

Bush couldn't resist a jab at the national media, which he said focuses on how they can hurt the president. Being in government means having to communicate with the people, Bush said, because most pay attention to the process only peripherally.

"Now that I'm not governor, that's what I do," he said. "I'd rather watch ESPN, frankly."

Bush's appearance was to boost fundraising for United Christian Giving, which is shooting for $250,000 to fund matching challenge grants this year.

Helmrich founded the charity after he and his wife, Sarah, lost a baby in 1997. A $5,000 donation to a local Christian home for unwed mothers was matched by an anonymous donor, and United Christian Giving as born.

Bush has been a supporter for years.

"I was blessed to be governor," he said. "It was the only job in politics I really wanted."