Governor candidate Charlie Crist working to formulate climate change policy
TALLAHASSEE _ Democrat Charlie Crist met with a Florida State University oceanography professor Friday for a brief presentation on climate change, but said he hadn’t yet developed an environmental platform he would push if he wins the governor’s race.

Echoing past statements, Crist said he’s a believer that manmade climate change is negatively affecting the planet, but said he still was undecided on specific policy issues such as a carbon tax. He said he would be open to signing executive orders related to the environment if elected, but provided no specifics.

Crist said he’d like to talk more to Jeff Chanton, the FSU climate scientist who gave the presentation.

“This is just the beginning of the dialogue,” Crist said.

Crist, who served as Republican governor from 2007-11, signed a host of climate-related executive orders when in office. A 2007 order set a goal of a 40 percent reduction of the greenhouse gases used by state agencies by 2025.

Minutes before the meeting began, a staffer from Gov. Rick Scott’s campaign showed up to hand out information about Crist’s ride to the event: a private jet.

The plane is owned by Crist donor James Finch, a Panama City developer whose company has faced fines in the past for violating water pollution laws.

“That is not the issue of today,” said Crist, who was audibly annoyed by the question. “The issue is who really cares about Florida.”

Florida is a large state, he said, so he needs to fly to campaigns stops, but “perhaps there is” a better plane to use. Scott travels the state in his own private plane.

Finch has contributed $150,000 to a committee supporting Crist and given the campaign flights on his plane worth $2,268, according to the most recently available campaign finance reports.

Crist hammered Scott for not initially meeting with a group of climate scientists, including Chanton, who wanted to talk to Scott about the issue. He has since agreed to meet with the scientists, but a date hasn’t yet been set.

“Rick Scott would not meet with this wonderful scientist,” Crist said.

Much of Chanton’s presentation focused on the effect rising sea levels can have on Florida, which is the state that’s most susceptible, he said.

“As we change climate, we are going to change the sea level,” he said.

Chanton said a governor can help by reducing carbon dioxide emissions, which is emitted by the combustion of coal, natural gas and oil.

Contact: Matt.Dixon@naplesnews.com, 352-233-0777