Scott Brown speaks to Nashua Republicans, plays up “strong” NH ties
NASHUA – Former Massachusetts Sen. Scott Brown made the case for why he should be New Hampshire’s next senator Thursday to the Nashua Republican City Committee at Crowne Plaza Hotel.

“There are so many things right now that are affecting who we are as Americans,” Brown said. “I am honored to have the opportunity to try to battle to retake our country.” ...

Please sign up for as low as 36 cents per day to continue viewing our website.

NASHUA – Former Massachusetts Sen. Scott Brown made the case for why he should be New Hampshire’s next senator Thursday to the Nashua Republican City Committee at Crowne Plaza Hotel.

“There are so many things right now that are affecting who we are as Americans,” Brown said. “I am honored to have the opportunity to try to battle to retake our country.”

Brown promised to repeal the Affordable Care Act, saying “the tsunami is coming with Obamacare,” and played up his record as a former senator when he voted to repeal the Affordable Care Act three times.

“I will repeal it again,” Brown said.

Brown said Sen. Jeanne Shaheen was “the deciding vote” on Obamacare and called Shaheen a “rubberstamp” for President Barack Obama.

“Who’s side are you on when you’re voting 99 percent with the president?” Brown said.

Brown attacked Shaheen for voting for “every debt ceiling increase,” and said he would get the debt and deficit “under control.”

“We have an opportunity right now to do something very special,” Brown said.

Brown also played up his ties to New Hampshire, which he called “long and strong.”

“I’ve heard it all … but it’s not about where I’m from, it’s about where we’re going,” Brown said. “I would encourage you to get on PolitiFact and look up Scott Brown residence.”

Brown said the article written by Telegraph reporter Jim Haddadin confirms that Brown’s New Hampshire roots go back nine generations to the 1600s.

“I’m a son of the American Revolution out of Newington,” Brown said, adding that he has owned property in the Granite State for 24 years.

Brown said he would “treat people with dignity and respect” as New Hampshire’s senator and said, “when I got down to Washington, I read the bills.”

“I’m a moderate … I keep an open mind,” Brown said.

Brown was asked several questions from the audience, but tried to preempt some of them by addressing his position on abortion and the Second Amendment.

“I am not going down to the U.S. Senate to propose any new gun laws,” Brown said.

Brown said he would “respect and trust women” to make good decisions with their own bodies but that he is opposed to

partial birth abortions.

Brown said he strongly supported the state’s voter identification laws and agreed with one audience member who suggested putting facial recognition on EBT welfare cards.

On immigration, Brown said he voted against the DREAM Act and said he supports strengthening the border with Mexico.

Brown attacked the president for lacking a solid energy policy and said the Keystone XL Pipeline, which is proposed to run through the country’s heartland, is a “no-brainer.”

Bradford Randall can be reached at 594-6557 or brandall@nashuatelegraph.com. Also, follow Randall on Twitter (@telegraph_bradr).