Glossary of terms

Academic Progress Rate (APR): The APR is a real-time assessment of teams' academic performance. The APR awards two points each term to student-athletes who meet academic-eligibility standards and who remain with the institution. A team's APR is the total points earned by the team at a given time divided by the total points possible.

Academic Success Rate (ASR): The ASR is a Division II metric that credits institutional graduation rates for transfers – both incoming and outgoing – as long as they are academically eligible. The ASR is similar to the Graduation Success Rate in Division I except that it accounts recruited participants who do not receive athletically related financial aid.

Graduation Success Rate (GSR): The GSR is an NCAA graduation-rate methodology that credits institutions for transfers -- both incoming and outgoing -- as long as they are academically eligible. It differs from the graduation rate mandated by the federal government, which does not count incoming transfers and counts outgoing transfers as having not graduated (regardless of whether they do or not). The GSR also accounts for midyear enrollees and is calculated for every sport.

Historical penalties:. Historically based penalties carry significant sanctions for teams that the APR identifies as chronic under-performers. The penalties are incremental, beginning with a warning once teams fall below a 900 APR cut score. Historical penalties progress to practice and financial aid restrictions, postseason bans and ultimately restricted membership in Division I. Teams scoring below 900 are subject to further examination to determine if historical penalties are warranted. Teams are compared against the bottom 10 percent within their sport, the general student body academic performance at the institution, and performance expectation based on the resources of the institution.

Immediate penalties:. Known also as contemporaneous penalties, these occur when a team with an APR score below 925 loses a student-athlete who would not have been academically eligible had he or she returned (an "0-for-2" student-athlete). An immediate penalty means that the team cannot re-award that grant-in-aid to another player. This penalty is not automatically applied when teams fall below the APR cut point; it is applied only when teams below that line do not retain an academically ineligible player.

Some exceptions apply.

Quarter-school variance:. Schools that are on a quarter system instead of a semester system have an advantage in APR calculations simply because of the number of reporting occasions. Because the reporting of APR is done at two occasions for semester schools but at three occasions for quarter schools, a slight numerical advantage can accrue from the extra reporting occasion. To account for the disparity, a statistical formula is applied to slightly alter quarter-school APRs.

Squad-size adjustment: The squad-size adjustment was a statistical “margin of error” applied by the NCAA during the beginning years of APR calculation because of limited data.

925: This is the cut score the Division I Board of Directors approved for immediate (or contemporaneous) penalties. APR scores have already become meaningful numbers to the NCAA membership and general public. Based on prior data, an APR score of 925 (out of 1,000) translates to about a 60 percent Graduation Success Rate.

900: This is the cut score for historical penalties. This benchmark of 900 APR translates to about a 45 percent Graduation Success Rate.

0-for-2:. An "0-for-2" student-athlete is one who is neither academically eligible nor remains with the institution. An 0-for-2 player might be one who transfers, leaves the institution for personal reasons or leaves to turn pro and would not have been academically eligible upon returning. These are the types of situations the academic-reform structure is most meant to address since 0-for-2 situations are most damaging to a team's APR. While teams cannot always control the reasons student-athletes leave, the immediate (or contemporaneous) penalty holds them accountable for trying to ensure that student-athletes are academically eligible during their college tenures.

10 percent cap:. To ensure that the immediate penalties are rehabilitative and not overly punitive, the Division I Board of Directors limited the number of contemporaneous penalties that may apply to a team in a given year. That figure is about 10 percent of the team's financial aid limit. Figures are rounded up to the next whole number for head-count sports (sports in which only full grants-in-aid are provided, such as football and women's basketball). For example, in the head-count sport of Division I men's basketball, a team with an APR below 925 would be subject to a penalty of up to 10 percent of the maximum 13 scholarships, rounded up to the next whole number (in this case, a maximum penalty of two scholarships).