Schwekendiek, D (Daniel)

Latest papers:

S,G,E,B,D) Econ Hum Biol. 2008 Aug 9; : 18789776 ( P Determinants of well-being in North Korea: Evidence from the post-famine period. [My paper] Daniel Schwekendiek University of Tuebingen, Department of Economics, Mohlstrasse 36, 72074 Tuebingen, Germany. North Korea has survived the breakdown of the communist bloc and has been immune to the democratization process of the 1990s. In spite of national famines and economic collapse, the totalitarian regime in Pyongyang maintains a firm grip on its power. Reliable information on the population's biosocial welfare is scarce. Using height and weight data of 5991 North Korean pre-school children measured in 2002, we investigate determinants of height-for-age z-score (HAZ), weight-for-age z-score (WAZ) and weight-for-height z-score (WHZ) as an indicator for child health. We find a statistically significant impact of the age of the child and of the mother, as well as the sex of the child on HAZ and WAZ. In contrast, social status and wealth proxies at the individual and household level are not statistically significant possibly because of errors in these variables. We do not find a consistent effect for geographic regions or for rural-urban residents either. Yet, urban provinces seem to be better-off. Most importantly, we find that children living in families who benefit from food aid of the United Nations are healthier in terms of HAZ, WAZ and WHZ than those depending on the government. Hence, further delivery of United Nations food aid is likely to mitigate the effects of the ongoing food crisis in North Korea.

S,G,E,B) J Biosoc Sci. 2008 Jul 23; :1-5 18647440 ( P HEIGHT AND WEIGHT DIFFERENCES BETWEEN NORTH AND SOUTH KOREA. [My paper] Daniel Schwekendiek Department of Economics, University of Tuebingen, Germany. SummaryThis paper investigates height and weight differences between the two Koreas by comparing national anthropometric data published by the South Korean Research Institute of Standard and Science with United Nations survey data collected inside North Korea in 2002. For socioeconomic reasons, pre-school children raised in the developing country of North Korea are up to 13 cm shorter and up to 7 kg lighter than children who were brought up in South Korea - an OECD member. North Korean women were also found to weigh up to 9 kg less than their Southern counterparts.