National Council on Public Polls
: Function ereg() is deprecated in /home/ncpporg/public_html/includes/file.inc on line 649.

: Function ereg() is deprecated in /home/ncpporg/public_html/includes/file.inc on line 649.

: Function ereg() is deprecated in /home/ncpporg/public_html/includes/file.inc on line 649. NCPP Analysis of Final 2012 Pre-Election Polls The National Council on Public Polls (NCPP) has released its analysis of final national and statewide pre-election polls for the 2012 elections. The analysis published in December 2012 has been updated with the final official vote totals released by the states by early January 2013. There were small changes in some summary numbers as a result of the comparison with final vote tallies. Principles of Disclosure We, the member organizations of the National Council on Public Polls, hereby affirm our commitment to standards of disclosure designed to insure that consumers of survey results that enter the public domain have an adequate basis for judging the reliability and validity of the results reported. 20 Questions A Journalist Should Ask About Poll Results Third Edition

By Sheldon R. Gawiser, Ph.D. and G. Evans Witt Polls provide the best direct source of information about public opinion. They are valuable tools for journalists and can serve as the basis for accurate, informative news stories. For the journalist looking at a set of poll numbers, here are the 20 questions to ask the pollster before reporting any results. This publication is designed to help working journalists do a thorough, professional job covering polls. It is not a primer on how to conduct a public opinion survey. About NCPP The National Council on Public Polls (NCPP) is an association of polling organizations established in 1969. Its mission is to set the highest professional standards for public opinion pollsters, and to advance the understanding, among politicians, the media and general public, of how polls are conducted and how to interpret poll results.