PUBLIC SCHOOL LAWS
North Carolina Schools are required to submit a School Improvement Plan (SIP) to the local board of education for review and approval is required by state regulations, Article 8B School Based Management & Accountability Program; to improve student performance.

http://www.ncga.state.nc.us/EnactedLegislation/Statutes/HTML/ByArticle/Chapter_115c/Article_8B.html

In planning for the School improvement plan development, please consider the following North Carolina regulations under ยง115C-105.27 of School Based Management & Accountability Program:

School staff and parent representatives shall constitute a school improvement team and the team shall be elected by their respective groups by secret ballot. Parents shall be elected by parents of children enrolled in the school in an election by either the parent/teacher organization or the largest organization of parents formed specifically for the election. Parents, serving on school improvement teams shall reflect the racial and socioeconomic composition of the students enrolled in the school and shall NOT be members of the building-level staff. Team meetings shall be held at convenient times to assure substantial parent participation. All school improvement plans shall be data-driven. Shall include a duty-free lunch period for every teacher. The principal shall submit plan to the local board of education only if the proposed school improvement plan has the approval of a majority of the staff who voted on the plan.



School Improvement Planning Implementation Guide

The Guide offers a one-stop-shop for guidance on conducting school improvement planning. Sections include a legal overview, best-practices-based guiding principles, and a step-by-step process for planning. Several appendices are provided to offer additional details in areas where school improvement teams may wish for more information.

(pdf, 1.6mb) LAST UPDATED: JULY 22, 2016



PEP Update

On June 2, 2015, the General Assembly enacted Session Law 2015-46, An Act to Repeal Personal Education Plans and Modify Transition Plans. S.L. 2015-46 modified G.S. 115C-105.41, 115C-83.7(c), and 115C-83.9(a). The link to the session law can be found here (pdf, 315kb).

There have been questions regarding these changes and implications for Personalized Education Plans (PEP). An explanation of the changes made by this law and option how schools can continue to support students at risk of academic failure are provided in the PDF below. Due to these changes in the law, the North Carolina Department of Public Instruction (NCDPI) will provide guidance through the lens of a Multi-Tiered System of Support (MTSS).