Undocumented Student Tuition: State Action Additional Information Undocumented Student Tuition: Overview

Undocumented Student Tuition: Federal Action

Undocumented Student Tuition: Resources NCSL Education Program Education Main Page

Education Bill Tracking Database

Contact: Brenda Bautsch May 2011 Allow In-State Tuition for Undocumented Students Since 2001, 12 states have enacted legislation granting undocumented students who meet specific requirements in-state tuition rates at public postsecondary institutions. California and Texas were the first states to enact legislation in 2001. In 2002, New York and Utah passed similar legislation. During the 2003 and 2004 legislative sessions, Washington, Oklahoma, Illinois and Kansas all passed such laws. Oklahoma has since amended its law, leaving granting of in-state tuition rates to undocumented students up to the Oklahoma Board of Regents. The Board of Regents currently still allows undocumented students, who meet Oklahoma's original statutory requirements, to receive in-state tuition. In 2005 and 2006, New Mexico and Nebraska signed undocumented student tuition legislation into law, and Wisconsin enacted a similar law in 2009. In May 2011, Maryland's governor signed a law allowing undocumented students meeting the specified requirements to pay in-state tuition at community colleges. Connecticut's legislature passed a bill allowing in-state tuition for undocumented students, and it now awaits the governor's signature. The 12 states that have passed laws to allow undocumented students to receive in-state tuition delineate requirements for eligibility. In general, students must live in state and attend high school for a specified period (1-3 years), and graduate or receive their GED. Students must be accepted to a public college or university, and must sign an affidavit stating their intention to file for legal immigration status. Nine of the 12 states that allow undocumented students to receive in-state tuition rates do not allow undocumented students to receive state financial aid. New Mexico and Texas currently allow undocumented students to receive financial aid. 2010-2011 Legislative Sessions During the 2010 legislative session, five states considered eight bills that would have allowed undocumented students to receive in-state tuition rates. None of those measures passed. In the 2011 legislative session, at least 12 states (Arizona, Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Iowa, Maryland, Massachusetts, Mississippi, Missouri, New Jersey, Oregon, and Rhode Island) have introduced 19 bills that would allow undocumented students to receive in-state tuition rates. Arizona, Colorado, Florida and Mississipi's bills have died. Maryland's Senate Bill 167 passed the General Assembly was signed into law by the governor in May 2011. Connecticut's House Bill 6390 passed the legislature and awaits the governor's signature. Prohibit In-State Tuition for Undocumented Students Four states--Arizona, Colorado, Georgia, and Indiana--ban undocumented students from receiving in-state tuition rates. In 2006, Arizona citizens passed Proposition 300, which prohibits undocumented students from qualifying for in-state tuition rates and any type of state financial aid. In 2008, the state legislatures in Colorado and Georgia passed bills that ban undocumented students from receiving in-state tuition rates. Also in 2008, South Carolina, in legislation titled the "Illegal Immigration Reform Act", prohibited undocumented students from enrolling in its state colleges or universities. In 2011, Indiana enacted HB 1402 requiring that students be lawfully present to receive in-state tuition benefits. 2010-2011 Legislative Sessions During the 2010 legislative session, 15 states considered 26 pieces of legislation that would have banned undocumented students from receiving in-state tuition rates. None of those measures passed. In the 2011 legislative session, at least 13 states (Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas, Georgia, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Montana, New Jersey, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia) have considered 22 bills that would ban undocumented students from receiving in-state tuition rates or from enrolling at public institutions. Bills in Arkansas, Arizona, Georgia, Kentucky, Maryland and Virginia failed to pass. Indiana's House Bill 1402 was enacted in May 2011. The bill stipulates that students must be lawfully present to qualify for in-state tuition rates. Montana's House Bill 638 also passed the legislature and was chaptered in May 2011. Montana's bill puts a referendum on the 2012 ballot asking voters to decide if the state should deny services to illegal immigrants. Included in the bill is whether to deny illegal immigrants access to public universities and financial aid. California, Kansas, Nebraska, New York, Oklahoma, Texas, Washington and Wisconsin introduced bills to repeal their existing laws that grant in-state tuition to undocumented students. Bills in California, Kansas, Nebraska and Oklahoma failed to pass; bills in the other states are still pending. Community College System Decisions Several community college systems have considered rules and regulations concerning undocumented students and tuition rates. The Alabama Community College System prohibits undocumented students from enrolling in its colleges. Since 2001, the North Carolina Community College System has changed its admissions policy for undocumented students five times. In the past decade the system has banned undocumented students from enrolling, allowed each campus to decide whether to admit undocumented students, allowed undocumented students, and then again banned undocumented students from enrolling. Currently, after a 2009 decision, undocumented students who graduated from a North Carolina high school, and who are able to pay out-of-state tuition, are allowed to enroll in the North Carolina Community College System. Board of Regents Decision In October 2010, Georgia's State Board of Regents passed new rules regulating the admission of undocumented students. The 35 institutions in the University System of Georgia must verify the "lawful presence" of all students seeking in-state tuition rates. In addition, any institution that has not admitted all academically qualified applicants in the two most recent years is not allowed to enroll undocumented students. In 2011, this rule is expected to affect: University of Georgia, Georgia Tech, Georgia State University, Medical College of Georgia and Georgia College & State University. Resources Alene Russell, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, "In-State Tuition for Undocumented Immigrants: States’ Rights and Educational Opportunity," August 2007. Carisa Chappell, Community College Times, "Struggling with the Status of Undocumented Students," September 2009. Educators for Fair Consideration, "An Overview of College-Bound Undocumented Students," July 2009. Mark Johnson, The News Observer, "Migrants Get Colleges' Nod," March 2010. Sejal Zota, Popular Government, "Unauthorized Immigrants’ Access to Higher Education: Fifty States, Different Directions," Spring/Summer 2009.