2005 Legislation on Military Life Insurance
State: Bill Summary:

Alabama H.B. 65

Passed House 2/24/05

Enacts the Military Personnel Insurance Act and requires the state Military Department to provide life insurance for any active duty member of the Alabama National Guard who is a resident of this state in the amount of $250,000. Provides an appropriation from the State General Fund for the current fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter to carry out the provisions of this act.

Alaska H.B. 122

Passed House 4/14/05

Relates to payment of premiums for Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance on behalf of members of the Alaska National Guard deployed to a combat zone.

S.B. 91

Relates to payment of premiums for Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance on behalf of members of the Alaska National Guard deployed to a combat zone.

Arizona S.B. 1467

Appropriates the sum of $975,000 from the state general fund in fiscal year 2005-2006 to the National Guard fund established by §26-152 for payment of insurance premiums for the service members group life insurance policies of members of the National Guard who have been activated and who are serving in a combat zone as determined by the adjutant general.

California A.B. 255

For the 2005-06 fiscal year and each fiscal year thereafter, additionally requires the Military Department to pay for life insurance of every qualified active duty member of the California State Military Reserve who is a California resident in a policy amount of $250,000, as provided. Continuously appropriates moneys from the General Fund to the Military Department to pay for life insurance of every qualified active duty member of the California State Military Reserve, as defined.

A.B. 294

Authorizes a refundable credit against that tax for each taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2005, and before January 1, 2009, in an amount equal to the amount paid or incurred by a qualified person, as defined, during the taxable year for qualified life insurance premiums, as defined, not to exceed $200. Requires the refunds to be paid from the Tax Relief and Refund Account.

A.B. 1594

Signed by governor 9/22/05, Chapter 342

Appropriates the sum of $130,000 from the General Fund to the Military Department for the purpose of paying those death gratuity benefits, as prescribed, to the families of those members who died or were killed after March 1, 2003, in the performance of duty.



S.B. 256

Requires the Military Department to reimburse a member of the California National Guard ordered to active duty in the federal military for the cost, not to exceed a specified amount, incurred by that member for purchasing a life insurance policy under either of two specified programs. This bill would continuously appropriate moneys from the General Fund to the Military Department to make these reimbursements, as specified.

Connecticut H.B. 5888

Failed Joint Favorable deadline 3/15/05

Provides life insurance benefits for all active duty members of the state National Guard.

H.B. 6004

Failed Joint Favorable deadline 3/15/05

Provides life insurance for members of the Connecticut National Guard.

H.B. 6009

Failed Joint Favorable deadline 3/15/05

Provides state life insurance in the amount of $250,000 for active duty National Guard members and veterans in accordance with the provisions of a bill introduced by Governor Richardson of New Mexico which is intended to protect the families of our soldiers.

H.B. 6223

Failed Joint Favorable deadline 3/15/05

Requires the state to pay no less than $100,000 of life insurance for every active duty member of the state National Guard.

Delaware H.B. 69

Signed by governor 6/14/05, Chapter 43

Establishes the Service Members’ Life Insurance Reimbursement Program.

H.B. 99

Signed by governor 5/17/05, Chapter 28

Extends line of duty death benefits to any member of the Delaware National Guard activated for federal service under Title 10 of the United States Code.

S.B. 55

Provides for State reimbursement to Delaware National Guard members serving on active duty for group life insurance premium payments.

Florida H.B. 843

Died in committee 5/6/05

S.B. 1614

Died in committee 5/6/05

Provides for issuing life insurance policy to members of Florida National Guard under certain circumstances; specifies amount; requires the Legislature to provide for continuing appropriation to pay premiums on such policies under certain circumstances; provides for repeal if policies and premiums are provided by federal government.

S.B. 656

Signed by governor 6/1/05, Chapter 100

Reenacts provisions that provide death benefits for National Guard members at the same level as law enforcement officers.

S.B. 1592

Laid on table 4/29/05

Defines the term "servicemembers' group life insurance"; requires the Department of Military Affairs to provide life insurance for members of Florida National Guard, subject to appropriation; requires report.

Georgia H.B. 164

Relates to pay, pensions, and allowances for militia members, so as to provide that the state shall pay for life insurance for certain members of the National Guard or Air National Guard who are residents of this state while on active duty or active duty for training.

H.B. 538

Signed by governor 4/21/05, Act 50

Relates to income taxes, so as to provide for certain benefits for members of the National Guard or reserve components of the armed services of the United States; provides for certain automatic license or registration extension; provides for an exemption regarding continuing education requirements; provides for nonapplicability; provides for an income tax credit for certain qualified life insurance premiums; provides for conditions and limitations; provide for powers, duties, and authority of the state revenue commissioner with respect to the foregoing.

S.B. 47

Provides that the state shall pay for life insurance for certain members of the National Guard or Air National Guard who are residents of this state while on active duty or active duty for training.

Illinois H.B. 4133

Amends the Line of Duty Compensation Act. Provides that, if no beneficiary is designated or surviving at the death of an armed forces member killed in the line of duty, compensation under the Act shall be paid in the following priority: to the surviving beneficiaries designated in the armed forces member's Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance Election and Certificate; in accordance with the armed forces member's valid will; or in accordance with the provisions of the Act that apply to other line-of-duty deaths. Applies regardless of when the death occurred, unless compensation was paid before the effective date of the amendatory Act.

S.B. 776

Passed Senate 4/14/05

Creates the Military Service Members Mortgage Life Insurance Act. Requires the Department of Military Affairs to establish a program for service members called to active duty to assist service members in the procurement of mortgage life insurance and to pay the premiums for such mortgage life insurance.

Indiana H.B. 1385

Provides a $150,000 death benefit for a member of the National Guard or a reserve component who dies while on military duty outside the United States beginning September 11, 2001. Appropriates an amount sufficient for the death benefit. Establishes the Veterans' Affairs Trust Fund to finance certain benefits and services to eligible veterans and to fund veteran related projects authorized by the Veterans' Affairs Commission. Funds the trust fund by: (1) taxpayer designation of all or part of a state income tax refund; (2) a quarterly allocation of 0.5 percent of the surplus revenue in the administrative trust fund; (3) donations; and (4) appropriations or other amounts provided for the fund. Provides that benefits available to eligible veterans from the fund include: (1) tuition reimbursement; (2) temporary emergency aid grants for subsistence and health care; (3) personal loans; (4) an assistance program for veterans in need of services; (5) retraining grants; (6) allocations to the state armory board for use by the military department ceremonial unit in rendering appropriate military honors at state functions and veteran funeral services; (7) grants to veterans' associations, veterans' organizations, and memorial corporations; and (8) grants to county service officers to improve services to veterans. Requires the Department of Veteran's Affairs to establish a program to reimburse a resident medal of honor awardee for participating in patriotic and other official events. Appropriates an amount sufficient to reimburse medal of honor awardees. Provides that a veteran of the Korean Conflict who left a public or nonpublic high school without graduating in order to perform military service is entitled to receive a high school diploma.

H.B. 1467

Provides for a $150,000 death benefit for a member of the National Guard or a reserve component who dies while on military duty, beginning September 11, 2001. Appropriates an amount sufficient from the state general fund for the death benefit. Establishes the Veterans' Affairs Trust Fund to finance certain benefits and services to eligible veterans and to fund veteran related projects authorized by the Veterans' Affairs Commission. Funds the trust fund by: (1) taxpayer designation of all or part of a state income tax refund; (2) a quarterly allocation of 0.5 percent of the surplus revenue in the administrative trust fund; (3) donations; and (4) appropriations or other amounts provided for the fund. Provides that benefits available to eligible veterans from the fund include: (1) tuition reimbursement; (2) temporary emergency aid grants for subsistence and health care; (3) personal loans; (4) an assistance program for veterans in need of services; (5) retraining grants; (6) allocations to the state armory board for use by the military department of the Indiana ceremonial unit in rendering appropriate military honors at state functions and veteran funeral services; (7) grants to veterans associations, veterans organizations, and memorial corporations; and (8) grants to county service officers to improve services to veterans. Requires the Department of Veteran's Affairs to establish a program to reimburse a medal of honor awardee who is a resident of Indiana for participating in patriotic and other official events. Appropriates an amount sufficient from the state general fund to reimburse medal of honor awardees.

H.B. 1712

Provides a deduction in computing the adjusted gross income of an individual or an individual's surviving spouse for all income received during the taxable year as compensation, retirement benefits, or survivor's benefits for the individual's service in an active or reserve component of the armed services of the United States. Provides for a payment of $500 to each member of the National Guard or of any reserve component of the National Guard or the armed forces who is placed on involuntary activation for 150 days or more and served outside the state after September 10, 2001. Appropriates money to the Department of Veterans' Affairs for the payments.

S.B. 478

Requires the state lottery commission to annually conduct a special drawing on Veteran's Day. Establishes the National Guard Trust Fund. Requires revenues received from the drawing to be deposited in the fund. Provides that money in the fund may be used to: (1) upgrade and supplement armament, safety equipment, and other equipment of the National Guard; and (2) provide special death benefits for guard members killed in the line of duty. Requires the adjutant general to submit proposed expenditures from the fund to the budget agency for review by the budget agency and the budget committee.

S.F. 414

Passed Senate 5/5/05

Provides for income tax credits for the cost of purchasing life insurance coverage by certain members of the military who are on active duty and for the payment of a death benefit on behalf of certain members of the military who died. Provides that a member of the National Guard or reserve forces of the United States on active duty in the military service of this state or of the United States is eligible to claim a refundable tax credit for the yearly amount paid by the member for the purchase of a life insurance policy obtained through the federal Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance program during the member's period of active duty. Provides that a death benefit shall be paid by the state on behalf of each member of the National Guard or reserve forces of the United States who died on or after January 1, 2003, and prior to the effective date of the bill, while on active duty pursuant to military orders related to Operation Iraqi Freedom, Operation Noble Eagle, or Operation Enduring Freedom. Provides that the death benefit shall be paid by the state in an amount up to and including $250,000 or so much thereof as is necessary to make the total death benefit payable on behalf of the member, including any amount received on behalf of the member from a federal Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance policy, equal to the amount of $250,000. The bill provides that the adjutant general shall adopt rules necessary to determine eligibility for and to administer the death benefit program. The bill provides that the Department of Revenue shall adopt rules necessary to determine eligibility for and to administer the tax credit program. The bill does not alter, amend, or change the eligibility or applicability requirements of the federal Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance program. Provides that the cost of death benefits payable pursuant to the bill is appropriated out of the general fund of the state. The bill takes effect upon enactment and applies retroactively to January 1, 2005, for tax years beginning on or after that date.

Kansas H.B. 2518

Signed by governor 06/06/05, Chapter 207

Relates to the state national guard, active duty and military service; provides tax exempt aggregate death benefits.

S.B. 1, Special Session

Signed by governor 7/14/05

Requires the state of Kansas to reimburse premiums for $250,000 in life insurance coverage to members of the Kansas National Guard called to federal active duty in a combat zone (as defined by the Internal Revenue Service). Reimbursement of life insurance premiums would be made through the adjutant general's office to the eligible member. Includes provisions for a transition period between the repeal of death benefit payments and the establishment of reimbursed premium payments by the state. To finance the provisions of the bill, the National Guard Life Insurance Premium Reimbursement Fund is established in Senate Bill 4, with an expenditure limitation of $390,000. Additionally, the bill amends 2005 Senate Substitute for HB 2518 and removes the provisions relating to the direct payment of death benefits to the beneficiary or beneficiaries of the Kansas National Guard members killed while on federal active duty in a combat zone. Certain provisions of 2005 Senate Substitute for HB 2518 would be repealed September 1, 2005. SB 1 does not remove death benefit payments totaling $750,000 made to the beneficiaries of three Kansas National Guard members already killed in the line of duty. Transfers $390,000 from the State General Fund to the National Guard Life Insurance Premium Reimbursement Fund for Fiscal Year 2006. Finally, the bill makes available for Tax Year 2004 the vehicle registration tax exemptions allowed for military personnel who either (a) are in the full-time military service, are absent from the state on military orders on the date of application for registration, and maintain their vehicles outside Kansas; or (b) are members of the military service and are mobilized or deployed on the date of application for registration. Current law makes these exemptions applicable only for Tax Year 2005 and beyond. Provides for a refund process, through the county treasurer's office, for such taxes previously paid if application for the refund is made not later than one year from the act's effective date.

S.B. 211

Passed Senate

Requires the state of Kansas to provide $250,000 in life insurance coverage to members of the Kansas National Guard on federal active duty in a combat area. Requires the adjutant general to develop, implement, and administer a plan to provide this life insurance coverage.

Kentucky H.B. 175

Passed House 2/11/05

Amends KRS 141.010 to exclude from income tax any military pay received by an active duty or reserve member of the armed forces or National Guard killed in action; effective for tax years beginning on and after January 1, 2002. Clarifies that excluded military pay shall include any death benefits paid to the estate or beneficiaries.

H.B. 191

Amends KRS 61.315 to require that the state treasurer pay death benefits in the amount of $75,000 when a member of the Kentucky National Guard or Reserve dies on federal active duty; makes an appropriation in the amount of $225,000 to carry out the provisions of the Act; makes amendment to KRS 61.315 retroactive to July 1, 2002.

H.B. 222

Amends KRS 61.315 to require that the state treasurer pay death benefits in the amount of $75,000 when a member of the Kentucky National Guard or Reserve dies on federal active duty; makes an appropriation in the amount of $225,000 to carry out the provisions of the Act; makes amendment to KRS 61.315 retroactive to July 1, 2002.

S.B. 161

Amends KRS 61.315 to require that the state treasurer pay death benefits in the amount of $75,000 when a member of the Kentucky National Guard or Reserve dies on federal active duty; makes an appropriation in the amount of $225,000 to carry out the provisions of the Act; makes amendments to KRS 61.315 retroactive to July 1, 2002.

Louisiana H.B. 95

Signed by governor 7/11/05, Act 411

Provides that the Military Department, State of Louisiana, shall study the feasibility of reimbursing group life insurance premiums paid by members; to provide for exemption from tuition charges for the surviving spouse and children of any member killed while serving in certain military service.

H.C.R. 138

Filed with secretary of state

Memorializes the United States Congress to take such actions as are necessary to make permanent the increases in Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance coverage and the death gratuity benefits to provide financial security of survivors of members of the Louisiana National Guard and other servicemembers who make the ultimate sacrifice with their lives while serving our country and the state of Louisiana.

Maryland H.B. 82

Passed House 3/23/05

Provides a credit against the Maryland income tax for the surviving spouse of a member of the armed forces who died as a result of or while serving in Afghanistan or Iraq under specified circumstances; limits the credit to the lesser of the Maryland income tax for that taxable year or $500; prohibiting the unused amount of the credit from being carried over to any other taxable year.

H.B. 1253

Allows an individual or corporation a credit against the state income tax for 50 percent of the costs incurred to purchase a $250,000 life insurance policy for an individual who is a resident of the state and is in the active military, naval, or air service of the United States in an area designated as a combat zone by the President of the United States; and applies the Act to tax years after 2004.

S.B. 632

Provides a credit against the state income tax for the surviving spouse of a member of the armed forces who died as a result of or while serving in Afghanistan or Iraq under specified circumstances; limiting the credit to the lesser of the state income tax liability or $1,000; prohibits the unused amount of the credit from being carried over to any other taxable year; and applies the Act to tax years beginning after December 31, 2004.

S.J.R. 4

Passed Senate 3/11/05

Urges the President and the Congress of the United States to compensate the families of military service members who gave their lives in the services of the United States; provides that a copy of the resolution be forwarded to specified individuals.

Massachusetts H.B. 37

Increases the death benefit awarded to survivors of Guard members killed in the line of duty from $5,000 to $100,000. The change would be made retroactive to October 2001 to include members of the Guard who served in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan. The death benefit would apply to individuals killed in state or federal actions.

H.B. 4469

Signed by governor 11/11/05, Chapter 130

Creates a trust for military family assistance; regulates premiums for a servicemember's group life insurance program from the Veteran's Administration; provides for voluntary income tax refund contributions to the Military Family Relief Fund; provides assistance to defray the cost of food, housing, utilities and medical services; provides that diplomas may be awarded to specified veterans; and provides for tuition and waiver programs.

S.B. 1531

Provides for a study of active duty death benefits of members of the Massachusetts National Guard.

S.B. 1998

Reforms death and disability compensation for officers and enlisted members of the armed forces of the Commonwealth.

Michigan H.B. 4250

Allows a reservist in any branch of armed forces on active duty to purchase a life insurance policy through the state.

H.B. 4456

Provides for state purchase of a supplemental life insurance policy for members of the Michigan National Guard called into active duty.

S.B. 396

Provides for state purchase of a supplemental life insurance policy for members of the Michigan national guard called into active duty.

Minnesota H.F. 103, First Special Session

S.F. 78, First Special Session

Relates to pensions; police and fire fund; extends eligibility for survivor benefits by broadening the definition of active duty to include pension fund members in active military service.

H.F. 723

S.F. 681

Creates a fund for the purpose of reimbursing members of the National Guard or other reserve component of the armed forces for certain premiums paid for life insurance; appropriates money.

Mississippi H.B. 1713

Died in committee 2/23/05

Makes an appropriation to the Mississippi National Guard for the purpose of paying certain life insurance premiums for those members of the Mississippi National Guard during the time that they are serving in Iraq or Afghanistan, for the fiscal year 2006.

Missouri H.B. 119

Signed by governor 7/13/05

Allows state employees and retirees who are called to military service in times of active armed warfare to retain life insurance benefits for the entire duration of deployment, subject to the terms and conditions of any life insurance policy in place. Employees or retirees who retain this insurance while deployed must pay for the cost of coverage.

H.B. 403

Requires the state to provide full-time, active duty Missouri National Guard personnel with a $250,000 term life insurance death benefit. The benefit must be in force for the entire time the soldier is called to full-time, active duty.

Montana H.B. 761

Signed by governor 5/6/05, Chapter 604

Creates an account in the state treasury from which premiums paid for group life insurance by members of the Montana National Guard and reserve who are on active duty for a contingency operation may be reimbursed; requires the Department of Military Affairs to adopt rules to determine service members' eligibility for reimbursement for group life insurance premiums paid and implement the reimbursement program; exempts from state income taxation the amount received by a service member as reimbursement for group life insurance premiums paid; appropriates funds to reimburse service members who are on active duty for a contingency operation for the premiums paid by members for group life insurance.

Nevada A.B. 376

Passed Assembly 5/27/05

Creates the Patriot Relief Account to provide reimbursements to certain members of the Nevada National Guard for the cost of premiums paid for coverage under certain policies of group life insurance and certain textbooks and to provide certain other monetary relief; provides for additional pay for state officers and employees who perform certain active military service in certain circumstances; applies the exemption for the gross receipts from the sale, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property sold to the state of Nevada, its unincorporated agencies and instrumentalities to certain members of the Nevada National Guard and certain relatives of such members; makes an appropriation.

A.B. 580

Signed by governor 6/17/05, Chapter 482

Creates the Patriot Relief Account to provide reimbursements to certain members of the Nevada National Guard for the cost of premiums paid for coverage under certain policies of group life insurance and certain textbooks and to provide certain other monetary relief; provides for additional pay for state officers and employees who perform certain active military service in certain circumstances; applies the exemption for the gross receipts from the sale, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property sold to the state of Nevada, its unincorporated agencies and instrumentalities to certain members of the Nevada National Guard and certain relatives of such members; makes an appropriation.

S.B. 285

No further action taken 6/7/05

Provides for the reimbursement to certain members of the Nevada National Guard of premiums paid for coverage under certain policies of group life insurance; makes an appropriation.

New Hampshire H.B. 718

Requires the state to pay for $250,000 worth of group life insurance coverage for each New Hampshire citizen serving in the military reserves or National Guard and activated. Makes an appropriation for the premium payments.

New Jersey A.B. 635

S.B. 621

Provides that a member of the Police and Firemen's Retirement System (PFRS) on official leave of absence with or without pay due to federal or state active duty or active duty for training in the reserve component of the armed forces of the United States, when the federal active duty has been ordered by the President of the United States, or in the organized militia of this state, when the state active duty has been ordered by the governor, will be considered to be an active PFRS member. Active member status ensures that police officers and firefighters called to active duty or active duty for training in the military service who are killed or injured remain eligible for PFRS death and disability benefits.

A.B. 2416

S.B. 843

Directs the adjutant general of the Department of Military and Veterans' Affairs to provide a $100,000 military death benefit payable to the surviving spouse or children of an active member of any branch of the armed forces of the United States, a reserve component of the armed forces, or the New Jersey National Guard or naval militia who was a citizen of this state at the time of death and who is killed through enemy action, or accident, or resulting from disease or illness contracted while on federal active duty.

A.B. 3692

Amends current law concerning the pension provided to the survivors of a police officer or firefighter who dies as a result of an accident sustained in the actual performance of duty to provide the same pension to the survivors of an individual who dies as a result of service in the reserve component of the armed forces of the United States or the National Guard in a federal active duty status. The surviving spouse receives a pension of 70 percent of final compensation. If there is no surviving spouse, a pension of 20 percent of such compensation will be payable to one surviving child, 35 percent of such compensation to two surviving children in equal shares and if there are three or more children, 50 percent of such compensation will be payable to such children in equal shares. If there is no surviving spouse or child, a pension of 25 percent of the final compensation will be payable to one surviving dependent parent or 40 percent of such compensation will be payable to two surviving parents in equal shares. In addition to the foregoing benefits, there is also paid to the deceased beneficiary an amount equal to 3 1/2 times the final compensation, and the state pays to the member's employer-sponsored health insurance program all premiums for the coverage of the member's surviving spouse and dependent children.

A.B. 3830

Creates the "Servicemembers' Life Insurance Reimbursement Fund" in the Department of Military and Veterans' Affairs. Money in the fund would be used exclusively to reimburse members of the New Jersey National Guard for premiums paid under the federal Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance program. Appropriates $1 million to the fund. Additional money in the fund would be derived from any grants, donations or bequests to the fund. All earnings received from the investment or deposit of moneys in the fund would be credited to the fund.

A.B. 3884

Passed Assembly 6/27/05

Creates the "Servicemembers' Life Insurance Reimbursement Fund" in the Department of Military and Veterans' Affairs. Money in the fund would be used exclusively to reimburse members of the New Jersey National Guard for premiums paid under the federal Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance program. Appropriates $1,500,000 to the fund. Additional money in the fund would be derived from any grants, donations or bequests to the fund. All earnings received from the investment or deposit of moneys in the fund would be credited to the fund.

A.B. 3911

S.B. 2457

Grants a $250,000 military death benefit payable to the surviving spouse or children of an active member of the New Jersey Army National Guard or Air National Guard who is killed through enemy action, or accident, or resulting from disease or illness contracted, during active duty in federal service or as ordered by the governor. This death benefit is payable to eligible survivors of active National Guard members who were killed on active duty since September 11, 2001. The adjutant general of the Department of Military and Veterans' Affairs is directed to administer these death benefit payments. Appropriates $1 million to effectuate the purposes of the legislation.

A.B. 3916

Authorizes the state treasurer to purchase group life insurance coverage for members of the New Jersey National Guard. The coverage would pay a death benefit of $250,000. The state would pay the premium for the coverage provided and the coverage would be for the period of service in the Guard.

A.R. 264

Urges the President and Congress to enact the Military Death Benefit Improvement Act of 2005. If enacted, it would increase the military death gratuity, which is paid to the families of service members who are killed while on active duty, from $12,000 to $100,000. It would also apply retroactively to service members who have died on active duty since September 11, 2001. The emotional hardship of losing a loved one should not also be compounded with great financial hardship, and the current military death gratuity of $12,000 is woefully inadequate to meet the immediate financial needs of families whose loved ones have made the ultimate sacrifice. The enactment of this legislation would demonstrate to our brave servicemen and women that their government and their country recognize and appreciate their service and sacrifice.

S.B. 2347

Creates the "Servicemembers’ Life Insurance Reimbursement Fund."

S.B. 2511

Establishes Servicemembers' Civil Relief Act of 2005; protections afforded to individuals serving on active duty in the military are; stays of judgment in civil proceedings; relief for contracts that cannot be performed due to service; termination of leases executed before an individual was called to active duty; relief with evictions, foreclosing of mortgages, and taxes on property; nonlapsing of life insurance policies executed before an individual was called to active duty; employment protections.

New Mexico H.B. 10

Signed by governor 2/2/05, Chapter 2

Relates to the Department of Military Affairs; creates a fund to reimburse group life insurance premiums paid by members of the National Guard; makes an appropriation.

New York A.B. 6205

S.B. 2947

Provides special indemnity insurance for members of the armed forces; sets up sponsored life insurance program covered service members placed in combat zones; provides maximum coverage of $250,000 and provides for coverage to expire one hundred and twenty days after separation from the service; defines active duty.

A.B. 8291

Signed by governor 6/14/05, Chapter 105

S.B. 5436

Provides death benefits and health insurance coverage to eligible survivors of public employees who die while on active duty other than for training purposes, in any branch of the armed forces of the United States.

A.B. 8856

S.B. 5799

Signed by governor 9/16/05, Chapter 681

Relates to pay and allowances, death benefits and health insurance coverage to eligible survivors of public employees who die while on active duty.

S.B. 5105

Provides certain benefits and awards to survivors of members of the armed forces who were killed in action.

North Carolina H.B. 61

Exempts from income tax certain compensation paid to military personnel or their survivors.

S.B. 546

Exempts from income tax certain compensation paid to military personnel or their survivors.

S.B. 583

Creates a fund to provide a death benefit for members of the North Carolina National Guard killed in the line of duty and provides a free higher education for qualified dependents of those members.

North Dakota S.B. 2146

Signed by governor 4/18/05

Provides adjusted compensation for eligible resident veterans and for the filing and payment of claims, duties of the adjutant general, and exemption from taxation and execution for such payments; creates and enacts a new subdivision to subsection 2 of section 57-38-30.3 of the North Dakota Century Code, relating to individual income tax deductions; provides a penalty.

Ohio H.B. 230

Prohibits discrimination under the Ohio Civil Rights Commission Law and certain other laws on the basis of military status; establishes a voluntary, state-sponsored "patriot discount card" program to provide reduced price discounts for merchandise and services for military personnel; authorizes state agencies to make their interactive video teleconference facilities available at cost to the immediate families of persons deployed on active duty; exempts from taxation the compensation received by members of the Ohio organized militia for active duty state service related to the effort to combat terrorism within the state; grants to a service member serving outside the United States in a contingency operation the same extension of deadlines for filing tax returns and making payments under the Taxation Law that is currently granted service members serving in a combat zone; eases restrictions on the authority of public employers to reemploy retired employees in order to fill a staffing need resulting from an employee being called to active duty; permits taxpayers to use their income tax returns to make contributions to the family members of active duty military personnel; requires the adjutant general to reimburse active duty members of the Ohio National Guard for premiums the members pay for federal Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance; requires the attorney general to appoint a staff member of the Consumer Protection Division to expedite certain cases or issues raised by a person, or the person's immediate family, who is deployed on active duty; eliminates the sales and use tax exemption for investment metal bullion and investment coins in order to provide college tuition waivers to spouses and qualifying former spouses of members of the United States armed forces killed in the line of duty in a combat zone after May 7, 1975; provides a $50,000 death benefit to active duty members of the Ohio National Guard; makes an appropriation.

S.B. 16

Requires the adjutant general to reimburse active duty members of the Ohio National Guard for premiums the members pay for federal servicemember's group life insurance.

Oklahoma S.B. 821

Signed by governor 6/2/05

Authorizes the adjutant general to expend funds for payment or reimbursement of insurance premiums to provide coverage up to a specified amount under the Serviceman’s Group Life Insurance or State Sponsored Life Insurance for the military members of the state army or air national guard who are in good standing in their unit and satisfactorily performing all required training.

S.B. 836

Creates the Oklahoma Survivors Compensation Act; specifies parameters for certain persons to be eligible for certain death benefits.

Oregon H.B. 2677

Creates the Oregon National Guard Life Insurance Reimbursement Program and the Oregon National Guard Life Insurance Reimbursement Program Fund. Appropriates money from the General Fund to the Oregon National Guard Life Insurance Reimbursement Program Fund.

H.B. 2910

Adopts an automatic connection to changes in federal definition of taxable income that relate to qualified military benefits. Applies to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, and to death gratuity benefits paid for deaths occurring after September 10, 2001.

H.B. 2933

Signed by governor 7/15/05, Chapter 519

Provides that an outstanding income tax liability of taxpayer who died during performance of military active duty service shall be discharged. Applies to deaths of taxpayers that occurred on or after September 11, 2001. Provides that a claim for discharge of liability may be allowed if filed on or before December 31, 2006. Provides that an outstanding income tax liability of taxpayer on military active duty shall be held in abeyance until six months after active duty ceases. Applies to unpaid tax liability incurred during periods of military service that occurred on or after September 11, 2001. Allows rolling connection to federal tax law changes regarding combat zone compensation. Applies to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, or any tax year affected by Military Family Tax Relief Act of 2003.

S.B. 18

Adopts automatic connection to changes in federal definition of taxable income that relate to qualified military benefits. Applies to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, and to death gratuity benefits paid for deaths occurring after September 10, 2001.

S.B. 19

Exempts military compensation, including death gratuity and other qualified military benefits, from income taxation. Limits exemption to Oregon National Guard, organized militia or other reserve forces performing service under active duty status. Applies to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, and before January 1, 2006.

S.B. 758

Exempts military compensation, including death gratuity and other qualified military benefits, from income taxation. Limits the exemption to Oregon National Guard, organized militia or other reserve forces performing service under active duty status. Applies to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, and before January 1, 2006.

S.B. 759

Adopts an automatic connection to changes in federal definition of taxable income that relate to qualified military benefits. Applies to tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2001, and to death gratuity benefits paid for deaths occurring after September 10, 2001.

S.B. 798

Creates the Oregon National Guard Life Insurance Reimbursement Program and Oregon National Guard Life Insurance Reimbursement Program Fund. Appropriates money from the General Fund to Oregon National Guard Life Insurance Reimbursement Program Fund.

Pennsylvania H.B. 875

Signed by governor 10/6/05, Act 59

Adds a provision that allows death benefits for National Guard members who suffer a fatal heart attack or stroke while on duty or not later than 24 hours after participating in a physical training exercise or responding to an emergency.

H.B. 1068

Passed House 12/20/05

Provides for association group life insurance for Pennsylvania National Guard.

H.B. 1820

Passed House 12/12/05

Provides compensation to persons in active service in connection with the Persian Gulf Conflict or their beneficiaries; authorizes the incurring of indebtedness and the issue and sale of bonds by the Commonwealth for the payment of compensation contingent upon electorate approval; creating a special fund in the State Treasury to be known as the Persian Gulf Conflict Veterans' Compensation Bond Fund; imposing powers and duties on the Department of General Services; makes appropriations; and makes a related repeal.

H.R. 59

Passed House 2/9/05

Memorializes the President and Congress of the United States to increase the military death gratuity payment and coverage under the Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance program and to require the Federal Government to pay the premiums for members of the armed forces.

S.B. 35

Prohibits companies issuing life insurance policies from canceling an insured’s policy when the person is a member of the National Guard called to active service or active duty.

S.B. 398

Passed Senate 3/14/05

Provides for association group life insurance for Pennsylvania National Guard.

S.B. 771

Amends the military Affairs Code. Provides for life insurance premium assistance to eligible veterans and active duty members of the armed forces of the United States for an Operation Iraqi Freedom death benefit.

S.R. 161

Memorializes the President and the Congress of the United States to increase the military death gratuity payment and coverage under the Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance program and to require the Federal Government to pay the premiums for members of the armed forces.

Rhode Island H.B. 5138

Mandates that all members of the National Guard called to active duty be issued a $250,000 life insurance policy, the premium of which shall be paid from the general fund.

H.B. 5169

Mandates that all members of the National Guard called to active duty be issued a $250,000 life insurance policy, the premium of which shall be paid from the general fund.

H.B. 5215

Mandates that all members of the National Guard called to active duty be issued a $250,000 life insurance policy, the premium of which shall be paid from the general fund.

H.B. 5927

Provides that the state would reimburse members of the National Guard on active duty for the cost of premiums for federally issued term life insurance coverage up to $250,000.

S.B. 48

Passed Senate 6/27/05

Mandates that all members of the National Guard called to active duty be issued a $250,000 life insurance policy, the premium of which shall be paid from the general fund.

S.B. 659

Provides that the state would reimburse members of the National Guard on active duty for the cost of premiums for federally issued term life insurance coverage up to $250,000.

South Carolina H.B. 3522

Provides that beginning January 1, 2006, group term life insurance coverage in the amount of $250,000 must be provided for each active member of the South Carolina National Guard at no cost to the member of the Guard, and provides that premiums for this policy must be paid from the insurance reserve fund.

S.B. 364

Provides that beginning January 1, 2006, the adjutant general shall provide group term life insurance coverage in the amount of $250,000 for each active member of the South Carolina National Guard at no cost to the member of the Guard.

South Dakota H.B. 1213

Authorizes the Department of Military and Veterans Affairs to purchase up to $100,000 worth of life insurance coverage through the soldiers' group life insurance program for each member of the South Dakota National Guard.

Tennessee H.B. 70

S.B. 162

Requires military department to pay life insurance premiums for national guard members on active duty overseas; allows premiums to be paid on policies obtained through a federal program and worth up to $250,000.

H.B. 678

S.B. 457

Requires the adjunct general to report on National Guard members life insurance plan to house and senate finance committee prior to April 1 each year.

H.B. 1953

S.B. 2083

Requires military department to pay life insurance premiums for national guard members on active duty overseas; allows premiums to be paid on policies obtained through a federal program and worth up to $250,000; appropriates funds for fiscal year 2005-2006 and fiscal years thereafter to fund payment of premiums.

H.B. 2241

S.B. 2078

Requires military department to pay life insurance premiums for national guard members on active duty overseas; allows premiums to be paid on policies obtained through a federal program and worth up to $250,000.

H.B. 2242

S.B. 2047

Requires military department to pay life insurance premiums for national guard members on active duty overseas; allows premiums to be paid on policies obtained through a federally subsidized program and worth up to $250,000.

Texas H.B. 1150

Relates to reimbursement of certain group life insurance premiums paid by certain members of the Texas National Guard.

H.B. 2691

Amends the Education Code and the Government Code to provide education assistance to members of the Texas National Guard, financial assistance to members of the Texas National Guard deployed on federal active duty, and a compensation benefit to the surviving heirs of a member of the Texas National Guard who died while on federal active duty.

H.B. 2726

Relates to benefits for survivors of certain members of the Texas National Guard.

H.B. 3224

Relates to the creation of the Texas Service Members Memorial Fund and the use of other sources of money to provide benefits to survivors of certain members of the United States armed forces.

Vermont H.B. 242

Creates a fund that provides payment to reimburse Vermont National Guard service members while on active duty for life insurance premiums.

H.B. 357

Provides dependent family members with one year of financial benefits for the death in time of war or national emergency of any member of the Vermont National Guard or any member of other branches of military service, provided the member’s home of record at time of death is Vermont.

Virginia H.B. 1793

Signed by governor 4/6/05, Chapter 910

Extends the Line of Duty Act's benefits to any state public safety employee whose disability occurred on or after January 1, 1972. Requires the state to provide an additional death benefit in the amount of $20,000 for every employee of the Commonwealth or of a political subdivision called to federal active duty services to be paid if the employee is killed in action in any armed conflict while serving in the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, Air Force, or Coast Guard of the United Sates, or with any reserve component of these respective services.

Washington H.B. 1343

Passed House 3/10/05

Provides that every member of the National Guard called into active duty shall be issued a life insurance policy with a benefit of $250,000. The premium for the policy shall be paid out of the general fund of Washington for the period of time that the member of the National Guard is on active duty. Declares that, under this act, "active duty" means active state service, active training duty, and federal service.

S.B. 6069

Creates the Washington National Guard Life Insurance Reimbursement Account in the custody of the state treasurer. All receipts from appropriates, gifts, grants, donations, and bequests to the fund must be deposited into the account. Expenditures from the account may be used only reimbursing eligible members of the Washington National Guard for premiums paid for benefits under the Servicemembers’ Group Life Insurance program under 38 U.S.C. §1965 et seq. as amended. Only the adjutant general or a designee may authorize expenditures from the account.

West Virginia S.B. 252

Relates to creating a fund to reimburse group life insurance premiums paid by members of the National Guard in exchange for and in recognition of their assumption of extended periods of active duty in combat areas; establishes a Service Members' Life Insurance Reimbursement Fund in the state treasury; requires promulgation of emergency rules; and providing for appropriations to the Fund.

Wisconsin A.B. 164

Adopts, for state income and franchise tax purposes, section 102 of Public Law 108-121 as it relates to exempting from taxation an amount that a person receives as a military death gratuity payment. The federal law increases the payment from $6,000 to $12,000 and amends the Internal Revenue Code to provide that the entire payment is exempt from taxation.