Marijuana Overview
Legalization

Ten states and the District of Columbia now have legalized small amounts of marijuana for adult recreational use.

Colorado and Washington approved adult-use recreational marijuana measures in 2012. Alaska, Oregon and District of Columbia followed suit in fall of 2014. In 2015, Ohio voters defeated a ballot measure that addressed commercial production and sale of recreational marijuana. On Nov. 8, 2016, voters in four states, California, Maine, Massachusetts and Nevada, approved adult-use recreational marijuana, while voters in Arizona disapproved.

In 2018, Michigan voters approved “Proposal 1” by a margin of 56 percent to 44 percent to legalize, regulate, and tax marijuana in the state.

In 2018, Vermont became the first state to legalize marijuana for adult use through the legislative process (rather than a ballot initiative.) Vermont’s law went into effect July 1, 2018.

Although voters in Maine approved adult use marijuana in 2016, the legislature approved a moratorium on implementing the retail sales and taxation portion of the law until at least February 2018. In 2017, the legislature passed a measure to facilitate a regulated marketplace in the state for adult use marijuana, but the measure was vetoed by Governor Paul LePage. The legislature introduced the package once again in 2018. The governor once again vetoed but the legislature overrode the veto and House Bill 1199 became law on May 2, 2018.

States that Have Legalized Recreational Marijuana for Adults

In 2018, 21 states considered bills that would legalize adult-use marijuana: Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Hawaii, Kansas, Kentucky, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Wisconsin and West Virginia.

In addition, measures in Minnesota, Missouri, New Mexico, proposed a constitutional initiative or other voter approval for adult-use legal marijuana but none of these measures passed.

Study bills were filed in Hawaii, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Dakota and Rhode Island. The measures in New Hampshire and Rhode Island were enacted and established commissions to study the legalization, regulation and taxation of marijuana.

Bills to repeal voter initiatives approving adult-use legal marijuana were introduced in 2018 but did not pass in Washington and a repeal bill is still pending in Massachusetts.

Federalism

Several bills before state legislatures in 2018 year addressed the federal role in marijuana policies. California passed a resolution urging Congress to pass legislation that would allow financial institutions to provide services to the cannabis industry. Bills or resolutions were introduced in 2018 in Alaska California, Georgia, Iowa, Massachusetts Michigan, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania call on Congress to reschedule or otherwise allow state authority for marijuana policy. NCSL has sent a letter to Congress in 2018 in support of a recently introduced bill to protect state sovereignty with respect to marijuana regulation. NCSL also sent a letter in support of language prohibiting the DOJ from using justice funding for enforcement actions against states with legal medical marijuana laws. NCSL’s Law, Criminal Justice and Public Safety committee also recently enacted a policy resolution on cannabis.

Under federal law, marijuana is still a Schedule I illegal substance.

Decriminalization

Twenty-three states and the District of Columbia have decriminalized small amounts of marijuana. This generally means certain small, personal-consumption amounts are a civil or local infraction, not a state crime (or are a lowest misdemeanor with no possibility of jail time). Since 2013, five state legislatures have enacted marijuana decriminalization – Delaware (2015), Illinois (2016), Maryland (2014), Missouri (2014), and Vermont (2013). Also, in 2014 and preceding the successful legalization ballot measure, the District of Columbia enacted legislation, which passed congressional review, and made possession or transfer without remuneration of one ounce or less of marijuana a civil violation.

States that have decriminalized small amounts of marijuana include:

Alaska (also now with legal provisions)

California (also now with legal provisions)

Colorado (also now with legal provisions)

Connecticut

Delaware

Illinois

Maine (also now with legal provisions)

Maryland

Massachusetts (also now with legal provisions)

Minnesota

Mississippi

Missouri

Nebraska

Nevada (also now with legal provisions)

New Hampshire

New Mexico

New York

North Carolina

Ohio

Oregon (also now with legal provisions),

Rhode Island

Vermont (also now with legal provisions)

Washington (also now with legal provisions)

District of Columbia (also now with legal provisions).

Of the states above, Minnesota, Missouri, Nevada, North Carolina and Ohio designate it as a low-level misdemeanor, with no possibility of jail for qualifying offenses. The other states with decriminalization policy have specified small amounts of marijuana as a civil infraction, or the like.

In 2018, decriminalization bills were considered in Alaska, Arizona, Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Indiana, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Maryland, Mississippi, North Carolina, New Jersey, New York, Tennessee, Virginia and Wisconsin. None of the measures had been passed as of October 4, 2018.

Recent Decriminalization Enactments 2013 - 2018

In 2017, New Hampshire became the latest state to decriminalize (HB 640) small amounts of marijuana. Fines for possession of up three-quarters of an ounce of marijuana were reduced from $2,000 to just $100 for a first or second offense. In 2016, New Hampshire passed legislation (SB 498) that made possession of one ounce or less of marijuana an unspecified misdemeanor, stopping short of decriminalization.

In 2016, the Illinois General Assembly enacted and the governor signed legislation (SB 2228) to decriminalize 10 grams or less of marijuana, making it an infraction that does not result in a criminal record.

In early 2016, the Maryland General Assembly overrode the governor's veto of a 2015 measure (SB 517) that decriminalized marijuana paraphernalia and imposes civil fines of $500 for public cannabis use.

Penalties

Other state actions have reduced criminal penalties for marijuana convictions, generally following a trend to reduce adverse consequences of some marijuana crimes.

In the last five years, legislation in at least 16 states have amended marijuana penalties.

In 2018, criminal penalty measures were considered in Alaska, Alabama, Arizona, Florida, Hawaii, Kansas, Massachusetts, Nebraska, New Mexico, New Jersey, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia and Wyoming. None of these measures were enacted.

Significant legislation in 2017 affecting marijuana penalties included:

Kansas (SB 112) reduced the severity level for unlawful possession for drug paraphernalia from a class A to a class B non-person misdemeanor.

Montana’s sweeping sentencing bill (HB 133) includes provisions that reduced penalties for possession of marijuana under 60 grams to a misdemeanor with no jail time.

North Dakota (HB 1041) reduced the drug possession (including marijuana) charge level from a Class C felony to a Class A misdemeanor for first-time offenders and establishes probation as the presumptive sentence for low-level, nonviolent felonies. Another bill (HB 1269) reduced mandatory minimum sentences for controlled substances including marijuana.

To create consistency in state law in response to Measure 91, Oregon enacted (SB 302) which repealed some penalties related to unlawful possession of marijuana.

West Virginia (HB 2579) increased the penalties for transporting controlled substances into the state but provided a differing, lesser penalty for an offense involving marijuana.

Significant legislation in 2016 affecting marijuana penalties included:

Vermont (HB 858) raised to one ounce the amount of marijuana being unlawfully sold or dispensed for which an imprisonment penalty applies.

Indiana lawmakers enacted a penalty measure (SB 290) that sets amounts of drugs for which a person may be convicted of possession with intent to deliver without additional evidence of trafficking. The marijuana amount is 10 pounds or more.

A Maryland enactment (HB 565) made possession of 10 grams or more of marijuana a misdemeanor.

In Minnesota, an act (SB 3481) modified threshold amounts for several drugs, including marijuana. The enactment also created new possession crimes for specified amounts of marijuana plants and a new gross misdemeanor offense for possession offenses involving trace amounts of drugs.

Oklahoma (HB 2479) shortened sentences for many drug crimes, including marijuana possession.

An enactment in Louisiana decreased criminal penalties for some drug paraphernalia offenses and also removed such offenses as a predicate conviction for sentence enhancement purposes.

A justice reinvestment act in Maryland (HB 1312) addressed mandatory penalties for possession and distribution of 50 pounds or more of marijuana.

A Delaware (HB 332) enactment allows probation before judgment for misdemeanor marijuana offenses.

Significant legislation in 2015 affecting marijuana penalties included:

Utah lawmakers enacted broad sentencing and corrections reform legislation (HB 348) that included reduction of most marijuana penalties to misdemeanors.

A Connecticut act (HB 7104) created a new penalty structure that makes half an ounce or more of marijuana a Class A misdemeanor instead of a felony. Other drug possession also became a misdemeanor rather than a felony, while courts have options for repeat offenses.

An act in Wyoming in 2015 (SB 38) provided for deferred prosecution for first offenses of using or being under the influence of controlled substances, including marijuana.

The North Dakota Legislative Assembly enacted a bill (HB 1394) that reduced from a Class A to a Class B misdemeanor the possession of less than one ounce of marijuana.

Legislation approved in Louisiana (HB 149) created graduated penalties for marijuana possession based on amounts and number of convictions.

And a 2015 Texas act (HB 642) allows judges to require that minors who possess marijuana participate in drug education programming.

Significant legislation in 2014 affecting marijuana penalties included:

A Mississippi (HB 585) measure addressed drug courts and penalties for certain drug possession offenses, including marijuana.

Utah (SB 205) provided that increased sentences for some drug possession crimes, including marijuana, may not result in an offense greater than a second-degree felony.

Oklahoma legislation (SB 1875) allows a deferred sentence for certain drug offenders, including marijuana, and provides for no conviction record upon completion of conditions.

In 2013, Oregon passed two marijuana penalty measures, one that reduced the penalty for marijuana manufacture from a class A to a class B felony and created varying penalties for marijuana possession based on weight of the drug. Another enactment modified sentences for felony marijuana offenses.

Expungement-related Legislation

The past four years, at least ten states have passed laws addressing expungement of certain marijuana convictions. In most of these states, expungement measures pair with other policies to decriminalize or legalize.

In 2018, Alaska, California, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Virginia and Washington considered legislation that would affect expungement of certain marijuana convictions. California’s measure was the only one that passed. The bills in Massachusetts and New York were still pending as of October 4, 2018.

Significant legislation in 2018 related to expungement:

California (AB 1793) addresses expungement of records. Proposition 64, the ballot measure that legalized recreational marijuana use for people 21 and older also contained language for the “resentencing and destruction of records for prior marijuana convictions”. A process for the expungement of records was not specified in the ballot measure and AB 1793 established such a process. The Department of Justice must now search its state criminal history information for eligible cases from 1975 to 2016 and notify prosecutors of all eligible cases in their jurisdiction. Prosecutors across the state have one year to challenge any case they do not agree is eligible for resentencing, case dismissal or expungement.

Massachusetts (M.G.L c276 § 100A and M. G.L. c. 94G, § 13) allows the sealing of records for offenses that are no longer crimes, therefore, a past criminal case for possession of marijuana under 2 ounces can be sealed without a waiting period.

Significant legislation in 2017 related to expungement:

Colorado (HB 1266) now allows defendants convicted of misdemeanor offense for use or possession of marijuana to petition to seal criminal records if offense would not have been a crime if committed on or after Dec. 10, 2012.

Maryland (SB 949) reduced the waiting period for expungement of a marijuana possession offense from 10 years to four years.

The Nevada Assembly and Senate both passed a measure (AB 259) that would have permitted those with criminal convictions for offenses involving the possession of one ounce or less of marijuana prior to Jan. 1, 2017 to have their convictions vacated. The measure was vetoed by the governor.

Significant legislation in 2016 related to expungement:

Missouri (SB 588) expanded eligibility for, reduces waiting periods, and creates presumption in favor of expungement if certain criteria are met, for all misdemeanors and many felonies, including but not limited to marijuana crimes.

New Hampshire (SB 391) amended to 2 years the waiting period for petitioning for annulment of a misdemeanor marijuana or hashish offense.

An Oregon enactment (SB1598) instructed courts with respect to expungement orders for marijuana convictions for offenses that no longer are a crime.

Significant legislation in 2015 related to expungement:

Following the successful legalization ballot measure there, an act in Oregon (SB 364) now requires courts to consider set-aside of records of certain misdemeanor marijuana offenses when probation has been successfully completed; and another Oregon act (SB 844) made eligible for expunction an adjudication for marijuana possession crimes.

Laws in Maryland (SB 651) and Vermont (SB 115) allow expungement of an offense for which the underlying conduct is no longer a criminal offense. Similarly, a Rhode Island act (SB 518) provided that records of marijuana violations are not open to the public.

In 2014, a New Jersey enactment (A 3206 and SB 2663) allows expungement of records of those who successfully complete special probation drug court.

Additional Resources

Lexis Nexis Terms and Conditions