Free Community College
Tennessee

In 2014, Tennessee passed House Bill 2491 creating the Tennessee Promise program—a scholarship and mentoring program that is designed to improve college access and success of recent high school graduates. As a scholarship program, Tennessee Promise will ensure all recent high school graduates have the opportunity to attend state community colleges without paying tuition or fees. Tennessee Promise Scholarships are last dollar grants meaning students must first utilize all other sources of financial aid including all federal Pell Grant aid, Tennessee HOPE scholarships, and any other grant aid received through the Tennessee Student Assistant Award program. If all of the other sources of financial aid combined do not cover the price of tuition, then students will receive a Promise Scholarship for the amount of tuition that is unmet. More than 58,000 students (roughly 90 percent of high school seniors) completed scholarship applications in the fall of 2014.

The mentoring aspect of the Promise program is just as important as the financial component. Each Promise applicant is assigned a mentor who will help students navigate the college-selection process. Research shows that at-risk students who work with a mentor are significantly more likely to hold college-going aspirations and ultimately enroll in degree seeking programs. More than 9,000 mentors have volunteered and will begin meeting with Tennessee Promise applicants in January, 2015. As a last dollar grant program, many of the lowest income students will not actually receive Promise Scholarships; however they will still receive the benefits of working with a mentor. In addition to working with a mentor, Promise Scholarship recipients must meet several additional requirements including: attend a college orientation session, enroll full-time, maintain continuous enrollment each semester, make satisfactory academic progress (GPA of 2.0), and complete at least eight hours of community service each semester.

To fund the Promise Scholarship program, Tennessee created an endowment fund with most of the original support coming from $300 million of lottery reserve funds and $47 million in one-time state general fund dollars.

In 2015, Tennessee passed Senate Bill 605 creating the Community College Reconnect Grant. This grant is designed to help adult students who have earned at least 30 hours of college credit toward an associate of applied science degree complete their degree program. Applicants must have an adjusted gross income less than $36,000 and not been enrolled in college for at least 24 months. Recipients of a Reconnect grant must enroll in at least nine credit hours per semester and maintain a 2.0 grade point average. The Reconnect program is a last-dollar grant that will cover any tuition and fees after federal and state grant aid have been deducted from expenses. Tennessee allocated $1.5 million for the program and will make awards for the 2016-17 academic year on a first-come, first-served basis.

Oregon

In 2015 the Oregon legislature passed Senate Bill 81, which will create a tuition waiver program known as the Oregon Promise. To be eligible students must be an Oregon resident, enroll in a community college within six months of graduating from high school or passing a high school equivalency exam, have a high school grade point average of 2.5 or higher, and complete the Free Application for Federal Student Aid. While the Oregon Promise program is very similar to the Tennessee Promise program, there are a few differences. First, each Oregon Promise recipient will receive a minimum grant of $1,000. Even if state and federal grants cover the full price of tuition, Oregon Promise recipients will still receive the minimum grant award, which can be used for other educational expenses such as textbooks. Second, each Oregon Promise recipient must pay $50 dollars per term to enroll in courses. Third, students receiving an Oregon Promise grant only need to be enrolled part time rather than full time.

For the 2016-2017 biennium, Oregon allocated $10 million each year to fund the Promise program. Because this level of funding will likely not be enough to offer Promise grants to each applicant, the Oregon Higher Education Coordinating Commission was given authority to establish a system to prioritize which students receive grants. Specifically, the commission may give priority to students from certain school districts or high schools that meet specified criteria.

Minnesota

Minnesota Senate Bill 5 (2015) creates the College Occupational Scholarship Pilot Program that will provide a last-dollar scholarship to cover any tuition and fee expenses not covered by state or federal grant aid for students seeking a credential in designated high demand program areas. Recipients must have an adjusted gross income of less than $90,000, and enroll within two years of completing high school or passing an equivalency test. Scholarship recipients must complete at least 30 hours and have a grade point average of 2.5 or higher during each academic year to maintain eligibility. The Minnesota pilot program also includes a mentoring component. Mentors are expected to help develop student success plans, connect recipients to on-campus resources, and assist with financial planning. The pilot program will begin in 2016 and last through the 2017-2018 academic year.

Kentucky

The Kentucky Legislature passed 2016 House Bill 626, which establishes the Work Ready Kentucky Scholarship Program. Similar to the promise scholarships in other states, the Kentucky program is a last-dollar scholarship for recent high school graduates that will cover any unmet tuition and mandatory fee charges after other state and federal financial aid have been subtracted from a student’s tuition bill. Beginning with the 2020-2021 academic year, students receiving Work Ready Scholarships will be required to complete at least three hours of college credit though dual enrollment courses prior to enrolling at a participating postsecondary institution. The required number of dual enrollment credits will increase to six credit hours in 2021-2022 and nine credit hours in subsequent years. Scholarship recipients must enroll in at least 15 credit hours each semester and maintain a cumulative 2.5 grade point average. Students that do not maintain a 2.5 grade point average or do not complete a semester for a reason not approved by the Kentucky Higher Education Assistance Authority will be required to repay the scholarship amount they received. House Bill 303 appropriates $9.4 million for the Work Ready Kentucky Scholarship for Fiscal Year 2016-17 and $15.9 million for Fiscal Year 2017-18.