Funding Elections Technology

In light of security concerns around elections, there has been an increased focus in recent months on the nation’s aging voting technology. State and local officials have been working on replacing outdated equipment in recent years, which limited budgets, but the majority of the voting machines used to cast and count votes in the country are those that were bought between 2002 and 2008. Many of these machines were purchased with federal funds through the 2002 Help America Vote Act and as anyone with an older model of a smart phone knows, technology moves quickly.

On March 23, 2018 President Trump signed the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018 into law, which included $380 million in Help America Vote Act (HAVA) grants for states to make election security improvements. Among the authorized uses of the grant funds is the replacement of voting equipment, specifically equipment that does not produce a paper record or that is determined to be at the end of its useful life. See the EAC’s page on 2018 HAVA Election Security Funds for additional information on the amount of grant funding provided by state, and other FAQs.

In order to receive the grant funds states must provide at least a 5 percent match within two years of receiving the federal funds and submit a state plan detailing how the funds are to be used. Every state received a base of $3 million, with the remaining funds disbursed using the voting age population formula described in Sections 101 and 103 of HAVA. This means that states received anywhere from $3 million to $34 million, depending on the population of the state. Many states plan to use some of these funds for replacing voting equipment, and six states (Alaska, Arkansas, Delaware, Louisiana North Dakota and Pennsylvania) plan to put all of their allocated HAVA funds toward new voting equipment. See this chart for state by state details.

In most states, however, the allocated amount is not sufficient for a statewide replacement of all aging voting equipment. And, there are competing security priorities, including beefing up statewide voter registration databases, conducting cybersecurity activities, and implementing post-election audits. Even though the funding picture is rosier than it was even a few months ago, states and localities are still in a position of needing to come up with funds to replace aging voting systems in order to ensure the security of our democracy.

With recent revelations of foreign hacking attempts and misinformation campaigns there has been an increased focus on voting machines, but no intelligence reports have thus far revealed that voting machines themselves have been the victims of an attack or that voting results were changed. Even so, election officials acknowledge that the age of these machines is a potential vulnerability.

It is typically within the purview of local election officials to replace voting equipment, but states have been stepping up in the last several years to assist with this funding. When states take steps to assist their jurisdictions with purchasing new voting equipment, they can do so in a variety of ways. Here are some options that are being discussed nationwide:

Task Forces and Special Study Committees

When faced with the prospect of purchasing new voting equipment, states sometimes choose to establish a task force or special study committee in the legislature to study the voting systems that currently exist, and what might be best for the state. Here are some examples:

Alaska One of the charges of Alaska's Election Policy Work Group is to evaluate, explore, and recommend a strategy for the replacement of the current voting system as deemed appropriate and necessary. The group's work is ongoing as of August 2018.

Colorado In 2013 The Colorado Secretary of State’s Office established an advisory committee to study a uniform voting system. The Uniform Voting System Advisory Committee incorporated the perspectives of county clerks, county commissioners, legislators and interest groups into a plan for and implementation of a Uniform Voting System in Colorado. The State of Colorado then issued a Request for Information (RFI) and later a Request for Proposals (RFP). Five vendors that responded to the RFP with proposals for complete systems, and of these four were granted “temporary certification” under Colorado law (Colo. Rev. Stat. §1-5-619) and were piloted in two counties each in the November 2015 election. After assessment of the pilots, The Secretary of State’s Office and a Pilot Election Review Committee selected a statewide vendor in December 2015. Counties are now purchasing equipment in a phased-in approach--some in 2016 and the remaining over the next few years. The Secretary of State’s Office made $850,000 in leftover HAVA funds available to assist counties with the training and implementation of the new system, though the system itself will be purchased with county funds. The state negotiated the contract on behalf of Colorado counties, which provided “extraordinary” savings compared to if the counties had individually negotiated contracts for themselves. Although the state did not mandate that counties move to the state-selected system, the Secretary of State’s Office will cease to support other vendors and voting systems in the future. Extensive materials regarding the process are available on the Colorado Secretary of State’s Uniform Voting System page.

Delaware In 2016 the Delaware legislature enacted HB 342 establishing the Elections Voting Equipment Selection Task Force. The task force includes legislators in the process of investigating voting equipment. After investigating options, the task force will present three to five voting equipment options for purchase or lease.

Georgia In April 2018 the secretary of state established the Secure, Accessible and Fair Elections (SAFE) Commission to study options for Georgia's next voting system. The stated mission of the commission is to conduct thorough discussions on all options – including the feasibility of using all hand-marked paper ballots to all electronic machines with a voter-verified paper trail – and travel the state to solicit feedback from stakeholders. Members will conduct cost analysis of market options, research post-election audit procedures, and provide legislative recommendations to lawmakers before the next session of Georgia’s General Assembly.

Nebraska The Election Technology Committee was established Feb. 29, 2016 with the adoption of LR403. The committee studied the longevity of technology used by election commissioners and county clerks, and the feasibility of updating or replacing Nebraska’s election technology. A report was issued at the end of 2016 outlining available equipment and financing options.

Pennsylvania ​In 2016 the Pennsylvania legislature enacted SR 394 which directs the Joint State Government Commission to study the issue of voting system technology and to report to the Senate its findings and recommendations. The study was issued in December 2017 and looked at election technology administration across the country, surveyed counties in the state to identify current and future technology needs, and performed a cost study to upgrade technology.

Rhode Island Rhode Island's Secretary of State Gorbea has convened task forces primarily comprised of state and local election officials to make improvements to Rhode Island's election systems. Among the recommendations discussed in the most recent task force were legislative initiatives such as Early In-Person Voting, Automatic Voter Registration, Post-election Audits, and clarifying the number of voting machines that the Board of Elections can allocate at each polling place. These initiatives are currently under review at the General Assembly. Other recommendations called for investment to fully implement the very popular electronic-poll books across the state; and using best practices identified in the private sector to improve field operations on Election Day. Another task force studied voting equipment and e-poll book options in 2016 when the state considered, and ultimately approved and funded, new voting equipment statewide.

South Carolina In 2015 the South Carolina Legislature established a Joint Voting System Research Committee to “identify and evaluate current voting system technologies.” The Committee issued a report in March 2016, and offered a conclusion and findings for South Carolina moving forward, though they note that the state is also in the middle of an RFP process for new voting systems and some information will not be available until responses to the RFP are received. The Committee encouraged the consideration of all options, including “acquiring the equipment in stages in order to capture the technological improvements, leasing the equipment, or maintaining the existing equipment in order to purchase a more advance technology in the future.”

Utah ​In 2016 the Lieutenant Governor convened the Voting Equipment Selection Committee (VESC) to study voting equipment options for the state. The committee included county clerks, an advocate for voters with disabilities, state election officials, and other experts. A preferred election equipment vendor was chosen in October 2017.

Wyoming In November 2017, the Wyoming Secretary of State's office created the Plan for Aging Voting Equipment (PAVE) Task Force, to look at the type of election equipment needed in Wyoming and the means of funding the replacement of outdated equipment. Membership includes legislators, county clerks and staff from the Secretary of State's office.







Lexis/Nexis Terms and Conditions