State Constitutional And Statutory Requirements For Balanced Budgets Appendix to State Balanced Budget Requirements: Provisions and Practice Ronald K. Snell State Balanced Budget Requirements: Provisions and Practice The following pages reprint the constitutional and statutory language that state legislative counsel and fiscal staff regard as requiring a balanced budget in their states. The selection of these provisions began with a 1976 publication from the National Association of State Budget Officers and the Council of State Governments, Limitations on State Deficits: Text of Constitutional and Statutory Provisions. NCSL staff asked legislative staff to review that text and to recommend additional citations as they saw fit. NCSL staff then edited the text of the approved citations in order to control the length of this report. Printed here is only the language that seems to target the issue at hand, so that portions of sections, subsections, and even paragraphs have been left out in some cases. In some cases relevant citations are listed without their text being included. Many state balanced-budget practices appear to have been developed from a limit on state debt by judicial interpretation or political consensus. The compilers have not attempted to trace judicial interpretation, but have included the debt-limitation language when state officials recommended doing so or when there was no other obvious constitutional or statutory source for the requirement. State constitutions as late as the Alaska State Constitution of 1956 allow the use of debt "for the purpose of repelling invasion, suppressing insurrection, defending the State in war...," in the words of the Alaska constitution. Such language has usually been omitted from the texts printed here. The language quoted here was current in March 1996, with California updated in March 2004. Alabama Constitution After the ratification of this Constitution, no new debt shall be created against, or incurred by the state, or its authority except to repel invasion or suppress insurrection, and then only by a concurrence of two-thirds of the members of each house of the legislature, and the vote shall be taken by yeas and nays and entered on the journals; provided, the governor may be authorized to negotiate temporary loans, never to exceed three hundred thousand dollars, to meet the deficiencies in the treasury, and until the same is paid no new loan shall be negotiated....To prevent further deficits in the state treasury, it shall be unlawful from and after the adoption of this amendment for the state comptroller of the state of Alabama to draw any warrant or other order for the payment of money belonging to, or administered by, the state of Alabama upon the state treasurer, unless there is in the hand of such treasurer money appropriated and available for the full payment of the same. In case there is, at the end of any fiscal year, insufficient money in the state treasury for the proper payment of claims presented to the state comptroller for the issuance of warrants, the comptroller shall issue warrants for that proportion of each such claim which the money available for the payment of all said claims bears to the whole, and such warrants for such prorated sums shall thereupon be paid by the state treasurer. At the end of each fiscal year all unpaid appropriations which exceed the amount of money in the state treasury subject to the payment of the same after the proration above provided for, shall thereupon become null and void to the extent of such excess. Any person violating any of the provisions of this amendment shall, on conviction, be punished by a fine of not exceeding five thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the penitentiary for not more than two years, one or both, at the discretion of the jury trying the same, and the violation of any provisions of this amendment shall also be ground for impeachment. Amendment No. 26 of the Constitution of 1901, Section 213: Statutes The legislature shall consider the governor's proposed comprehensive program and financial plan, evaluate alternatives to the governor's recommendations and determine the comprehensive program and financial plan to support the services to be provided the citizens of the state; provided, however, that in such determination authorized expenditures shall not exceed estimated revenues and resources. Code, Section 41-19-9: See also Alaska Constitution No state debt shall be contracted unless authorized by law for capital improvements or unless authorized by law for housing loans for veterans, and ratified by a majority of the qualified voters of the State who vote on the question. The State may, as provided by law and without ratification, contract debt for the purpose of repelling invasion, suppressing insurrection, defending the State in war, meeting natural disasters, or redeeming indebtedness outstanding at the time this constitution becomes effective. Article IX, Section 8: Article IX, Section 10: The State and its political subdivisions may borrow money to meet appropriations for any fiscal year in anticipation of the collection of the revenues for that year, but all debt so contracted shall be paid before the end of the next fiscal year. Statutes (a) The governor shall prepare and submit to the legislature before the fourth legislative day a budget for the succeeding fiscal year which must cover all estimated receipts, including all grants, loans, and money received from the federal government, and all proposed expenditures of the state government. . . . Section 37.07.020: (c) Proposed expenditures may not exceed estimated revenue for the succeeding fiscal year. The expenditures proposed in the six-year capital improvements program and financial plan may not exceed the estimated revenue and bond authorizations passed and proposed. Section 37.07.030: The legislature shall (5) adopt or revise the estimate or receipts required to balance the succeeding fiscal year's budget in order that proposed expenditures do not exceed estimated receipts for that fiscal year; (6) adopt, revise, or initiate revenue measures in order to balance the succeeding fiscal year's budget and the capital improvements section of the budget for the succeeding six years. Arizona Constitution The Legislature shall provide by law for an annual tax sufficient, with other sources of revenue, to defray the necessary ordinary expenses of the State for each fiscal year. And for the purpose of paying the State debt, if there be any, the Legislature shall provide for levying an annual tax sufficient to pay the annual interest and the principal of such debt within twenty-five years from the final passage of the law creating the debt. Article 9, Section 3: No tax shall be levied except in pursuance of law, and every law imposing a tax shall state distinctly the object of the tax, to which object only it shall be applied. All taxes levied and collected for State purposes shall be paid into the State treasury in money only. Article 9, Section 5: The State may contract debts to supply the casual deficits or failures in revenues, or to meet expenses not otherwise provided for; but the aggregate amount of such debts, direct and contingent, whether contracted by virtue of one or more laws, or at different periods of time, shall never exceed the sum of three hundred and fifty thousand dollars; and the money arising from the creation of such debts shall be applied to the purpose for which it was obtained or to repay the debts so contracted, and to no other purpose. In addition to the above limited power to contract debts the State may borrow money to repel invasion, suppress insurrection, or defend the State in time of war; but the money thus raised shall be applied exclusively to the object for which the loan shall have been authorized or to the repayment of the debt thereby created. No money shall be paid out of the State treasury, except in the manner provided by law. See also Arkansas Constitution Except for the purpose of refunding the existing outstanding indebtedness of the State and for assuming and refunding valid outstanding road improvement district bonds, the State of Arkansas shall issue no bonds or other evidence of indebtedness pledging the faith and credit of the State or any of its revenues for any purpose whatsoever, except by and with the consent of the majority of the qualified electors of the State voting on the question at a general election or at a special election called for that purpose. Amendment 20: Statutes It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Director of the Department of Finance and Administration to: 19-1-212: (1) Keep advised at all times as to the revenues and other income available for the operation, maintenance, and improvement of all state agencies; (2) Exercise the powers conferred upon him by law to see that the state and all state agencies are maintained on a cash basis; (3) See that no obligation shall be incurred which shall not be payable when the obligation shall become due; and (4) Exercise his powers to see that the funds on hand and estimated to become available to each state agency shall be sufficient to maintain the state and all of its agencies on a sound financial basis without incurring a deficit. See also California Constitution Article 4, Section 12, Subdivision (a): Within the first 10 days of each calendar year, the Governor shall submit to the Legislature, with an explanatory message, a budget for the ensuing fiscal year containing itemized statements for recommended state expenditures and estimated state revenues. If recommended expenditures exceed estimated revenues, the Governor shall recommend the sources from which the additional revenues should be provided. The constitution was admended on March 3, 2004 to add the following language: (f) For the 2004-05 fiscal year, or any subsequent fiscal year, the Legislature may not send to the Governor for consideration, nor may the Governor sign into law, a budget bill that would appropriate from the General Fund, for that fiscal year, a total amount that, when combined with all appropriations from the General Fund for that fiscal year made as of the date of the budget bill's passage, and the amount of any General Fund moneys transferred to the Budget Stabilization Account for that fiscal year pursuant to Section 20 of Article XVI, exceeds General Fund revenues for that fiscal year estimated as of the date of the budget bill's passage. That estimate of General Fund revenues shall be set forth in the budget bill passed by the Legislature. SEC. 1.3. (a) For the purposes of Section 1, a "single object or work,'' for which the Legislature may create a debt or liability in excess of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) subject to the requirements set forth in Section 1, includes the funding of an accumulated state budget deficit to the extent, and in the amount, that funding is authorized in a measure submitted to the voters at the March 2, 2004, statewide primary election. (b) As used in subdivision (a), "accumulated state budget deficit'' means the aggregate of both of the following, as certified by the Director of Finance: The estimated negative balance of the Special Fund for Economic Uncertainties arising on or before June 30, 2004, not including the effect of the estimated amount of net proceeds of any bonds issued or to be issued pursuant to the California Fiscal Recovery Financing Act (Title 17 (commencing with Section 99000) of the Government Code) and any bonds issued or to be issued pursuant to the measure submitted to the voters at the March 2, 2004, statewide primary election as described in subdivision (a). (2) Other General Fund obligations incurred by the State prior to June 30, 2004, to the extent not included in that negative balance. (c) Subsequent to the issuance of any state bonds described in subdivision (a), the State may not obtain moneys to fund a year-end state budget deficit, as may be defined by statute, pursuant to any of the following: (1) indebtedness incurred pursuant to Section 1 of this article, (2) a debt obligation under which funds to repay that obligation are derived solely from a designated source of revenue, or (3) a bond or similar instrument for the borrowing of moneys for which there is no legal obligation of repayment. This subdivision does not apply to funding obtained through a short-term obligation incurred in anticipation of the receipt of tax proceeds or other revenues that may be applied to the payment of that obligation, for the purposes and not exceeding the amounts of existing appropriations to which the resulting proceeds are to be applied. For purposes of this subdivision, "year-end state budget deficit'' does not include an obligation within the accumulated state budget deficit as defined by subdivision (b). Article 16, Section 1: The Legislature shall not, in any manner create any debt or debts, liability or liabilities, which shall, singly or in the aggregate with any previous debts or liabilities, exceed the sum of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000), except in case of war to repel invasion or suppress insurrection, unless the same shall be authorized by law for some single object or work to be distinctly specified therein which law shall provide ways and means, exclusive of loans, for the payment of the interest of such debt or liability as it falls due, and also to pay and discharge the principal of such debt or liability within 50 years of the time of the contracting thereof, and shall be irrepealable until the principal and interest thereon shall be paid and discharged, and such law may make provision for a sinking fund to pay the principal of such debt or liability to commence at a time after the incurring of such debt or liability of not more than a period of one-fourth of the time of maturity of such debt or liability; but no such law shall take effect unless it has been passed by a two-thirds vote of all the members elected to each house of the Legislature and until, at a general election or at a direct primary, it shall have been submitted to the people and shall have received a majority of all the votes cast for and against it at such election; and all moneys raised by authority of such law shall be applied only to the specific object therein stated or to the payment of the debt thereby created. Full publicity as to matters to be voted on by the people is afforded by the setting out of the complete text of the proposed laws, together with the arguments for and against them, in the ballot pamphlet mailed to each elector preceding the election at which they are submitted, and the only requirement for publication of such law shall be that it be set out at length in ballot pamphlets which the Secretary of State shall cause to be printed. The Legislature may, at any time after the approval of such law by the people, reduce the amount of the indebtedness authorized by the law to an amount not less than the amount contracted at the time of the reduction, or may repeal the law if no debt shall have been contracted in pursuance thereof. . . . Statutes Government Code Section 13337.5: The annual Budget Act shall not provide for projected expenditures in excess of projected revenues. Further, it is the intention of the Legislature that in the event, after enactment of the Budget Act, revised estimates of expected revenues or expenditures, or both, show that expenditures will exceed estimated revenues, expenditures should be reduced or revenues increased, or both, to ensure that actual expenditures do not exceed actual revenues for that fiscal year. Colorado Constitution The general assembly shall provide by law for an annual tax sufficient, with other resources, to defray the estimated expenses of the state government for each fiscal year. Article 10, Section 2: Article 10, Section 16: No appropriation shall be made, nor any expenditure authorized by the general assembly, whereby the expenditure of the state, during any fiscal year, shall exceed the total tax then provided for by law and applicable for such appropriation or expenditure, unless the general assembly making such appropriation shall provide for levying a sufficient tax, not exceeding the rates allowed in section eleven of this article, to pay such appropriation or expenditure within such fiscal year. This provision shall not apply to appropriations or expenditures to suppress insurrection, defend the state, or assist in defending the United States in time of war. See also Connecticut Constitution The amount of general budget expenditures authorized for any fiscal year shall not exceed the estimated amount of revenue for such fiscal year. Article XXVIII: Statutes...If the estimated revenue of the state for the ensuing biennium as set forth in the budget on the basis of existing statutes, plus the estimated unappropriated surplus at the close of the year in progress available for expenditure in the ensuing biennium, is less than the aggregate appropriations recommended for the ensuing biennium as contained in the budget, the governor shall make recommendations to the general assembly in respect to the manner in which such deficit shall be met, whether by an increase in the indebtedness of the state, by the imposition of new taxes, by increased rates on existing taxes or otherwise. If the aggregate of such estimated revenue plus such estimated unappropriated surplus is greater than such recommended appropriations for the ensuing biennium, he shall make such recommendations for the use of such surplus for the reduction of indebtedness, for the reduction in taxation or for other purposes as in his opinion are in the best interest of the public welfare. Title 4, Section 4-72: Delaware Constitution(a) No money shall be drawn from the treasury but pursuant to an appropriation made by Act of the General Assembly; provided, however, that the compensation of the members of the General Assembly and all expenses connected with the session thereof may be paid out of the treasury pursuant to resolution in that behalf; a regular account of the receipts and expenditures of all public money shall be published annually. Article VIII, Section 6: (b) No appropriation, supplementary appropriation or budget act shall cause the aggregate State General Fund appropriations enacted for any given fiscal year to exceed 98 percent of the estimated State General Fund revenue for such fiscal year from all sources, including estimated unencumbered funds remaining at the end of the previous fiscal year. An act approved pursuant to the provisions of Section 3 of this article shall not be considered an appropriation for the purpose of this section. Estimated unencumbered funds are calculated by taking the estimated General Fund cash balance at the end of the fiscal year less estimated revenue anticipation bonds or notes, estimated encumbrances, estimated continuing appropriations and the amount of the Budget Reserve Account as established in subsection (d) of this section at the end of said fiscal year. The amount of said revenue estimate and estimated unencumbered funds remaining shall be determined by the most recent joint resolution approved from time to time by a majority of the members elected to each House of the General Assembly and signed by the Governor. (c) Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this Section, any portion of the amount between 98 and 100 percent of the estimated State General Fund revenue for any fiscal year as estimated in accordance with subsection (b) of this section may be appropriated in any given fiscal year in the event of emergencies involving the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the State, such appropriations to be approved by three-fifths of the members elected to each House of the General Assembly. (d) There is hereby established a Budget Reserve Account within the General Fund. Within 45 days after the end of any fiscal year, the excess of any unencumbered funds remaining from the said fiscal year shall be paid into the Budget Reserve Account, provided, however, that no such payment will be made which would increase the total of the Budget Reserve Account to more than 5 percent of only the estimated State General Fund revenues as set by subsection (b) of this section. The excess of any unencumbered funds shall be determined by subtracting from the actual unencumbered funds at the end of any fiscal year an amount which together with the latest estimated revenues is necessary to fund the ensuing fiscal year's General Fund Budget including the required estimated General fund supplemental and automatic appropriations for said ensuing fiscal year less estimated reversions. The General Assembly by a three-fifths vote of the members elected to each House, may appropriate from the Budget Reserve Account such additional sums as may be necessary to fund any unanticipated deficit in any given fiscal year or to provide funds required as a result of any revenue reduction enacted by the General Assembly. Statutes The General Assembly may increase, decrease or eliminate items in the Budget Appropriation Bill in any way that is not contrary to the Constitution of the State, except as hereinafter provided, but neither House shall consider further or special appropriations, except in case of emergency, which fact shall be clearly stated in the appropriation bill therefor, until the Budget Appropriation Bill shall have been finally acted upon by both Houses. No items providing for appropriations for payment of interest or principal due on state debt shall be decreased or eliminated. The total budget appropriation items may not be increased in the aggregate to a point where they would exceed the state revenue from all sources as estimated in the budget. Title 29, Section 6337: Title 29, Section 6339: Any further or special appropriations shall be known as supplementary appropriations. Every such appropriation shall be embodied in a separate bill limited to some single work, object or purpose therein stated and called herein a Supplementary Appropriation Bill. Each Supplementary Appropriation Bill, shall, by its provisions, provide or designate the source from which the money therein appropriated is to be derived. No Supplementary Appropriation Bill shall be passed, if when added to the appropriations already authorized, the aggregate appropriations exceed in amount the state revenues from all sources for the ensuing biennial period as set forth in the budget. See also Florida Constitution Provision shall be made by law for raising sufficient revenue to defray the expenses of the state for each fiscal period. Article 7, Section 1(d): Statutes: All appropriations shall be maximum appropriations, based upon the collection of sufficient revenues to meet and provide for such appropriations. It is the duty of the Governor, as chief budget officer, to ensure that revenues collected will be sufficient to meet the appropriations and that no deficit occurs in any state fund. Section 216.221 (1) (2) The Legislature shall annually provide direction in the General Appropriations Act regarding use of the Working Capital Fund to offset General Revenue Fund deficits. (3) For purposes of preventing a deficit in the General Revenue Fund, all branches and agencies of government that receive General Revenue Fund appropriations shall participate in deficit reduction efforts. Absent specific direction in the General Appropriations Act when budget reductions are required in order to prevent a deficit under the provisions of subsection (7), each branch shall reduce its General Revenue Fund appropriations by a proportional amount. See also Georgia Constitution The General Assembly shall not appropriate funds for any given fiscal year which, in aggregate, exceed a sum equal to the amount of unappropriated surplus expected to have accrued in the state treasury at the beginning of the fiscal year together with an amount not greater than the total treasury receipts from existing revenue sources anticipated to be collected in the fiscal year, less refunds, as estimated in the budget report and amendments thereto. Supplementary appropriations, if any, shall be made in the manner provided in Paragraph V of this section of the Constitution; but in no event shall a supplementary appropriations Act continue in force and effect beyond the expiration of the general appropriations Act in effect when such supplementary appropriations Act was adopted and approved. Article 3, Section 9, Paragraph IV (b): See also Hawaii Constitution No public money shall be expended except pursuant to appropriations made by law. General fund expenditures for any fiscal year shall not exceed the State's current general fund revenues and unencumbered cash balances, except when the governor publicly declares the public health, safety or welfare threatened as provided by law. Article VII, Section 5: Statutes The department of budget and finance shall: Title 5, Section 37-74 (c): (1) Review each operations plan to determine: (A) That it is consistent with the policy decisions of the governor and appropriations by the legislature; (B) That it reflects proper planning and efficient management methods, and (C) That appropriations have been made for the planned purpose and will not be exhausted before the end of the fiscal year.... (2) Approve the operations plan if satisfied that it meets the requirements under paragraph (1). Otherwise, the department of budget and finance shall require revision of the operations plan in whole or in part; and (3) Modify or withhold the planned expenditures at any time during the appropriation period if the department of budget and finance finds that such expenditures are greater than those necessary to execute the programs at the level authorized by the governor and the legislature, or that state receipts and surpluses will be insufficient to meet the authorized expenditure levels.... Idaho Constitution No appropriation shall be made, nor any expenditure authorized by the legislature, whereby the expenditure of the state during any fiscal year shall exceed the total tax then provided for by law, and applicable to such appropriation or expenditure, unless the legislature making such appropriation shall provide for levying a sufficient tax, not exceeding the rates allowed in section nine of this article, to pay such appropriation or expenditure within such fiscal year. This provision shall not apply to appropriations or expenditures to suppress insurrection, defend the state, or assist in defending the United States in time of war. Article 7, Section 11: Article 8, Section 1: The legislature shall not in any manner create any debt or debts, liability or liabilities, which shall singly or in the aggregate, exclusive of the debt of the territory at the date of its admission as a state, and exclusive of debts or liabilities incurred subsequent to January 1, 1911, for the purpose of completing the construction and furnishing of the state capitol at Boise, Idaho, and exclusive of debt or debts, liability or liabilities incurred by the eleventh session of the legislature of the state of Idaho, exceed in the aggregate the sum of two million dollars, except in case of war, to repel an invasion, or suppress an insurrection, unless the same shall be authorized by law, for some single object or work, to be distinctly specified therein, which law shall provide ways and means, exclusive of loans, for the payment of the interest on such debt or liability as it falls due, and also for the payment and discharge of the principal of such debt or liability within twenty years of the time of the contracting thereof, and shall be irrepealable until the principal and interest thereon shall be paid and discharged. But no such law shall take effect until at a general election it shall have been submitted to the people, and shall have received a majority of all the votes cast for or against it at such election, and all moneys raised by the authority of such laws shall be applied only to specified objects therein stated or to the payment of the debt thereby created. . . . Illinois Constitution(a) The Governor shall prepare and submit to the General Assembly, at a time prescribed by law, a State budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall set forth the estimated balance of funds available for appropriation at the beginning of the fiscal year, the estimated receipts, and a plan for expenditures and obligations during the fiscal year of every department, authority, public corporation and quasi-public corporation of the State, every State college and university, and every other public agency created by the State, but not of units of local government or school districts. The budget shall also set forth the indebtedness and contingent liabilities of the State and such other information as may be required by law. Proposed expenditures shall not exceed funds estimated to be available for the fiscal year as shown in the budget. Article VIII, Section 2: (b) The General Assembly by law shall make appropriations for all expenditures of public funds by the State. Appropriations for a fiscal year shall not exceed funds estimated by the General Assembly to be available during that year. Indiana Constitution No law shall authorize any debt to be contracted, on behalf of the State, except in the following cases: to meet casual deficits in the revenue; to pay the interest on the State Debt; to repel invasion, suppress insurrection, or, if hostilities be threatened, provide for the public defense. Article 10, Section 5: Statutes For the purpose of meeting casual deficits in the state revenue, the {State Board of Finance} may negotiate such loans as may be necessary to meet the demands of the state. The loan may not be made for a longer period than four [4] years after the end of the fiscal year in which the loan is made. To evidence the loan, the board may execute certificates of indebtedness or promissory notes, which certificates or notes must recite that they are issued to meet casual deficits in the state revenue. Title 4, Article 4-9.1-1-8: If there are not sufficient funds coming into the general fund of the state to pay the certificates or notes when due, the board may, notwithstanding Indiana Code 6-1.1-18-2, levy a tax on all the taxable property of the state, sufficient to pay the amount of the indebtedness. Iowa Constitution The state may contract debts to supply casual deficits or failures in revenues, or to meet expenses not otherwise provided for; but the aggregate amount of such debts, direct and contingent, whether contracted by virtue of one or more acts of the general assembly, or at different periods of time, shall never exceed the sum of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars; and the money arising from the creation of such debts, shall be applied to the purpose for which it was obtained, or to repay the debts so contracted, and to no other purpose whatever. Article VII, Section 2: Statutes If the estimated revenues of the government for the ensuing fiscal year as set forth in the budget on the basis of existing laws, plus the estimated amounts in the treasury at the close of the year in progress, available for expenditure in the ensuing fiscal year are less than the aggregate recommended for the ensuing fiscal year as contained in the budget, the governor shall make recommendations to the legislature in respect to the manner in which the deficit shall be met, whether by an increase in the state tax or the imposition of new taxes, increased rates on existing taxes, or otherwise, and if the aggregate of the estimated revenues, plus estimated balances in the treasury, is greater than the recommended appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year, the governor shall make recommendations in reference to the application of the surplus to the reduction of debt or otherwise, to the reduction in taxation, or to such other action as in the governor's opinion is in the interest of the public welfare. Section 8.22, Part 1, Subsection 2, f: Kansas Constitution The legislature shall provide, at each regular session, for raising sufficient revenue to defray the current expenses of the state for two years. Article 11, Section 4: Article 11, Section 6: For the purpose of defraying extraordinary expenses and making public improvements, the state may contract public debts; but such debts shall never, in the aggregate, exceed one million dollars, except as hereinafter provided. Every such debt shall be authorized by law for some purpose specified therein, and the vote of a majority of all the members elected to each house, to be taken by the yeas and nays, shall be necessary to the passage of such law; and every such law shall provide for levying an annual tax sufficient to pay the annual interest of such debt, and the principal thereof, when it shall become due; and shall specifically appropriate the proceeds of such taxes to the payment of such principal and interest; and such appropriation shall not be repealed nor the taxes postponed or diminished, until the interest and principal of such debt shall have been wholly paid. Article 11, Section 7: No debt shall be contracted by the state except as herein provided, unless the proposed law for creating such debt shall first be submitted to a direct vote of the electors of the state at some general election.... Statutes Whenever for any fiscal year it appears that the resources of the general fund or any special revenue fund are likely to be insufficient to cover the appropriations made against such general fund or special revenue fund, the secretary of administration, on the advice of the director of the budget, shall, in such manner as he or she may determine, inaugurate the allotment system so as to assure that expenditures for any particular fiscal year will not exceed the available resources of the general fund or any special revenue fund for that fiscal year. 75-3722: Kentucky Constitution The General Assembly may contract debts to meet casual deficits or failures in the revenue; but such debts, direct or contingent, singly or in the aggregate, shall not at any time exceed five hundred thousand dollars, and the moneys arising from loans creating such debts shall be applied only to the purpose or purposes for which they were obtained, or to repay such debts: Provided, The General Assembly may contract debts to repel invasion, suppress insurrection, or, if hostilities are threatened, provide for the public defense. Section 49: Section 50: No act of the General Assembly shall authorize any debt to be contracted on behalf of the Commonwealth except for the purposes mentioned in section 49, unless provision be made therein to levy and collect an annual tax sufficient to pay the interest stipulated, and to discharge the debt within thirty years; nor shall such act take effect until it shall have been submitted to the people at a general election, and shall have received a majority of all the votes cast for and against it: Provided, The General Assembly may contract debts by borrowing money to pay any part of the debt of the State, without submission to the people, and without making provision in the act authorizing the same for a tax to discharge the debt so contracted, or the interest thereon. Section 171: The General Assembly shall provide by law an annual tax, which, with other resources, shall be sufficient to defray the estimated expenses of the Commonwealth for each fiscal year. Louisiana Constitution. Appropriations by the legislature from the state general fund and dedicated funds for any fiscal year except funds allocated by Article VII, Section 4, Paragraphs (D) and (E) shall not exceed the official forecast in effect at the time the appropriations are made. Article VII, Section 10: (E) Balanced Budget (F) Projected Deficit. The legislature by law shall establish a procedure to determine if appropriations will exceed the official forecast and an adequate method for adjusting appropriations in order to eliminate a projected deficit. If within thirty days of the determination that appropriations will exceed the official forecast the necessary adjustments in appropriations are not made to eliminate the projected deficit, the governor shall call a special session of the legislature for this purpose unless the legislature is in regular session. This special session shall commence as soon as possible as allowed by the provisions of this constitution, including but not limited to Article III, Section 2(B). (G) Year End Deficit. If a deficit exists in any fund at the end of a fiscal year, that deficit shall be eliminated no later than the end of the next fiscal year. Maine Constitution The credit of the State shall not be directly or indirectly loaned in any case, except as provided in sections 14-A, 14-C, 14-D and 14-E. The Legislature shall not create any debt or debts, liability or liabilities, on behalf of the State, which shall singly, or in the aggregate, with previous debts and liabilities hereafter incurred at any one time, exceed $2,000,000, except to suppress insurrection, to repel invasion, or for purposes of war, and except for temporary loans to be paid out of money raised by taxation during the fiscal year in which they are made; and excepting also that whenever two-thirds of both Houses shall deem it necessary, by proper enactment ratified by a majority of the electors voting thereon at a general or special election, the Legislature may authorize the issuance of bonds on behalf of the State at such times and in such amounts and for such purposes as approved by such action; but this shall not be construed to refer to any money that has been, or may be deposited with this State by the Government of the United States, or to any fund which the State shall hold in trust for any Indian tribe. Whenever ratification by the electors is essential to the validity of bonds to be issued on behalf of the State, the question submitted to the electors shall be accompanied by a statement setting forth the total amount of bonds of the State outstanding and unpaid, the total amount of bonds of the State authorized and unissued, and the total amount of bonds of the State contemplated to be issued if the enactment submitted to the electors be ratified.... Article 9, Section 14: Statutes The state budget document, setting forth a financial plan for the State government for each fiscal year of the ensuing biennium, shall be set up in 3 parts, the nature and contents of which shall be as follows: Title 5, Chapter 149, Section 1664: Part 1 shall consist of a budget message by the Governor-elect, or the Governor, which shall outline the financial policy of the State Government for the ensuing biennium, describing in connection therewith the important features of the financial plan. It shall embrace a general budget summary setting forth the aggregate figures of the budget in such manner as to show the balanced relations between the total proposed expenditures and the total anticipated revenues together with other means of financing the budget for each fiscal year of the ensuing biennium, contrasted with the corresponding figures for the last completed fiscal year and the fiscal year in progress. . . . Maryland Constitution The Budget and the Budget Bill as submitted by the Governor to the General Assembly shall have a figure for the total of all proposed appropriations and a figure for the total of all estimated revenues available to pay the appropriations, and the figure for total proposed appropriations shall not exceed the figure for total estimated revenues. Neither the Governor in submitting an amendment or supplement to the Budget Bill nor the General Assembly in amending the Budget Bill shall thereby cause the figure for total proposed appropriations to exceed the figure for total estimated revenues, including any revisions, and in the Budget Bill as enacted the figure for total estimated revenues always shall be equal to or exceed the figure for total appropriations. Article III, Section 52(5a): Massachusetts Constitution Within three weeks after the convening of the general court the governor shall recommend to the general court a budget which shall contain a statement of all proposed expenditures of the commonwealth for the fiscal year, including those already authorized by law, and of all taxes, revenues, loans and other means by which such expenditures shall be defrayed. In the first year of the term of office of a governor who has not served in the preceding year said governor shall recommend such budget within eight weeks after the convening of the general court. The budget shall be arranged in such form as the general court may by law prescribe, or, in default thereof, as the governor shall determine. For the purpose of preparing his budget, the governor shall have power to require any board, commission, officer or department to furnish him with any information which he may deem necessary. Article 63, Section 2: Statutes The governor shall recommend, the general court shall enact, and the governor shall approve a general appropriation bill which shall constitute a balanced budget for the commonwealth. No supplementary appropriation bill shall be approved by the governor which will cause the state budget for any fiscal year not to be balanced. Except as otherwise provided herein, the balanced budget in any fiscal year shall include state tax revenues for such fiscal year which shall not exceed allowable state tax revenues for such fiscal year. Chapter 29B, Section 2: Michigan Constitution The general appropriation bills for the succeeding fiscal period covering items set forth in the budget shall be passed or rejected in either house of the legislature before that house passes any appropriation bill for items not in the budget except bills supplementing appropriations for the current fiscal year's operation. Any bill requiring an appropriation to carry out its purpose shall be considered an appropriation bill. One of the general appropriation bills as passed by the legislature shall contain an itemized statement of estimated revenue by major source in each operating fund for the ensuing fiscal period, the total of which shall not be less than the total of all appropriations made from each fund in the general appropriation bills as passed. Article 4, Section 31: Article 5, Section 14: To meet obligations incurred pursuant to appropriations for any fiscal year, the legislature may by law authorize the state to issue its full faith and credit notes in which case it shall pledge undedicated revenues to be received within the same fiscal year for the repayment thereof. Such indebtedness in any fiscal year shall not exceed 15 percent of undedicated revenues received by the state during the preceding fiscal year and such debts shall be repaid at the time the revenues so pledged are received, but not later than the end of the same fiscal year. Article 5, Section 15: The state may borrow money for specific purposes in amounts as may be provided by acts of the legislature adopted by a vote of two-thirds of the members elected to and serving in each house, and approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at any general election. The question submitted to the electors shall state the amount to be borrowed, the specific purpose to which the funds shall be devoted, and the method of repayment. Article 5, Section 18: The governor shall submit to the legislature at a time fixed by law, a budget for the ensuing fiscal period setting forth in detail, for all operating funds, the proposed expenditures and estimated revenue of the state. Proposed expenditures from any fund shall not exceed the estimated revenue thereof. On the same date, the governor shall submit to the legislature general appropriation bills to embody the proposed expenditures and any necessary bill or bills to provide new or additional revenues to meet proposed expenditures. The amount of any surplus created or deficit incurred in any fund during the last preceding fiscal period shall be entered as an item in the budget and in one of the appropriation bills. The governor may submit amendments to appropriation bills to be offered in either house during consideration of the bill by that house, and shall submit bills to meet deficiencies in current appropriations. Article 5, Section 20: No appropriation shall be a mandate to spend. The governor, with the approval of the appropriating committees of the house and senate, shall reduce expenditures authorized by appropriations whenever it appears that actual revenues for a fiscal period will fall below the revenue estimates on which appropriations for that period were based. Reductions in expenditures shall be made in accordance with procedures prescribed by law. The governor may not reduce expenditures of the legislative and judicial branches or from funds constitutionally dedicated for specific purposes. Minnesota Statutes Part one of the budget, the governor's message, shall include the governor's recommendations on the financial policy of the state for the coming biennium, describing the important features of the budget plan, embracing a general budget summary setting forth the aggregate figures of the budget so as to show the balanced relation between the total proposed expenditures and the total anticipated income, with the basis and factors on which the estimates are made, the amount to be borrowed, and other means of financing the budget for the coming biennium, compared with the corresponding figures for at least the last two completed fiscal years and the current year. Section 16A.11, subdivision 2: Section 16A.15, subdivision 1: (a) If the commissioner determines that probable receipts for the general fund will be less than anticipated, and that the amount available for the remainder of the biennium will be less than needed, the commissioner shall, with the approval of the governor, and after consulting the legislative advisory commission, reduce the amount in the budget and cash flow reserve account established in subdivision 6 as needed to balance expenditures with revenue. (b) An additional deficit shall, with the approval of the governor, and after consulting the legislative advisory commission, be made up by reducing unexpended allotments of any prior appropriation or transfer. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary, the commissioner is empowered to defer or suspend prior statutorily created obligations which would prevent effecting such reductions. (c) If the commissioner determines that probable receipts for any other fund, appropriation, or item will be less than anticipated, and that the amount available for the remainder of the term of the appropriation or for any allotment period will be less than needed, the commissioner shall notify the agency concerned and then reduce the amount allotted or to be allotted so as to prevent a deficit. (d) In reducing allotments, the commissioner may consider other sources of revenue available to recipients of state appropriations and may apply allotment reductions based on all sources of revenue available. (e) In like manner, the commissioner shall reduce allotments to an agency by the amount of any saving that can be made over previous spending plans through a reduction in prices or other cause. Mississippi Statutes The proposed budget of each state agency shall show the amounts required for operating expenses separately from the amounts required for permanent improvements. The overall budget shall show, separately by each source, the estimated amount of general-fund revenue and of special-fund revenues of general-fund agencies. The total proposed expenditures in Part 1 of the overall budget shall not exceed the amount of estimated revenues which will be available in the general and special funds for appropriation or use during the succeeding fiscal year, including any balances which will be on hand in the general and special funds at the close of the then current fiscal year. Beginning with the budget for fiscal year 1994, the total proposed expenditures from the General Fund in Part 1 of the overall budget shall not exceed ninety-eight percent (98%) of the amount of General Fund revenue estimate for the succeeding fiscal year, plus any unencumbered balances in general funds that will be available and on hand at the close of the then current fiscal year. The General Fund revenue estimate shall be the estimate jointly adopted by the Governor and the Joint Legislative Budget Committee. Unencumbered balances in general funds that will be available and on hand at the close of the current fiscal year shall not include projected amounts required to be deposited into the Working Cash-Stabilization Reserve Fund and the Education Reserve Fund pursuant to Section 27-103-203. The Legislative Budget Office may recommend additional taxes or sources of revenue if in its judgment such additional funds are necessary to adequately support the functions of the state government. Section 27-103-125: Missouri Constitution The general assembly shall have no power to contract or authorize the contracting of any liability of the state, or to issue bonds therefor, except (1) to refund outstanding bonds, the refunding bonds to mature not more than twenty-five years from date, (2) on the recommendation of the governor, for a temporary liability to be incurred by reason of unforeseen emergency or casual deficiency in revenue, in a sum not to exceed one million dollars for any one year and to be paid in not more than five years from its creation, and (3) when the liability exceeds one million dollars, the general assembly as on constitutional amendments, or the people by the initiative, may also submit a measure containing the amount, purpose and terms of the liability, and if the measure is approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the state voting thereon at the election, the liability may be incurred, and the bonds issued therefor must be retired serially and by installments within a period not exceeding twenty-five years from their date. Before any bonds are issued under this section the general assembly shall make adequate provision for the payment of the principal and interest, and may provide an annual tax on all taxable property in an amount sufficient for the purpose. Article 3, Section 37: Article 4, Section 24: The governor shall, within thirty days after it convenes in each regular session, submit to the general assembly a budget for the ensuing appropriation period, containing the estimated available revenues of the state and a complete and itemized plan of proposed expenditures of the state and all its agencies, together with his recommendations of any laws necessary to provide revenues sufficient to meet the expenditures. Article 4, Section 27: The governor may control the rate at which any appropriation is expended during the period of the appropriation by allotment or other means, and may reduce the expenditures of the state or any of its agencies below their appropriations whenever the actual revenues are less than the revenue estimates upon which the appropriations were based. Montana Constitution Appropriations by the legislature shall not exceed anticipated revenue. Article 8, Section 9: Nebraska Constitution The state may, to meet casual deficits, or failures in the revenue, contract debts never to exceed in the aggregate one hundred thousand dollars, and no greater indebtedness shall be incurred except for the purpose of repelling invasion, suppressing insurrection, or defending the state in war, and provision shall be made for the payment of the interest annually, as it shall accrue, by a tax levied for the purpose, or from other sources of revenue, which law providing for the payment of such interest by such tax shall be irrepealable until such debt is paid. . . . Article 13, Section 1: Nevada Constitution The legislature shall provide by law for an annual tax sufficient to defray the estimated expenses of the state for each fiscal year; and whenever the expenses of any year shall exceed the income, the legislature shall provide for levying a tax sufficient, with other sources of income, to pay the deficiency, as well as the estimated expenses of such ensuing year or two years. Article 9, Section 2: Statutes The proposed budget for the exectuve department of the state government must be set up in three parts. 353.205(1): 1. Part 1 must consist of a budget message by the governor which outlines the financial policy of the executive department of the state government for the next 2 fiscal years, describing in connection therewith the important features of the financial plan. It must also embrace a general budget summary setting forth the aggregate figures of the budget in such a manner as to show the balanced relations between the total proposed expenditures and the total anticipated revenues, together with the other means of financing the budget for the next 2 fiscal years, contrasted with the corresponding figures for the last completed fiscal year and fiscal year in progress. The general budget summary must be supported by explanatory schedules or statements, classifying the expenditures contained therein by organizational units, objects and funds, and the income by organizational units, sources and funds. 353.235(2): A supplementary appropriation is not valid if it exceeds the amount in the state treasury available for the appropriation, unless the legislature making the appropriation provides the necessary revenue to pay the appropriation by a tax, direct or indirect, to be laid and collected as directed by the legislature. The tax must not exceed the rates permitted under the constitution of the State of Nevada. This provision does not apply to appropriations to suppress insurrections, defend the state, or assist in defending the United States in time of war. New Hampshire Statutes If the estimated revenues of the state for the ensuing biennium as set forth in the budget on the basis of existing laws, plus the estimated amounts in the treasury at the close of the year in progress available for expenditure in the ensuing biennial period is less than the aggregate recommended for the ensuing biennial period as contained in the budget, the governor shall make recommendations to the legislature in respect to the manner in which such deficit shall be met, whether by an increase in the state tax or the imposition of new taxes, increased rates on existing taxes, or otherwise; and if the aggregate of such estimated revenues, plus estimated balances in the treasury is greater than such recommended appropriations for the ensuing biennial period, he shall make such recommendations in reference to the application of such surplus to the reduction of debt or otherwise, to the reduction in taxation, or to such other action as in his opinion is in the interest of the public welfare. Chapter 9:3(e): Chapter 9:9: The governor shall transmit to the legislature supplemental estimates for such appropriations as in his judgment may be necessary on account of laws enacted after the transmission of the budget, or as he deems otherwise in the public interest. He shall accompany such estimates with a statement of the reasons therefor, including the reasons for their omission from the budget. Whenever such supplemental estimates amount to an aggregate which, if they had been contained in the budget, would have required the governor to make a recommendation for the raising of additional revenue, he shall make such recommendation. Chapter 9:16-b: I. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the law, the governor may, with the prior approval of the fiscal committee, order reductions in any or all expenditure classes within any or all departments, as defined in RSA 9:1, if he determines at any time during the fiscal year that: (a) Projected state revenues will be insufficient to maintain a balanced budget and that the likelihood of a serious deficit exists; or (b) The actual lapse for each fiscal year is not going to equal the level estimated in the forecast of funds, unappropriated surplus, as issued by the legislative budget assistant. New Jersey Constitution No money shall be drawn from the State treasury but for appropriations made by law. All moneys for the support of the State government and for all other State purposes as far as can be ascertained or reasonably foreseen, shall be provided for in one general appropriation law covering one and the same fiscal year; except that when a change in the fiscal year is made, necessary provision may be made to effect the transition. No general appropriation law or other law appropriating money for any State purpose shall be enacted if the appropriation contained therein, together with all prior appropriations made for the same fiscal period, shall exceed the total amount of revenue on hand and anticipated which will be available to meet such appropriations during such fiscal period, as certified by the Governor. Article 8, Section 2, par. 2: Article 8, Section 2 par. 3: The Legislature shall not, in any manner, create in any fiscal year a debt or debts, liability or liabilities of the State, which together with any previous debts or liabilities shall exceed at any time one per centum of the total amount appropriated by the general appropriation law for that fiscal year, unless the same shall be authorized by a law for some single object or work distinctly specified therein. Regardless of any limitation relating to taxation in this Constitution, such law shall provide the ways and means, exclusive of loans, to pay the interest of such debt or liability as it falls due, and also to pay and discharge the principal thereof within thirty-five years from the time it is contracted; and the law shall not be repealed until such debt or liability and the interest thereon are fully paid and discharged. Except as hereinafter provided, no such law shall take effect until it shall have been submitted to the people at a general election and approved by a majority of the legally qualified voters of the State voting thereon. No voter approval shall be required for any such law authorizing the creation of a debt or debts in a specified amount or an amount to be determined in accordance with such law for the refinancing or all or a portion of any outstanding debts or liabilities of the State heretofore or hereafter created, so long as such law shall require that the refinancing provide a debt service savings determined in a manner to be provided in such law and that the proceeds of such debt or debts and any investment income therefrom shall be applied to the payment of the principal of, any redemption premium on, and interest due and to become due on such debts or liabilities being refinanced on or prior to the redemption date or maturity date thereof, together with the costs associated with such refinancing. All money to be raised by the authority of such law shall be applied only to the specific object stated therein, and to the payment of the debt thereby created. This paragraph shall not be construed to refer to any money that has been or may be deposited with this State by the government of the United States. Nor shall anything in this paragraph contained apply to the creation of any debts or liabilities for purposes of war, or to repel invasion, or to suppress insurrection or to meet an emergency caused by disaster or act of God. See also New Mexico Constitution The state may borrow money not exceeding the sum of two hundred thousand dollars in the aggregate to meet casual deficits or failure in revenue, or for necessary expenses. The state may also contract debts to suppress insurrection and to provide for the public defense. Article 9, Section 7: Article 9, Section 8: No debt other than those specified in the preceding section shall be contracted by or on behalf of the state, unless authorized by law for some specified work or object; which law shall provide for an annual tax levy sufficient to pay the interest and to provide a sinking fund to pay the principal of such debt within fifty years from the time of the contracting thereof. No such law shall take effect until it shall have been submitted to the qualified electors of the state and have received a majority of all the votes cast thereon at a given election; such law shall be published in full in at least one newspaper in each county of the state, if one be published therein, once each week, for four successive weeks next preceding such election. No debt shall be so created if the total indebtedness of the state, exclusive of the debts of the territory, and the several counties thereof, assumed by the state, would thereby be made to exceed one per cent of the assessed valuation of all the property subject to taxation in the state as shown by the preceding general assessment. New York Constitution Annually, on or before the first day of February in each year following the year fixed by the constitution for the election of governor and lieutenant governor, and on or before the second Tuesday following the first day of the annual meeting of the legislature, in all other years, the governor shall submit to the legislature a budget containing a complete plan of expenditures proposed to be made before the close of the ensuing fiscal year and all moneys and revenues estimated to be available therefor, together with an explanation of the basis of such estimates and recommendations as to proposed legislation, if any, which he may deem necessary to provide moneys and revenues sufficient to meet such proposed expenditures. It shall also contain such other recommendations and information as he may deem proper and such additional information as may be required by law. Article 7, Section 2: Statutes: Upon passage of appropriation bills by both the senate and the assembly, the senate and the assembly shall issue either jointly or separately a summary of changes to the budget submitted by the governor in accordance with article seven of the constitution. The summary shall be in such a form as to indicate whether the budget as amended provides that, for the general fund, any changes in anticipated disbursements are balanced by changes in anticipated receipts. The summary shall be accompanied by descriptions of changes to both receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail as is necessary to describe legislative action on the governor's budget submission. The summary shall be in such format as determined by the senate and the assembly, either jointly or separately, and may be issued separately, as part of the report required by section twenty-two-b of the state finance law or may be included within the introductory memoranda or fiscal committee memoranda relating to such legislation or in such other manner as may be determined by the senate and the assembly, either separately or jointly. Legislative Law, Section 54 North Carolina Constitution The Governor shall prepare and recommend to the General Assembly a comprehensive budget of the anticipated revenue and proposed expenditures of the State for the ensuing fiscal period. The budget as enacted by the General Assembly shall be administered by the Governor. Article III, Section 5(3): The total expenditures of the State for the fiscal period covered by the budget shall not exceed the total of receipts during that fiscal period and the surplus remaining in the State Treasury at the beginning of the period. To insure that the State does not incur a deficit for any fiscal period, the Governor shall continually survey the collection of the revenue and shall effect the necessary economies in State expenditures, after first making adequate provision for the prompt payment of the principal of and interest on bonds and notes of the State according to their terms, whenever he determines that receipts during the fiscal period, when added to any surplus remaining in the State Treasury at the beginning of the period, will not be sufficient to meet budgeted expenditures. Statutes All maintenance appropriations now or hereafter made are hereby declared to be maximum, conditional and proportionate appropriations, the purpose being to make the appropriations payable in full in the amounts named herein if necessary and then only in the event the aggregate revenues collected and available during each fiscal year of the biennium for which such appropriations are made, are sufficient to pay all of the appropriations in full; otherwise, the said appropriations shall be deemed to be payable in such proportion of the total sum of all appropriations bears to the total amount of revenue available in each of said fiscal years. The Director of the Budget is hereby given full power and authority to examine and survey the progress of the collection of the revenue out of which such appropriations are made, and to declare and determine the amounts that can be, during each quarter of each of the fiscal years of the biennium properly allocated to each respective appropriation. In making such examination and survey, he shall receive estimates of the prospective collection of revenues from the Secretary of Revenue and every other revenue collection agency of the State. The Director of the Budget may reduce all of said appropriations pro rata when necessary to prevent an overdraft or deficit to the fiscal period for which such appropriations are made. The purpose and policy of this Article is to provide and insure that there shall be no overdraft or deficit in the general fund of the State at the end of the fiscal period, growing out of appropriations for maintenance and the Director of Budget is directed and required to so administer this Article as to prevent any such overdraft or deficit. Prior to taking any action under this section to reduce appropriations pro rata, the Governor may consult with the Advisory Budget Commission. Section 143-25: North Dakota Constitution The state may issue or guarantee the payment of bonds, provided that all bonds in excess of two million dollars shall be secured by first mortgage upon real estate in amounts not to exceed sixty-five percent of its value; or upon real and personal property of state-owned utilities, enterprises, or industries, in amounts not exceeding its value, and provided further, that the state shall not issue or guarantee bonds upon property of state-owned utilities, enterprises, or industries in excess of ten million dollars. Article X, Section 13: No further indebtedness shall be incurred by the state unless evidenced by a bond issue, which shall be authorized by law for certain purposes, to be clearly defined. Every law authorizing a bond issue shall provide for levying an annual tax, or make other provision, sufficient to pay the interest semiannually, and the principal within thirty years from the date of the issue of such bonds and shall specially appropriate the proceeds of such tax, or of such other provisions to the payment of said principal and interest, and such appropriation shall not be repealed nor the tax or other provisions discontinued until such debt, both principal and interest, shall have been paid. No debt in excess of the limit named herein shall be incurred except for the purpose of repelling invasion, suppressing insurrection, defending the state in time of war or to provide for the public defense in case of threatened hostilities. Ohio Constitution The State may contract debts, to supply casual deficits or failures in revenues, or to meet expenses not otherwise provided for; but the aggregate amount of such debts, direct and contingent, whether contracted by virtue of one or more acts of the General Assembly, or at different periods of time, shall never exceed seven hundred and fifty thousand dollars; and the money, arising from the creation of such debts, shall be applied to the purpose for which it was obtained, or to repay the debts so contracted, and to no other purpose whatever. Article 8, Section 1: Article 8, Section 2: In addition to the above limited power, the State may contract debts to repel invasion, suppress insurrection, defend the State in war, or to redeem the present outstanding indebtedness of the State: but the money, arising from the contracting of such debts, shall be applied to the purpose for which it was raised, or to repay such debts, and to no other purpose whatever; and all debts, incurred to redeem the present outstanding indebtedness of the State, shall be so contracted as to be payable by the sinking fund, hereinafter provided for, as the same shall accumulate. Article 12, Section 4: The General Assembly shall provide for raising revenue, sufficient to defray the expenses of the state, for each year, and also a sufficient sum to pay principal and interest as they become due on the state debt. Statutes On or before the tenth day of each month, the director of budget and management shall furnish to the governor statements in such form as the governor requires showing the condition of the general revenue fund. The statements shall provide a summary of the status of appropriations to enable the governor to exercise and maintain effective supervision and control over the expenditures of the state. The director shall also furnish statements the governor requests showing the condition of any other fund. Title 1, Section 126.05: If the governor ascertains that the available revenue receipts and balances for the general revenue fund for the current fiscal year will in all probability be less than the appropriations for the year, he shall issue such orders to the state agencies as will prevent their expenditures and incurred obligations from exceeding such revenue receipts and balances. If the governor ascertains that the available revenue receipts and balances for any fund other than the general revenue fund for the current fiscal year will in all probability be less than the appropriations for the year, he may issue such orders to the state agencies as will prevent their expenditures and incurred obligations from exceeding such revenue receipts and balances. As used in this section, "expenditures and incurred obligations" includes all moneys expended or obligated pursuant to appropriations by the general assembly that are calculated and distributed pursuant to a distribution formula in law. Oklahoma Constitution The state shall never create or authorize the creation of any debt or obligation, or fund or pay any deficit, against the state, or any department, institution or agency thereof, regardless of its form or the source of money from which it is to be paid, except as may be provided in this section and in Sections 24 and 25 of Article X of the Constitution of the State of Oklahoma. Article 10, Section 23: To ensure a balanced annual budget, pursuant to the limitations contained in the foregoing, procedures are herewith established as follows: 1. Not more than forty-five (45) days or less than thirty-five (35) days prior to the convening of each regular session of the Legislature, the State Board of Equalization shall certify the total amount of revenue which accrued during the last preceding fiscal year to the General Revenue Fund and to each Special Revenue Fund appropriated directly by the Legislature, and shall further certify amounts available for appropriation which shall be based on a determination, in accordance with the procedure hereinafter provided, of the revenues to be received by the state under the laws in effect at the time such determination is made, for the next ensuing fiscal year, showing separately the revenues to accrue to the credit of each such fund of the state appropriated directly by the Legislature. Amounts certified as available for appropriation from each fund, as hereinbefore provided, shall be ninety-five percent (95%) of an itemized estimate made by the State Board of Equalization, which shall include all sources of revenue to each fund for the next ensuing fiscal year, provided however, appropriated federal funds shall be certified for the full amount of the estimate. Said estimate shall consider any increase or decline in revenues that would result from predictable changes in the economy. Legislative appropriations for any fiscal year, except for special appropriations provided for in paragraph 4, shall be limited to a sum not to exceed the total amount appropriated from all funds in the preceding fiscal year, plus twelve percent (12%), adjusted for inflation for the previous calendar year. Said limit shall be adjusted for funds not previously appropriated. The limit on the growth of appropriations shall be certified to by the State Board of Equalization. 6. The Legislature shall provide a method whereby appropriations shall be divided and set up on a monthly, quarterly or semiannual basis within each fiscal year to prevent obligations being incurred in excess of the revenue to be collected, and notwithstanding other provisions of this Constitution, the Legislature shall provide that all appropriations shall be reduced to bring them within revenues actually collected, but all such reductions shall apply to each department, institution, board, commission or special appropriation made by the State Legislature in the ratio that its total appropriation for that fiscal year bears to the total of all appropriations from that fund for that fiscal year; provided, however, that the Governor may in his discretion issue deficiency certificates to the State Treasurer for the benefit of any department, institution or agency of the state, if the amount of such deficiency certificates be within the limit of the current appropriation for that department, institution or agency, whereupon the State Treasurer shall issue warrants to the extent of such certificates for the payment of such claims as may be authorized by the Governor, and such warrants shall become a part of the public debt and shall be paid out of any money appropriated by the Legislature and made lawfully available therefor; provided further, that in no event shall said deficiency certificates exceed in the aggregate the sum of Five Hundred Thousand Dollars ($500,000.00) in any fiscal year. Oregon Constitution The Legislative Assembly shall provide for raising revenue sufficiently to defray the expenses of the State for each fiscal year, and also a sufficient sum to pay the interest on the State debt, if there be any. Article IX, Section 2: Article IX, Section 6: Whenever the expenses, of any fiscal year, shall exceed the income, the Legislative Assembly shall provide for levying a tax, for the ensuing fiscal year, sufficient, with other sources of income, to pay the deficiency, as well as the estimated expense of the ensuing fiscal year. Statutes The budget report shall include a budget message prepared by the Governor, including recommendations of the Governor with reference to the fiscal policy of the state government for the coming biennium, describing the important features of the budget plan, embracing a general budget summary setting forth the aggregate figures of the budget report so as to show a balanced relation between the total proposed expenditures and the total anticipated income, with the basis and factors on which the estimates are made, the amount to be borrowed, and other means of financing the estimated expenditures for the ensuing biennium, compared with the corresponding figures for at least the last completed biennium and the current biennium. ORS 291.216(2): ORS 291.254: If the department determines at any time that the probable receipts from taxes and any other sources for any appropriation will be less than what was anticipated, and that consequently the amount available for the remainder of the term of the appropriation or for any allotment period will be less than that amount estimated or allotted therefor, the department shall, with the approval of the Governor, and after notice to the agency or agencies concerned, reduce the amount allotted or to be allotted so as to prevent a deficit. Pennsylvania Constitution Annually, at the times set by law, the Governor shall submit to the General Assembly: Article 8, Section 12: (a) a balanced operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year setting forth in detail (i) proposed expenditures classified by department or agency and by program and (ii) estimated revenues from all sources. If estimated revenues and available surplus are less than proposed expenditures, the Governor shall recommend specific additional sources of revenue sufficient to pay the deficiency and the estimated revenue to be derived from each source... Article 8, Section 13(a): Operating budget appropriations made by the General Assembly shall not exceed the actual and estimated revenues and surpluses available in the same fiscal year. Statutes As soon as possible after the organization of the General Assembly, but not later than the first full week in February of each year, except in the case where a Governor has been elected for his first term of office and then no later than the first full week in March, the Governor shall submit to the General Assembly copies of agency budget requests and a State budget and program and financial plan embracing: Title 71, Section 233: (1) A balanced operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year setting forth in detail: (i) The amounts recommended by him to be appropriated to the General Assembly, the Judicial Department, the Governor, and the several administrative departments, boards, and commissions of the State Government, and to institutions within the State, and for all public purposes, classified by department or agency and by program. (ii) The estimated revenues or receipts from any and all sources, and an estimated amount to be raised by taxation or otherwise, including proposals for new revenues and receipts. Rhode Island Constitution The general assembly shall have no powers, without the express consent of the people, to incur state debts to an amount exceeding fifty thousand dollars, except in time of war, or in case of insurrection or invasion; nor shall it in any case, without such consent, pledge the faith of the state for the payment of the obligations of others. This section shall not be construed to refer to any money that may be deposited with the state by the government of the United States. Article 6, Section 16: Statutes The governor shall submit the budget and the appropriation bill or bills for the fiscal year to the general assembly, which may increase, decrease, alter, or strike out the items contained therein; provided, however, that no action on its part shall be taken which will cause an excess of appropriations for revenue expenditures over expected revenue receipts. If additional appropriations are deemed necessary by the general assembly, it shall not make the appropriations unless it shall provide the necessary additional revenue therefor. Title 35, Section 3-13: Title 35, Section 3-16: At any time during the fiscal year, upon notification by the budget officer that it is indicated that actual revenue receipts or resources will not equal the original estimates upon which appropriations were based or that it is indicated that spending will exceed appropriations, the governor, for the purpose of maintaining a balanced budget, shall have the power to reduce or suspend appropriations for any or all departments or subdivisions thereof, excepting the general assembly, legislative agencies, and legislative committees and commissions, and at least ten (10) business days prior to taking action to reduce or suspend or otherwise withhold appropriations, the governor shall thereupon notify, in writing, the speaker of the house, senate majority leader, and the chairpersons of the house and senate finance committees. The writing shall state specifically the action to be taken and the specific reason which necessitates the action. South Carolina Constitution The General Assembly shall provide by law for a budget process to insure that annual expenditures of state government may not exceed annual state revenue. Article 10, Section 7(a): Rules of the House of Representatives Every General Appropriations Bill and Supplemental Appropriations Bill for the ordinary expenses of State Government before presentation shall have attached thereto a certificate from the Budget Division of the State Budget and Control Board stating that the total of the appropriations therein provided for is not in excess of the estimated total revenue of the State for such purposes, including that revenue which may be provided for in the bill, or in any other bill previously passed by the House for the fiscal year to which the bill is applicable, and an Appropriations Bill without such certificate shall not be read the first time in the House, but shall be returned to the Committee on Ways and Means by the Speaker. 5.3: South Dakota Constitution For the purpose of defraying extraordinary expenses and making public improvements, or to meet casual deficits or failure in revenue, the state may contract debts never to exceed with previous debts in the aggregate one hundred thousand dollars, and no greater indebtedness shall be incurred except for the purpose of repelling invasion, suppressing insurrection, or defending the state or the United States in war and provision shall be made by law for the payment of the interest annually, and the principal when due, by tax levied for the purpose or from other sources of revenue; which law providing for the payment of such interest and principal by such tax or otherwise shall be irrepealable until such debt is paid; provided, however, the state of South Dakota shall have the power to refund the territorial debt assumed by the state of South Dakota, by bonds of the state of South Dakota. Article 13, Section 2: Statutes The budget report shall contain and include the following information...(5) a summary statement of the unappropriated fund balances estimated to be available at the beginning of the next fiscal year, and the estimated revenue of the next fiscal year, as compared with the total recommended amounts of appropriation for expenditures for the next fiscal year, and if the total of the recommended expenditures exceeds the total of the estimated resources, recommendations as to how the deficiency is to be met and estimates of any proposed additional revenues. Title 4, Chapter 7-10: Title 4, Chapter 8-23: Should it appear to the commissioner of finance and management at any time that revenues of the state are substantially less than legislative estimates in making appropriations for expenditures by budget units, he shall immediately report the fact to the Governor, who shall thereupon investigate and may, if necessary, establish a rate of expenditures within all or any budget units, so that said expenditures shall be in proportion to such reduced revenues and will not result in the incurrence of state debt. Tennessee Constitution No public money shall be expended except pursuant to appropriations made by law. Expenditures for any fiscal year shall not exceed the states' revenues and reserves, including the proceeds of any debt obligation, for that year. No debt obligation, except as shall be repaid within the fiscal year of issuance, shall be authorized for the current operation of any state service or program, nor shall the proceeds of any debt obligation be expended for a purpose other than that for which it was authorized. Article 2, Section 24: In no year shall the rate of growth of appropriations from state tax revenues exceed the estimated rate of growth of the state's economy as determined by law. No appropriation in excess of this limitation shall be made unless the General Assembly shall, by law containing no other subject matter, set forth the dollar amount and the rate by which the limit will be exceeded. Any law requiring the expenditure of state funds shall be null and void unless, during the session in which the act receives final passage, an appropriation is made for the estimated first year's funding. No law of general application shall impose increased expenditure requirements on cities or counties unless the General Assembly shall provide that the state share in the cost. An accurate financial statement of the state's fiscal condition shall be published annually. Texas Constitution(a) No debt shall be created by or on behalf of the State, except: Article 3, Section 49: (1) to supply casual deficiencies of revenue, not to exceed in the aggregate at any one time two hundred thousand dollars; (2) to repel invasion, suppress insurrection, or defend the State in war; (3) as otherwise authorized by this constitution; or (4) as authorized by Subsections (b) through (f) of this section. (b) The legislature, by joint resolution approved by at least two-thirds of the members of each house, may from time to time call an election and submit to the eligible voters of this State one or more propositions that, if approved by a majority of those voting on the question, authorize the legislature to create State debt for the purposes and subject to the limitations stated in the applicable proposition. Each election and proposition must conform to the requirements of Subsections (c) and (d) of this section. (c) The legislature may call an election during any regular session of the legislature or during any special session of the legislature in which the subject of the election is designated in the governor's proclamation for that special session. The election may be held on any date, and notice of the election shall be given for the period and in the manner required for amending this constitution. The election shall be held in each county in the manner provided by law for other statewide elections. (d) A proposition must clearly describe the amount and purpose for which debt is to be created and must describe the source of payment for the debt. Except as provided by law under Subsection (f) of this section, the amount of debt stated in the proposition may not be exceeded and may not be renewed after the debt has been created unless the right to exceed or renew is stated in the proposition. (e) The legislature may enact all laws necessary or appropriate to implement the authority granted by a proposition that is approved as provided by Subsection (b) of this section. A law enacted in anticipation of the election is valid if, by its terms, it is subject to the approval of the related proposition. (f) State debt that is created or issued as provided by Subsection (b) of this section may be refunded in the manner and amount and subject to the conditions provided by law. (g) State debt that is created or issued as provided by Subsections (b) through (f) of this section and that is approved by the attorney general in accordance with applicable law is incontestable for any reason. Article 8, Section 22(c): In no case shall appropriations exceed revenues as provided in Article III, Section 49a, of this constitution. Nothing in this section shall be construed to alter, amend, or repeal Article III, Section 49a, of this constitution. Utah Constitution No appropriation shall be made, or any expenditure authorized by the Legislature, whereby the expenditure of the State, during any fiscal year, shall exceed the total tax then provided for by the law, and applicable for such appropriation or expenditure, unless the Legislature making such appropriation, shall provide for levying a sufficient tax, not exceeding the rates allowed in section seven of this article, to pay such appropriation or expenditure within such fiscal year. This provision shall not apply to appropriations or expenditures to suppress insurrections, defend the State, or assist in defending the United States in time of war. Article 13, Section 9: Article 14, Section 1: To meet casual deficits or failures in revenue, and for necessary expenditures for public purposes, including the erection of public buildings, and for the payment of all Territorial indebtedness assumed by the State, the State may contract debts, not exceeding in the aggregate at any one time, an amount equal to one and one-half per centum of the value of the taxable property of the State, as shown by the last assessment for State purposes, previous to the incurring of such indebtedness. But the State shall never contract any indebtedness, except as in the next Section provided, in excess of such amount, and all monies arising from loans herein authorized, shall be applied solely to the purposes for which they were obtained. Statutes If the total of all revenues accruing in any given fiscal year to the General Fund, or any other major fund type, collections, or dedicated credits, from which appropriations are made, are not sufficient to cover the appropriations made for that period, the governor shall reduce the budgetary allotments and transfer of funds by the amount of the deficiency. 63-38-10(3): Vermont Note: Statutes(a) It is the purpose of this section to reduce the effects of annual variations in state revenues upon the budget of the state by retaining certain surpluses in general fund revenues that may accrue for the purpose of offsetting deficits or reducing general fund bonds. Chapter 5, Section 308: (b) There is hereby created a budget stabilization trust fund to be administered by the state treasurer. The fund shall be composed of any undesignated general fund surplus occurring at the close of a fiscal year; provided that the balance of the fund shall not exceed five percent of the appropriations from the general fund for the most recently ended fiscal year. Any undesignated general fund surplus remaining after the budget stabilization trust fund has been brought to the maximum authorized level shall remain in the general fund. When the general assembly next meets, it may specifically appropriate the use of the undesignated general fund surplus for the reduction of general fund bonds authorized but yet to be issued by the treasurer, a reduction of revenues or for other needs as the general assembly may determine. (c) Following any fiscal year in which the general fund is found to have a fund deficit, the budget stabilization trust fund shall be used by the treasurer to the extent necessary to offset the fund deficit. (d) Determination of the amount of the undesignated general fund surplus or fund deficit in any fiscal year for the purposes of this section shall be made by the state treasurer and the commissioner of finance and management a soon as possible after the close of the fiscal year. Adjustment may be made to the transfers authorized in subsections (b) and (c) of this section upon receipt of the final audited annual report of the commissioner of finance and management. Virginia Constitution All taxes, licenses, and other revenues of the Commonwealth shall be collected by its proper officers and paid into the state treasury. No money shall be paid out of the State treasury except in pursuance of appropriations made by law; and no such appropriation shall be made which is payable more than two years and six months after the end of the session of the General Assembly at which the law is enacted authorizing the same. Article 10 Section 7: Other than as may be provided for in the debt provisions of this Constitution, the Governor, subject to such criteria as may be established by the General Assembly, shall ensure that no expenses of the Commonwealth be incurred which exceed total revenues on hand and anticipated during a period not to exceed the two years and six months period established by this section of the Constitution. Washington Statutes Cash deficit of the current fiscal period is defined for purposes of this chapter as the amount by which the aggregate of disbursements charged to a fund will exceed the aggregate of estimated receipts credited to such fund in the current fiscal period, less the extent to which such deficit may have been provided for from available beginning cash surplus. 43.88.050: If, for any applicable fund or account, the estimated receipts for the next ensuing period plus cash beginning balances is less than the aggregate of estimated disbursements proposed by the governor for the next ensuing fiscal period, the governor shall include in Part I of the budget document proposals as to the manner in which the anticipated cash deficit shall be met, whether by an increase in the indebtedness of the state, by the imposition of new taxes, by increases in tax rates or an extension thereof, or in any like manner. The governor may propose orderly liquidation of the anticipated cash deficit over a period of one or more fiscal periods, if, in the governor's discretion, such manner of liquidation would best serve the public interest. 43.88.110(5): If at any time during the fiscal period the governor projects a cash deficit in a particular fund or account as defined by RCW 43.88.050, the governor shall make across-the-board reductions in allotments for that particular fund or account so as to prevent a cash deficit, unless the legislature has directed the liquidation of the cash deficit over one or more fiscal periods. West Virginia Constitution The legislature shall not amend the budget bill so as to create a deficit but may amend the bill by increasing or decreasing any item therein: Provided, that no item relating to the judiciary shall be decreased, and except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, the salary or compensation of any public officer shall not be increased or decreased during his term of office: Provided further, that the legislature shall not increase the estimate of revenue submitted in the budget without the approval of the governor. Article VI, Section 51, Subsection B (7): Article X, Section 4: No debt shall be contracted by this State, except to meet casual deficits in the revenue, to redeem a previous liability of the State, to suppress insurrection, repel invasion or defend the State in time of war; but the payment of any liability other than that for the ordinary expenses of the State, shall be equally distributed over a period of at least twenty years. Wisconsin Constitution The legislature shall provide for an annual tax sufficient to defray the estimated expenses of the state for each year; and whenever the expenses of any year shall exceed the income, the legislature shall provide for levying a tax for the ensuing year, sufficient, with other sources of income, to pay the deficiency as well as the estimated expenses of such ensuing year. Article 8, Section 5: Article 8, Section 6: For the purpose of defraying extraordinary expenditures the state may contract public debts (but such debts shall never in the aggregate exceed one hundred thousand dollars). Every such debt shall be authorized by law, for some purpose or purposes to be distinctly specified therein; and the vote of a majority of all the members elected to each house, to be taken by yeas and nays, shall be necessary to the passage of such law; and every such law shall provide for levying an annual tax sufficient to pay the annual interest of such debt and the principal within five years from the passage of such law, and shall specially appropriate the proceeds of such taxes to the payment of such principal and interest; and such appropriation shall not be repealed, nor the taxes be postponed or diminished, until the principal and interest of such debt shall have been wholly paid. Statutes No bill directly or indirectly affecting general purpose revenues as defined in s. 20.001(2)(a) may be enacted by the legislature if the bill would cause the estimated general fund balance on June 30 of any fiscal year as projected under s. 20.005(1) to be an amount equal to less than one percent of the total general purpose revenue appropriations for that fiscal year. S. 20.003(4): Wyoming Constitution The State of Wyoming shall not, in any manner, create any indebtedness exceeding one per centum on the assessed value of the taxable property in the state as shown by the last general assessment for taxation, preceding; except to suppress insurrection or to provide for the public defense. Article 16, Section 1: Article 16, Section 2: No debt in excess of the taxes for the current year, shall in any manner be created in the State of Wyoming, unless the proposition to create such debt shall have been submitted to a vote of the people and by them approved; except to suppress insurrection or to provide for the public defense. Updated March 2004.

Email statebudget-info@ncsl.org for more information. Vermont is generally said to be unique among the states in lacking a requirement for a balanced budget. The following language, however, provides for closing a general fund deficit at the end of a fiscal year. statutes: Title 52, Section 27B-21, 27B-22. statutes: 45-12-75., Subsections (4) through (10). statutes: Title 29, Section 6533. Constitution, Article XI, Section 3; statutes, Section 24-37-301. statutes: 19-4-201. statutes: Section 35-115. statutes: Sections 41-4-83, 41-4-90, 41-19-4