The U.S. Refugee Resettlement Program: A Primer for Policymakers
President Donald J. Trump issued a revised executive order—Protecting the Nation from Foreign Terrorist Entry into the United States—on March 6, 2017, after the Jan. 27 order was enjoined by the 9th circuit for due process violations. The revised order continues to suspend entry for 90 days for nationals from countries that have sponsored acts of international terrorism, but removes Iraq from the list of countries, leaving Iran, Libya, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, and Yemen. Lawful permanent residents and current nonimmigrant visa holders are now exempt. The order applies to new visa applicants and permits the US State Department to grant waivers on a case-by-case basis. The executive order suspends the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program in the Department of State for 120 days and reduces refugee admissions to 50,000 from the current 110,000. See NCSL’s summary here.

The new executive order was scheduled to take effect Thursday March 16th, 2017 but the sections on the travel ban and refugee program suspension were enjoined. See the Hawaii and Maryland rulings.

President Donald Trump issued his third executive order on refugee admissions and travel restrictions for nationals from selected countries on Oct. 24, 2017. The 9th circuit court of appeals (in Seattle) was expected to review this order on Dec. 6 and the 4th Circuit (in Richmond) on Dec. 8. On Dec. 4, the U.S. Supreme Court announced a stay of the injunctions in the Fourth and Ninth Circuit court cases, allowing the 3rd executive order to go into effect.

The refugee program, which was suspended for 120 days, has been resumed but at a reduced admissions ceiling of 50,000, down from the planned 110,000 for FY2017. The President’s 2018 admissions ceiling has been set at 45,000.

See below for a primer on the U.S. refugee resettlement program.

Overview

The terrorist attacks in Paris in November 2015 led many in the U.S. to question the security procedures for resettling refugees from Syria in the United States. A number of governors issued statements seeking a halt to the resettlement of refugees. California and Michigan adopted resolutions in support of accepting innocent civilian Syrians and Iraqis, respectively. Legislation was introduced in a dozen state legislatures in 2016 addressing the refugee resettlement program.

In recent years, the U.S. accepted up to 70,000 refugees per year from five different regions of the world. Refugees are vetted overseas and background checks are run through several federal agencies, including the Department of Homeland Security, National Counterterrorism Center and FBI. Forty-nine states participate in the refugee resettlement program to assist those fleeing persecution to become self-sufficient and integrated into their adopted communities. The Obama administration increased the ceiling for refugee admissions to 85,000 in 2016 and 110,000 in FY2017.

This brief provides background to the current crisis and a review of the U.S.’ 37-year old refugee resettlement program.

Background

The civil war in Syria has caused 4 million of its citizens to flee the country since 2011. Many of these refugees remain in the region, temporarily residing in neighboring countries of Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey. More than one million live in Lebanon (a country of 4 million). In Europe, nearly 682,000 Syrian applications for refugee status have been received from 2011-2015.

The surge in migrant and asylum seekers to Europe captured global attention with varied responses: many countries offered resettlement and humanitarian aid while others increased border enforcement efforts and directed refugees to other countries. In September 2015, the European Union agreed to accept 120,000 refugees, and President Obama announced a plan to raise refugee admissions from 70,000 to 85,000 for FY2016.

From 2012-2015, 1854 Syrians were resettled in the United States. The Obama administration set a goal of 10,000 Syrians in 2016, and resettled 12,587.

Since the terrorist attacks on France, some congressional leaders have suggested suspending the program pending a review of security measures, and a number of governors have issued similar statements. Governors in Alabama and Kansas issued executive orders.

In state legislatures, California and Michigan adopted resolutions in 2015 encouraging the U.S. to recognize the moral obligation to assist innocent civilians and to accept additional Syrian and Iraqi refugees, respectively (CA SR52 and Michigan HR9). On Nov. 17, 2015, Ohio became the first state to introduce a resolution seeking the halt of Syrian refugees resettled in the state, followed by Pennsylvania, and North Carolina leaders added the topic of refugees to a hearing of the Joint Legislative Commission on Government Operations. A dozen states introduced measures addressing refugees in 2016. Tennessee adopted a resolution urging legal action to seek relief related to refugee resettlement.

Who Is a Refugee?

A refugee is defined by the Immigration and Nationality Act as any person outside his or her country who has a “well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion.”

What Is the U.S. Refugee Resettlement Program?

Congress established the U.S. refugee resettlement program through the Refugee Act of 1980, primarily to provide refuge to those fleeing communism in Russia and Southeast Asia, later expanding to other regions. The program was created as a partnership with state government and nonprofit resettlement agencies to provide cash, medical and social services until refugees became self-sufficient in their new communities.

The U.S. president sets an annual refugee ceiling in consultation with Congress, currently 70,000 per year. The admissions ceiling will increase to 85,000 in FY16 and 100,000 in FY17.

Prior to Arrival

More than 60 million people are displaced from their homes because of war or persecution. The resettlement program is available to less than 1 percent of refugees per year. The United States is the leading resettlement country in the world, with 29 other countries participating.

The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) reviews applications from around the world, registers individuals as refugees and selects for resettlement the most vulnerable refugees who will be unable to return home, such as women head of households, and victims of violence and torture.

Of refugees accepted by the United States, 75 percent are referred by UNHCR and another 25 percent are direct petition, such as Iraqis who served with the U.S. military.

Once they are referred by UNHCR, the Department of Homeland Security must conduct criminal and medical background checks, all while the refugee is still overseas or out of the country. This process is overseen by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services. The screening is conducted by the National Counterterrorism Center and the FBI and takes an average of 18 months to complete. Refugees are subjected to the highest level of security check of any traveller to the United States.

State Department contractors conduct direct interviews with the refugee family to determine: 1) is this family principle applicant eligible under U.S. law based on one of five protected grounds: race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion; and 2) is this person admissible under U.S. law.

Refugees can be barred from entering the United States on medical grounds, criminal background, national security reasons, or potential to become a public charge (Section 212 of the Immigration and Nationality Act). Refugees are inadmissible if they have contributed money, intelligence, or any other support to any terrorist organization or they themselves have been members of a terrorist organization. Refugee applicants can also be inadmissible if they are determined to have a communicable disease of public health significance (however HIV is not grounds for inadmissibility). All applicants must also go through rigorous criminal background checks to prove they did not commit any other crimes such as prostitution, acts of violence violating religious freedom, money laundering, drug trafficking, or human trafficking.

After arrival

Once the refugee has been approved for admittance to the United States, the Department of State handles overseas processing and contracts with nine national-level voluntary agencies who then coordinate refugee cases with 350 local affiliates in 49 states for initial resettlement. The agencies provide housing and other basic needs for the first 30-90 days with funding from the State Bureau of Population, Refugees and Migration (PRM). The State Department contracts require voluntary agencies to consult with stakeholders prior to accepting refugees for resettlement in the states. Refugees are provided with cultural orientation to the United States, assistance during their first 90 days, self-sufficiency, money management,and introduction to the role of law enforcement in the U.S.

The Office of Refugee Resettlement in HHS funds domestic refugee resettlement after the initial resettlement. ORR funds states to provide temporary, short-term cash and medical assistance and social services. Each participating state has a refugee coordinator.

What Is the Role of States?

States receive funding from the Office of Refugee Resettlement for cash and medical assistance, social services (such as English language and job training), targeted assistance, and preventive health. States either provide services directly or contract with nonprofit organizations to carry out and implement resettlement services.

Thirty-two states administer the funds through state-run offices. Twelve states—Arkansas, Nevada, Idaho, Colorado, South Dakota, North Dakota, Kentucky, Alabama, Tennessee, Louisiana, Massachusetts and Vermont—participate in the alternative Wilson-Fish program which contracts to nonprofit organizations.. Five states—Minnesota, Oregon, Oklahoma, Texas and Maryland—use public-private partnerships to administer the funds. Wyoming does not participate.

What Is the Budget for Refugee Resettlement?

Core Line Items in Refugee Resettlement Budget Transitional cash and medical assistance $383 million Social services such as English language and vocational training $150 million Targeted assistance $48 million Victims of trafficking $13 million Victims of torture $11 million Victims of domestic trafficking $3 million Preventative health $4.6 million Total $582 million

Over the last 10 years, cash and medical assistance has averaged $300 million/year and social services $150 million per year.

The ORR budget for FY 2015 was $1.56 billion dollars, with $948 million in funding for unaccompanied migrant children.

Funds are allocated to the states according to the number of refugees resettled. The top 10 states are: Texas, California, New York, Michigan, Florida, Arizona, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Illinois, and Washington.

What Are the Benefits Available to Refugees?

ORR funds a variety of temporary assistance programs for refugees. The two major areas of support for refugees are Refugee Cash Assistance (RCA) and Refugee Medical Assistance (RMA). ORR also provide funding for employment assistance and citizenship services. Social services include interpretation and translation, citizenship and naturalization classes and support, and various employment and job training services.

Refugees are also eligible for other federally funded benefit programs, if they meet all other requirements, including Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), and Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP).

After 12 months of refugee status, refugees are required to apply for Lawful Permanent Resident (Permanent Resident Alien).

Prepared by: Jennifer Mayorga, NCSL fall fellow, 2015, and Ann Morse, NCSL program director

This issue brief was made possible by a grant from the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation. The statements made and views expressed are solely the responsibility of NCSL.

Additional Resources