Autonomous | Self-Driving Vehicles Legislation
Autonomous Vehicles

Many people consider autonomous vehicles to be a significant part of the future of the automotive industry.

As the technology for autonomous vehicles continues to develop, it may be necessary for state and municipal governments to address the potential impacts of these vehicles on the road.

Each year, the number of states considering legislation related to autonomous vehicles has gradually increased. In 2016, 20 states introduced legislation. Sixteen states introduced legislation in 2015, up from 12 states in 2014, nine states and D.C. in 2013, and six states in 2012. Since 2012, at least 34 states and D.C. have considered legislation related to autonomous vehicles. Nine states—California, Florida, Louisiana, Michigan, Nevada, North Dakota, Tennessee, Utah and Virginia—and Washington D.C. have passed legislation related to autonomous vehicles. Governors in Arizona and Massachusetts issued executive orders related to autonomous vehicles.

Latest News

On Sep. 20, the National Highway and Transportation Safety Administration (NHTSA) issued updated guidance for the safe development of highly autonomous vehicles (HAVs). The policy update is broken down into four parts – vehicle performance guidelines, model state policy, NHTSA’s current regulatory tools and possible new regulatory actions NHTSA believes could be helpful in ensuring the safe deployment of HAVs.

NHTSA is clear in its guidance that states retain their traditional responsibilities for vehicle licensing and registration, traffic laws and enforcement, and motor vehicle insurance and liability regimes and that the model state policy included in NHTSA’s policy release is in no way binding on states wishing to take action regarding use of HAVs in their state.

For potential HAV manufacturers, the policy includes a set of 15 best practices regarding the safe pre-deployment design as well as development and testing of HAV’s prior to commercial sale or operation on public roads.

Separately, NHTSA issued an enforcement bulletin regarding its authority to issue recalls on such automated technology. The notice has a particular focus on semi-autonomous technologies where the driver can allow the car to take over certain aspects, which NHTSA believes could result in increases in distracted driving.

In January 2016, U.S. Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx unveiled new policy that updates the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's (NHTSA) 2013 preliminary policy statement on autonomous vehicles. This announcement was made at the North American International Auto Show in Detroit in conjunction with a commitment of nearly $4 billion over the next 10 years to accelerate the development and adoption of safe vehicle automation. The new policy is designed to facilitate and encourage the development and deployment of technologies with the potential to save lives. Within six months, NHTSA will propose guidance to industry on establishing principles of safe operation for fully autonomous vehicles.

State Action

Nevada was the first state to authorize the operation of autonomous vehicles in 2011. Since then, eight other states—California, Florida, Louisiana, Michigan, North Dakota, Tennessee, Utah and Virginia—and Washington D.C. have passed legislation related to autonomous vehicles. Governors in Arizona and Massachusetts issued executive orders related to autonomous vehicles.

Florida’s legislation, passed in 2012, declared the legislative intent to encourage the safe development, testing and operation of motor vehicles with autonomous technology on public roads of the state and found that the state does not prohibit nor specifically regulate the testing or operation of autonomous technology in motor vehicles on public roads. Florida's 2016 legislation expands the allowed operation of autonomous vehicles on public roads and eliminates requirements related to the testing of autonomous vehicles and the presence of a driver in the vehicle.

Virginia's governor Terry McAuliffe announced in early June 2015 a partnership allowing research and development for autonomous vehicles to take place in the state with “Virginia Automated Corridors.”

Arizona’s Governor Doug Ducey signed an executive order in late August 2015 directing various agencies to “undertake any necessary steps to support the testing and operation of self-driving vehicles on public roads within Arizona.” He also ordered the enabling of pilot programs at selected universities and developed rules to be followed by the programs. The order established a Self-Driving Vehicle Oversight Committee within the governor’s office.

Massachusetts Governor Charlie Baker signed an executive order in October 2016, “To Promote the Testing and Deployment of Highly Automated Driving Technologies.” The order created a working group on AVs and the group is expected to work with experts on vehicle safety and automation, work with members of the legislature on proposed legislation, and support agreements that AV companies will enter with the state DOT, municipalities and state agencies.

Enacted Autonomous Vehicles Legislation State Bill Number Relevant Provisions Effective Date California SB 1298 (2012) Requires the Department of the California Highway Patrol to adopt safety standards and performance requirements to ensure the safe operation and testing of autonomous vehicles, as defined, on the public roads in this state. Permits autonomous vehicles to be operated or tested on the public roads in this state pending the adoption of safety standards and performance requirements that would be adopted under this bill. Enacted and chaptered on Sept. 25, 2012. California AB 1592 (2016) Authorizes the Contra Costa Transportation Authority to conduct a pilot project for the testing of autonomous vehicles that are not equipped with a steering wheel, a brake pedal, an accelerator, or an operator inside the vehicle, if the testing is conducted only at specified locations and the autonomous vehicle operates at specified speeds. Enacted and chaptered on Sept. 29, 2016. Florida HB 1207 (2012) Defines “autonomous vehicle” and “autonomous technology.” Declares legislative intent to encourage the safe development, testing and operation of motor vehicles with autonomous technology on public roads of the state and finds that the state does not prohibit or specifically regulate the testing or operation of autonomous technology in motor vehicles on public roads. Authorizes a person who possesses a valid driver's license to operate an autonomous vehicle, specifying that the person who causes the vehicle’s autonomous technology to engage is the operator. Authorizes the operation of autonomous vehicles by certain persons for testing purposes under certain conditions and requires an instrument of insurance, surety bond or self-insurance prior to the testing of a vehicle. Directs the Department of Highway Safety and Motor Vehicles to prepare a report recommending additional legislative or regulatory action that may be required for the safe testing and operation of vehicles equipped with autonomous technology, to be submitted no later than Feb. 12, 2014. Enacted and chaptered on April 16, 2012. Florida HB 599 (2012) The relevant portions of this bill are identical to the substitute version of HB 1207. Enacted and chaptered on April 29, 2012. Florida HB 7027 (2016) Permits operation of autonomous vehicles on public roads by individuals with a valid driver license. This bill eliminates the requirement that the vehicle operation is being done for testing purposes and removes a number of provisions related to vehicle operation for testing purposes. Eliminates the requirement that a driver be present in the vehicle. Requires autonomous vehicles meet applicable federal safety standards and regulations. Enacted and chaptered on April 4, 2016. Florida HB 7061 (2016) Defines autonomous technology and driver-assistive truck platooning technology. Requires a study on the use and safe operation of driver-assistive truck platooning technology and allows for a pilot project upon conclusion of the study. Enacted and chaptered on Apr. 14, 2016. Louisiana HB 1143 (2016) Defines "autonomous technology" for purposes of the Highway Regulatory Act. Enacted and chaptered on June 2, 2016. Michigan SB 995 (2016) Allows for autonomous vehicles under certain conditions. Allows operation without a person in the autonomous vehicle. Specifies that the requirement that commercial vehicles maintain a minimum following distance of 500 feet does not apply to vehicles in a platoon. Enacted and chaptered on Dec. 9, 2016. Michigan SB 996 (2016) Allows for autonomous vehicles under certain conditions. Allows operation without a person in the autonomous vehicle. Enacted and chaptered on Dec. 9, 2016. Michigan SB 997 (2016) Defines automated driving system. Allows for the creation of mobility research centers where automated technology can be tested. Provides immunity for automated technology manufacturers when modifications are made without the manufacturer's consent. Enacted and chaptered on Dec. 9, 2016. Michigan SB 998 (2016) Exempts mechanics and repair shops from liability on fixing automated vehicles. Enacted and chaptered on Dec. 9, 2016. Michigan SB 169 (2013) Defines "automated technology," "automated vehicle," "automated mode," expressly permits testing of automated vehicles by certain parties under certain conditions, defines operator, addresses liability of the original manufacturer of a vehicle on which a third party has installed an automated system, directs state DOT with Secretary of State to submit report by Feb. 1, 2016. Enacted and chaptered on Dec. 20, 2013. Michigan SB 663 (2013) Limits liability of vehicle manufacturer or upfitter for damages in a product liability suit resulting from modifications made by a third party to an automated vehicle or automated vehicle technology under certain circumstances; relates to automated mode conversions. Enacted and chaptered on Dec. 26, 2013. Nevada AB 511 (2011) Authorizes operation of autonomous vehicles and a driver’s license endorsement for operators of autonomous vehicles. Defines “autonomous vehicle” and directs state Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) to adopt rules for license endorsement and for operation, including insurance, safety standards and testing. Enacted and chaptered on June 17, 2011. Nevada SB 140 (2011) Prohibits the use of cell phones or other handheld wireless communications devices while driving in certain circumstances, and makes it a crime to text or read data on a cellular phone while driving. Permits use of such devices for persons in a legally operating autonomous vehicle. These persons are deemed not to be operating a motor vehicle for the purposes of this law. Enacted and chaptered on June 17, 2011. Nevada SB 313 (2013) Relates to autonomous vehicles. Requires an autonomous vehicle that is being tested on a highway to meet certain conditions relating to a human operator. Requires proof of insurance;. Prohibits an autonomous vehicle from being registered in the state, or tested or operated on a highway within the state, unless it meets certain conditions. Provides that the manufacturer of a vehicle that has been converted to be an autonomous vehicle by a third party is immune from liability for certain injuries. Enacted and chaptered on June 2, 2013. North Dakota HB 1065 (2015) Provides for a study of autonomous vehicles. Includes research into the degree that automated motor vehicles could reduce traffic fatalities and crashes by reducing or eliminating driver error and the degree that automated motor vehicles could reduce congestion and improve fuel economy. Enacted and chaptered on March 20, 2015. Tennessee SB 598 (2015) Relates to motor vehicles. Prohibits local governments from banning the use of motor vehicles equipped with autonomous technology. Enacted and chaptered on April 24, 2015. Tennessee SB 2333 (2016) Allows a motor vehicle to be operated, or to be equipped with, an integrated electronic display visible to the operator while the motor vehicle's autonomous technology is engaged. Enacted and chaptered on March 22, 2016. Tennessee SB 1561 (2016) Redefines "autonomous technology" for purposes of preemption. Defines "driving mode" and "dynamic driving task." Enacted and chaptered on April 27, 2016. Utah HB 373 (2015) Authorizes the Department of Transportation to conduct a connected vehicle technology testing program. Enacted and chaptered on April 22, 2015. Utah HB 280 (2016) Requires a study related to autonomous vehicles, including evaluating NHTSA and AAMVA standards and best practices, evaluating appropriate safety features and regulatory strategies and developing recommendations. Enacted and chaptered on March 23, 2016. Virginia HB 454 (2016) Allows the viewing of a visual display while a vehicle is being operated autonomously. Enacted and chaptered on April 6, 2016. Washington, D.C. 2012 DC B 19-0931 Defines "autonomous vehicle” as "a vehicle capable of navigating District roadways and interpreting traffic-control devices without a driver actively operating any of the vehicle’s control systems." Requires a human driver "prepared to take control of the autonomous vehicle at any moment." Restricts conversion to recent vehicles, and addresses liability of the original manufacturer of a converted vehicle. Enacted and effective from April 23, 2013.

Introduced 2015 Autonomous Vehicle Legislation State Bill Number Relevant Provisions Status as of May 26, 2016 Connecticut CT HB 6344 Concerns autonomous vehicles. Allows the use of autonomous vehicles in Connecticut for testing purposes. Failed. Georgia GA SB 113 Creates a new class of motor vehicles to be known as autonomous vehicles. Provides for definitions. Provides for requirements to operate an autonomous vehicle. Provides for the operation of autonomous vehicles on public highways for testing purposes. Provides for indemnity to vehicle manufacturers in certain instances. Provides for the regulation of autonomous vehicles. Provides for a penalty. Provides for related matters. Repeals conflicting laws. Failed. Hawaii HI HB 632 Authorizes for testing purposes the operation of autonomous vehicles in the state of Hawaii. Requires Department of Transportation to establish an application and approval process and report annually to the Legislature. Makes an appropriation. Failed. Hawaii HI HB 1458 Allows autonomous motor vehicles to be operated on any road, street, or highway if certain requirements are met. Allows for manufacturer testing of autonomous motor vehicles on any road, street or highway. Failed Idaho ID SB 1108 Amends and adds to existing law. Provides insurance requirements. Provides requirements for testing autonomous driven vehicles. Provides that autonomous driven vehicles shall meet federal standards and regulations. Provides requirements for autonomous driven vehicles before testing or operation on highways within the state. Provides an exemption from liability for manufacturers and dealers. Provides that all highways shall be open for testing. Failed. Maryland MD HB 172 Establishes the Task Force to Study Issues Related to the Use of Self Driving Vehicles. Provides for the composition, chair and staffing of the Task Force. Requires the Task Force to make specified determinations, review specified information, consider specified issues, and make specified recommendations related to the use of self driving vehicles. Failed. Maryland MD SB 778 Establishes the Task Force to Study Issues Related to the Use of Self-Driving Vehicles. Provides for the composition, chair, and staffing of the Task Force. Requires the Task Force to make specified determinations, review specified information, consider specified issues, and make specified recommendations related to the use of self-driving vehicles. Requires the Task Force to report its findings and recommendations to the governor and the General Assembly on or before Jan.1, 2017. Failed. Mississippi MS SB 2676 Authorizes the use of an autonomous motor vehicle in this state. Defines autonomous technology and autonomous vehicles. Provides for the safety and control of an autonomous vehicle. Provides for endorsement on driver's license to operate; for related purposes. Failed. Missouri MO HB 924 Allows testing of driverless motor vehicles until Aug. 28, 2018 Failed. North Carolina NC HB 782 Directs the Division of Motor Vehicles to study how to implement autonomous vehicle technology on the roads and highways of this state. Failed. Oregon OR SB 620 Establishes process for certifying manufacturers for purposes of testing, selling or operating autonomous vehicles on highways of state; prescribes vehicle and operator requirements for autonomous vehicles. Failed. Tennessee TN HB 616 Prohibits local governments from banning the use of motor vehicles equipped with autonomous technology. Substituted by SB 598 Texas TX HB 933 Creates a border security pilot program. Failed. Texas TX SB 1167 Relates to autonomous motor vehicles. Failed. Texas TX HB 3690 Relates to the operation of autonomous motor vehicles by the State Department of Transportation. Failed.

Additional Resources

NCSL Resources

State Resources

Other Resources

Lexis Nexis Terms and Conditions