Road Use Charges
Recent News

On Aug. 30, the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Federal Highway Administration announced $14.2 million in grants for states under a new program, Surface Transportation System Funding Alternatives (STSFA). The grants are to explore alternative revenue mechanisms to help sustain the long-term solvency of the Highway Trust Fund. The new program was included in the Fixing America’s Surface Transportation (FAST) Act, a five-year reauthorization of federal surface transportation programs. NCSL advocated strongly for the program’s inclusion following the adoption of a policy resolution by the conference in 2013, and reauthorized thereafter, supporting federal grants to states to explore alternative revenue mechanisms.

Specifically, the $14.2 million will fund eight projects that aim to pilot a variety of options to raise revenue, including onboard vehicle technologies to charge drivers based on miles traveled and multistate or regional approaches to road user charges. The projects will address common challenges involved with implementing user-based fees, such as public acceptance, privacy protection, equity and geographic diversity. The projects will also evaluate the reliability and security of the technologies available to implement mileage-based fees. See a complete list of projects receiving funding.

Click here to see the full Info Alert released by NCSL's Office of State-Federal Relations.

Introduction

Road-use charges (RUCs)—also known as mileage-based user fees (MBUFs) or vehicle miles traveled (VMT) fees—are transportation funding mechanisms that seek to more closely link transportation taxes to actual use of the roadways by a driver, as compared to traditional fuel taxes.

As states struggle to keep pace with increasing funding shortfalls and maintenance backlogs, lawmakers are exploring innovative approaches to increase revenues for transportation. One approach is to restructure existing gas taxes into a variable-rate tax to better reflect increased construction costs or fuel efficiency of vehicles. Similarly some states have attempted to recapture revenues from drivers who now use electric or hybrid vehicles that use less or no gas at all.

A RUC goes one step further, potentially eliminating the need for a gas tax altogether, by charging drivers on a per-mile driven basis. Proponents see this as a way to increase transportation revenues as vehicle miles traveled increases even as fuel purchases may decrease, due to increased vehicle efficiency.

Legislative Action

NCSL is aware of at least 10 states since 2013 that have passed legislation to study RUCs and many more have examined the feasibility of such a mechanism without official legislation. NCSL tracks state legislation related to RUCs in the Transportation Funding and Finance Legislation Database.

Pilot Programs

Oregon

Oregon launched the largest user-fee pilot program to date in July 2015. The OreGo program is building a cadre of volunteers who agree to receive a monthly rebate for the gas taxes they pay at the pumps in exchange for a bill based on the miles they drive. At a rate of 1.5 cents per mile, a vehicle with a fuel efficiency of 20 mpg would break even under the new program by not having to pay the state’s 30-cent-per-gallon fuel tax.

Officials tried to anticipate public concerns by letting volunteers choose from a couple of mileage-tracking options: an in-car GPS unit, self-reporting based on odometer readings or a monthly set mileage fee. Private, third-party companies are administering the program to alleviate privacy and data-collection worries.

“Ultimately, the goal of this public-private partnership is to pave the way for reform by removing the uncertainty surrounding a workable road-user charge,” says Bruce Starr, a former Oregon senator and past NCSL president. “Our program is voluntary, users have choices, it’s transparent and the private sector is collecting the fee—all necessary for a successful pilot.”

California

California is rolling out the Road Charge Pilot Program, a voluntary effort that relies heavily on Oregon’s experience. The program was created by the Road Charge Technical Advisory Committee, which was established by legislation in 2014 to study user-fees and lay the groundwork for a statewide pilot program. The California Road Charge Pilot will also serve as a proof-of-concept and include 5,000 volunteers. Unlike the Oregon’s pilot, this program will be conceptual in nature and not involve any actual revenues.

Others

A number of smaller short-term pilot programs have taken place across the country. The Federal Highway Administration’s (FHWA) Office of Innovative Program Delivery catalogues many of these past efforts.

Federal Involvement

In March 2016, FHWA formally released the Notice of Funding Opportunity from the Surface Transportation System Funding Alternatives (STSFA), a new program that was included in last year’s Fixing America’s Surface Transportation (FAST) Act.

The program provides funding to states to help them develop alternatives to the gas tax that utilize a user fee structure to help fund the nation’s systems of highways, roads, bridges and mass transit through the Federal Highway Trust Fund (HTF).

The competitive grant program will provide a total of $15 million to states in 2016 and $20 million per year thereafter, through 2020.

For 2016, FHWA will accept three types of applications for STSFA awards from either a state or group of states applying for funding:

Full new demonstration projects.

Extensions or enhancements of existing demonstration projects.

Required pre-demonstration activity leading directly to a planned future demonstration project in the near term (less than 18 months from award).

Furthermore, an application must address a number of items including how the project addresses implementation, interoperability, public acceptance, protection of personal privacy, the use of vendors to collect fees and operate the mechanism, market-based congestion mitigation impacts, equity concerns, ease of compliance and the reliability and security of technologies used.

Proposals may also address the flexibility and choices available for user payments, administrative costs and ability to audit and enforce compliance. Additionally, cost sharing or matching is required, with awardees providing a 50 percent share. Although other federal funds may be leveraged for the deployment, it cannot be considered as part of the STSFA matching funds, which must come from non-federal sources.

For those states that receive an award, FHWA anticipates substantial federal involvement with STSFA recipients during the course of these projects, which will include oversight, technical assistance, and guidance to the awardee.

Additional Resources