NEA’s Involvement in the Common Core State Standards
How and Why NEA Has Been Involved in the Development and Implementation of the Standards

The partnership that developed the Common Core State Standards is headed by the National Governor’s Association (NGA) and the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO). The group invited NEA to be a partner in the enterprise. NEA decided to join the partnership for two major reasons.

First, it is clear that that there is broad support from many groups of stakeholders for common standards. Second, NEA wanted to be sure that the concerns and voices of teachers were considered as these standards were developed. That has happened as the project staff met with groups of mathematics and English language arts teachers who were NEA members and National Board Certified.

There is evidence that they listened carefully to our members and incorporated many of their suggestions into the subsequent drafts of the standards. Three of our teachers from the review group were on official review committees for the standards.

When the first drafts of the Common Core State Standards for College and Workplace Readiness in mathematics and English language arts were released, the Common Core State Standards staff and writers met with two groups of NEA members. One was a group of mathematics teachers and the other was a group of English language arts teachers. All the teachers in the groups were National Board Certified Teachers.

The standards project staff listened carefully to our teachers and made substantive changes in the standards based on the recommendations of our teachers as well as those of teachers from other organizations including the American Federation of Teachers, the International Reading Association, the National Council of Teachers of English, and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.

NEA believes that this work on Common Standards has the potential to provide teachers with far more manageable curriculum goals. Their breadth allows teachers to exercise professional judgment in planning instruction that promotes student success.

As the standards are extended to grades k-12, NEA is optimistic that they will continue to be fewer, broader, and more challenging than most of the current state standards. They will give teachers flexibility and a common, general focus that will extend across states.

After the standards are completed and adopted, there will be the task of developing assessments related to the standards. The potential to vastly improve the quality of assessments and increase the role of teachers in the development, scoring, and use of assessments is an important rationale for NEA’s continued involvement in the project.

Examination of the education systems of high performing countries such as Singapore and New Zealand indicates that those countries have common standards or curriculum that articulate broad, high goals for students, provide adequate preparation and support to teachers, allow teachers to exercise professional judgment, and involve teachers in all aspects of the education enterprise including curriculum, standards, and assessments as well as instruction.

The Common Core State Standards Initiative has the potential to begin to move education in the U.S. along this path.