Milwaukee Crime Rates and Statistics
With a crime rate of 55 per one thousand residents, Milwaukee has one of the highest crime rates in America compared to all communities of all sizes - from the smallest towns to the very largest cities. One's chance of becoming a victim of either violent or property crime here is one in 18. Within Wisconsin, more than 98% of the communities have a lower crime rate than Milwaukee. In fact, after researching dangerous places to live, NeighborhoodScout found Milwaukee to be one of the top 100 most dangerous cities in the U.S.A.

Importantly, when you compare Milwaukee to other communities of similar population, then Milwaukee crime rate (violent and property crimes combined) is quite a bit higher than average. Regardless of how Milwaukee does relative to all communities in America of all sizes, when NeighborhoodScout compared it to communities of similar population size, its crime rate per thousand residents stands out as higher than most.

Now let us turn to take a look at how Milwaukee does for violent crimes specifically, and then how it does for property crimes. This is important because the overall crime rate can be further illuminated by understanding if violent crime or property crimes (or both) are the major contributors to the general rate of crime in Milwaukee.

For Milwaukee, we found that the violent crime rate is one of the highest in the nation, across communities of all sizes (both large and small). Violent offenses tracked included rape, murder and non-negligent manslaughter, armed robbery, and aggravated assault, including assault with a deadly weapon. According to NeighborhoodScout's analysis of FBI reported crime data, your chance of becoming a victim of one of these crimes in Milwaukee is one in 62.

Significantly, based on the number of murders reported by the FBI and the number of residents living in the city, NeighborhoodScout's analysis shows that Milwaukee experiences one of the higher murder rates in the nation when compared with cities and towns for all sizes of population, from the largest to the smallest.

In addition, NeighborhoodScout found that a lot of the crime that takes place in Milwaukee is property crime. Property crimes that are tracked for this analysis are burglary, larceny over fifty dollars, motor vehicle theft, and arson. In Milwaukee, your chance of becoming a victim of a property crime is one in 26, which is a rate of 39 per one thousand population.

Importantly, we found that Milwaukee has one of the highest rates of motor vehicle theft in the nation according to our analysis of FBI crime data. This is compared to communities of all sizes, from the smallest to the largest. In fact, your chance of getting your car stolen if you live in Milwaukee is one in 107.