Uveitis Associated with Zika Virus Infection — NEJM
To the Editor:

Zika virus (ZIKV) is an arthropod-borne virus transmitted by infected aedes mosquitoes.1 Nonpurulent conjunctivitis has been described in association with ZIKV infection in adults.2 We report on a man in his early 40s who had an unremarkable medical history and a 2-day history of a rash and bilateral ocular hyperemia. ZIKV infection was diagnosed by means of a positive real-time reverse-transcriptase–polymerase-chain-reaction (RT-PCR) assay3 of a serum specimen. A peripheral-blood sample was also positive for anti-ZIKV IgM antibodies detected by means of an in-house enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and a plaque-reduction neutralization test4 (titer, 1:5000).

Eight days after the onset of systemic symptoms, ophthalmic evaluation showed a visual acuity of 20/20 in the patient’s right eye and 20/40 in his left eye (the latter acuity was attributed to amblyopia that had been detected in the patient at a young age). The examination also showed conjunctival hyperemia bilaterally (Figure 1A and 1BFigure 1 Slit-Lamp Photographs of the Patient’s Eyes.Conjunctival hyperemia in the right eye (Panel A) and left eye (Panel B) 8 days after the onset of systemic symptoms is shown. Also shown are keratic precipitates and grade 2+ inflammatory cells (on a scale of 0 to 4+, with higher grades indicating more cells per field)5 in the anterior chamber of the left eye 16 days after the onset of Zika virus infection (Panel C). ), bilateral nongranulomatous keratic precipitates, and grade 0.5+ leukocytes (on a scale of 0 to 4+, with higher grades indicating more cells per field)5 in the anterior chamber of the right eye and grade 2+ flare (on a scale of 0 to 4+, with higher grades indicating more intense flare)5 in the left eye.

Aqueous humor obtained by means of anterior-chamber paracentesis in the patient’s right eye tested positive for ZIKV RNA by means of real-time RT-PCR. The cycle threshold value for the serum was 20, and the cycle threshold value for the aqueous humor was 36; this suggested a lower amount of ZIKV RNA in the aqueous humor than in the serum. Topical ciprofloxacin–dexamethasone was prescribed for his right eye.

Eight days after the administration of the drug, the visual acuity was 20/20 in the patient’s right eye and 20/60 in his left eye, with conjunctival hyperemia bilaterally, mild punctate keratitis, nongranulomatous keratic precipitates, grade 0.5+ leukocytes in the anterior chamber of the right eye, and grade 2+ leukocytes in the anterior chamber of his left eye (Figure 1C). Anterior-chamber paracentesis was performed again, this time in his left eye; real-time RT-PCR analysis for ZIKV was negative.

After the patient had received topical glucocorticoids for 7 days, the visual acuity returned to its baseline value and no signs of ongoing uveitis were detected. The intraocular pressure remained normal at all visits. All serologic and intraocular samples tested negative for dengue virus. Also, we did not identify clinical and laboratory evidence of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus, herpes simplex virus, cytomegalovirus, or varicella–zoster virus, and evidence of tuberculosis, syphilis, toxoplasmosis, and immune-related uveitis was not detected.

We suspect that some persons with a diagnosis of ZIKV-related conjunctivitis may have intraocular inflammation. Uveitis may be a potential manifestation of ZIKV infection.