Tuberculosis in New York City — Turning the Tide
These epidemiologic patterns strongly suggest that the decrease in the number of cases resulted from an interruption of the ongoing spread of M. tuberculosis infection. Several programmatic improvements are likely to have contributed.

Directly Observed Therapy

Figure 1. Figure 1. Number of Patients with Tuberculosis in New York City (Solid Line) and Number Receiving Directly Observed Therapy at the End of Each Year (Shaded Bars), 1978 through 1994. Data are from the New York City Department of Health.

First, public health programs to control tuberculosis have recently expanded, particularly those that provide directly observed therapy, in which patients are observed as they take each dose of their medicine (Figure 1). With support from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention as well as the city and state governments of New York, the staff of the Bureau of Tuberculosis Control of the New York City Department of Health increased from 144 to more than 600 between 1988 and 1994; in the same period, the bureau's budget increased from $4 million to more than $40 million. Outreach workers traveled to patients' homes and workplaces, as well as to street corners, bridges, subway stations, park benches, and even “crack dens” in abandoned buildings, to ensure that patients were appropriately treated. By the end of 1994, more than 1200 patients were receiving directly observed therapy, as compared with fewer than 50 in 1983. Most received their therapy through the city Department of Health with federal and local funding, and some were in programs supported by the state Department of Health, Medicaid funds, and funding granted under the Ryan White Care Act.

From January 1, 1992, through December 31, 1994, more than 32,000 patient-months of directly observed therapy were administered. In a typical month during this period, only 3 percent of patients who received the therapy were infectious, as indicated by sputum smears positive for acid-fast bacilli and M. tuberculosis on culture. We estimate that, without directly observed therapy, at least 15 to 20 percent of patients would have been infectious. A single infectious patient infects approximately one person per month.17 Since more than 40 percent of patients with tuberculosis in New York City have HIV infection,4 many contacts (perhaps 20 percent) who would have become infected with M. tuberculosis were also HIV-infected. Among HIV-infected persons with new tuberculosis infections, the rate of progression to active tuberculosis is likely to be at least 30 percent in the first year18,19; among HIV-negative patients, it is approximately 3 to 5 percent.20 On the basis of these figures, directly observed therapy may have prevented at least 4000 tuberculosis infections and at least 800 cases of active tuberculosis by preventing patients from either becoming or remaining infectious.

The proportion of patients who completed treatment increased from less than 50 percent in 1989 to approximately 90 percent among patients with tuberculosis diagnosed in 1994, with most of the improvement occurring from 1992 to 1994. In addition to directly observed therapy and intensive case management, involuntary in-hospital confinement was instituted for the small proportion of patients (approximately 1 percent) in whom all other treatment approaches failed. The most important effect of the detention program was probably as a deterrent; given the credible threat of detention, adherence to directly observed therapy by some patients undoubtedly increased.

Infection-Control Measures

There has also been improvement in infection control. The New York State Department of Health has documented that tuberculosis-control efforts in New York City hospitals improved substantially from July 1992 to July 1994 (Stricof RL: personal communication). Measures carried out at hospitals where an outbreak has occurred can halt the spread of multidrug-resistant tuberculosis.21 There were 115 cases in 1991 for which there was epidemiologic evidence of nosocomial transmission, 103 cases in 1992, and fewer than 30 cases annually in 1993 and 1994. We recently found that more than 4 percent of all cases of tuberculosis in New York City in April 1991 appeared to have been associated with a hospital stay (unpublished data). Thus, improved infection control is likely to have substantially decreased the number of cases citywide.

A further factor that may have contributed to the decrease in cases is the downsizing of large shelters for single adults. In the 1980s, as many as 50,000 different people passed through shelters for homeless adult men in New York City in a single year, with more than 5000 housed on any given night.22 In the early 1990s, non-congregate housing began to be provided to homeless patients with AIDS. This policy had the dual effect of removing most patients with tuberculosis from the shelter system and of removing many patients with AIDS — those who are at highest risk for tuberculosis. Also, the large shelters that had housed 800 or more men in a single room in the late 1980s and early 1990s were phased out. This change may have affected the transmission of tuberculosis among the homeless persons who remained in the system, by reducing the opportunities for exposure to the disease as well as decreasing the intensity of such exposure. The number of patients with tuberculosis who were listed on the computerized registry of the shelter system decreased from 748 in 1991 to 293 in 1994.

In addition, improved practices for screening, isolation, and follow-up of incarcerated persons in New York City probably reduced the transmission of M. tuberculosis infection. The Rikers Island Correctional Facility holds more than 120,000 prisoners annually and has a daily census of more than 15,000.23 There were no effective facilities for isolation at Rikers Island until May 1992, when a communicable-disease unit with effective respiratory isolation was constructed. There is evidence that tuberculosis was transmitted among patients incarcerated at Rikers Island in 198524; it is likely that subsequent improvements in screening and isolation to prevent the airborne spread of M. tuberculosis reduced such transmission. In 1992, all patients with suspected or confirmed active tuberculosis at Rikers Island were enrolled in a program of directly observed therapy. An expanded outreach program and the use of incentives increased the proportion of patients who kept follow-up appointments after their release from less than 20 percent to 92 percent (Bailey V, Larkin C: personal communication).

These factors — the use of directly observed therapy and improved infection control in hospitals, shelters for the homeless, and correctional facilities — are related. Programs of directly observed therapy for outpatients greatly reduced the number of infectious patients entering hospitals, shelters, and jails. Improved infection control limited the spread of disease by infectious persons who entered those facilities.

Changes in Treatment Regimens

Other factors may have contributed to the recent decrease in the number of cases of tuberculosis in New York City. In November 1991 the Department of Health recommended an initial regimen of at least four drugs (isoniazid, rifampin, pyrazinamide, and ethambutol) for all patients with active tuberculosis. By July 1993, one survey found that 89 percent of patients with suspected tuberculosis were being treated with at least four antituberculous drugs (Stricof RL: personal communication). This drug regimen not only reduced the likelihood that the treatment of drug-resistant tuberculosis would be ineffective, but also shortened the time required for patients to become noninfectious.25 Improved laboratory methods, broader use of drug-susceptibility testing, and a higher index of suspicion for the disease (leading to more rapid diagnosis and initiation of treatment) probably all played a part.

The expanded use of preventive therapy in high-risk groups, such as persons with HIV infection, and the use of rifabutin as prophylaxis against disease caused by M. avium complex may also have contributed to the decrease. This cannot be demonstrated, however, because there is no systematic monitoring of the number of patients who complete preventive therapy. The chest clinics of the New York City Department of Health provided such therapy to more than 4000 people annually from 1992 through 1994, a substantial increase from prior years.

Finally, the number of severely immunosuppressed HIV-infected persons may have decreased slightly in New York City in recent years.26 The fact that the number of cases of tuberculosis decreased less rapidly among women — in whom AIDS has been increasing, when a constant case definition is used — suggests that the epidemiologic features of AIDS may have played some part in this change.27,28 However, even among women 20 to 40 years of age, the number of cases of tuberculosis fell 22 percent.

The decrease in resistance to drugs is perhaps the most convincing evidence linking the reduced numbers of tuberculosis cases with programmatic improvements. The incidence of drug-resistant tuberculosis has been shown to decline with improved rates of completion of treatment and with the use of directly observed therapy,29,30 but presumably it would not be decreased by either the use of isoniazid prophylaxis or changes in the pattern of the HIV epidemic.

Implications

There is an important and complex lesson to be learned from the rapid decrease in the number of cases of tuberculosis. It had been believed that 90 percent of cases could be attributed to the reactivation of earlier infection,31 but at least in the era of HIV, 30 percent or more of cases may result from the recent transmission of M. tuberculosis.15,16 It is comparatively easy to prevent transmission by ensuring that patients with recently acquired disease are treated promptly, appropriately, and completely — ideally, with directly observed therapy. But after these cases have been prevented, the challenge becomes much greater. Preventive treatment must be given to many people who are not ill, who are unaware that they are infected, and for whom preventive therapy may be only a low priority; at the same time, effective directly observed therapy and high rates of completion of treatment among patients with active disease must be maintained. Thus, it is critical that control programs continue and expand, or another surge in tuberculosis may well occur.

New York City has not yet controlled tuberculosis. In 1994, 2995 cases were reported, far more than in any other city in the United States. The case rate was more than four times the national average, and there were more patients with multidrug-resistant tuberculosis than in the rest of the country combined. Nevertheless, the recent substantial decrease confirms that this disease can be prevented and cured, even in persons with HIV infection.32

The costs of the resurgence of tuberculosis have been phenomenal. From 1979 through 1994, there were more than 20,000 excess cases of the disease in New York City — cases that would not have occurred if previous downward trends had continued. Each case cost more than $20,000 in 1990 dollars, for a total exceeding $400 million.33 In addition, as many as one third of patients with tuberculosis were rehospitalized because of inadequate follow-up, and thousands of people were hospitalized in order to rule out the diagnosis. There were additional expenditures for renovation at Rikers Island (more than $60 million); the renovation of hospitals; and preventive therapy for those who became infected during the resurgence. Care will be required for those who become ill, some of them with multidrug-resistant disease, in the years and decades to come. These costs easily exceed $1 billion and may reach several times that amount. Thus, despite their cost, efforts to control tuberculosis in the United States are likely to be highly cost effective.

Tuberculosis is a preventable and curable disease, and the war against it can be won. New York City's experience demonstrates that tuberculosis can be controlled even in populations in which immunosuppression is common and the prevalence of drug-resistant organisms is high. The challenge in the years ahead will be to continue to focus on treating the disease and to expand the use of preventive treatment for people at high risk, such as close contacts of patients with tuberculosis, people with HIV infection, and persons from countries where tuberculosis remains common. Because foreign-born persons account for an increasing proportion of cases in the United States, we need to improve screening and services for immigrants and support international programs to control tuberculosis, which are important, effective, and woefully underfunded.34,35 By doing so, we can ensure that the recent decrease in incidence becomes not simply a blip on a curve, but the resumption of a consistent drive to eliminate tuberculosis as a serious threat to public health in the United States.