Zika Virus Outbreak on Yap Island, Federated States of Micronesia
In this Zika virus outbreak, approximately three quarters of Yap residents were infected with Zika virus, and we estimated that more than 900 people had illness attributable to Zika virus infection. Zika virus infection was widespread across all geographic areas of Yap and caused relatively mild illness lasting several days. There were no deaths or hospitalizations attributed to Zika virus. We were unable to detect Zika virus in any mosquito samples, and therefore we cannot determine with certainty the vector of transmission. On the basis of the relative abundance of Aedes hensilli and previous evidence that this species was the most likely vector of dengue virus transmission on Yap, it is plausible that Aedes hensilli was a vector of Zika virus transmission in this outbreak.21

The clinical signs and symptoms of Zika virus infection were consistent with those described in a previous report of one male patient but different from those described in a previous case series.2,20 In that case series, rash or conjunctivitis was not reported and arthralgia was noted in only one of seven patients. Fever was reported in all seven patients, but the study included only patients who were hospitalized with febrile illness.19

The detection of Zika virus RNA in the serum of acutely ill patients and the absence of nucleic acid of other arboviruses provide convincing evidence that the outbreak was caused by Zika virus. Although the transmission of dengue virus is common in Micronesia, none of the 137 patients for whom acute-phase specimens were available had evidence of dengue virus RNA in their serum.21,22 All 108 patients with confirmed or probable Zika virus disease had IgM antibody against Zika virus and neutralizing antibodies. ELISA for IgM is a relatively sensitive and specific assay for detecting arboviral infections.23 Although the ELISA for IgM antibody against Zika virus may cross-react with IgM against other flaviviruses, such as dengue virus or yellow fever virus, it is not likely to cross-react with IgM against alphaviruses such as chikungunya or Ross River viruses. PRNTs effectively discriminate among different primary flavivirus infections, but patients who have secondary infections (those who have been previously vaccinated against or exposed to another flavivirus) may have indeterminate PRNT results.30,31 The patients with confirmed Zika virus disease had titers of neutralizing antibodies against Zika virus that were at least four times as high as their titers of neutralizing antibodies against dengue virus, a finding that provides strong evidence of primary Zika virus infection. The patients with probable Zika virus disease also had neutralizing antibodies against Zika virus, but the titers were less than four times as high as the titers of neutralizing antibodies against dengue virus. Although the results from these patients do not definitively confirm Zika virus infection, they are consistent with Zika virus infection after a previous dengue virus infection.

The attack rates of Zika virus disease detected by surveillance were higher among females than males and among older persons than younger persons. In contrast, the prevalence of IgM antibody against Zika virus detected by the survey was higher in male participants (perhaps because of the possibility of their greater exposure to mosquitoes) and was relatively evenly distributed across age groups. These discrepancies may be because of differences in health care–seeking behavior for this relatively mild illness. The estimated ratio of symptomatic to asymptomatic patients with Zika virus infection in this outbreak is similar to that described for West Nile virus infection.32,33

We think it unlikely that Zika virus circulated unrecognized on Yap before this outbreak. The compact clustering of cases in May and June and the high seroprevalence of IgM antibody against Zika virus are consistent with an acute outbreak of Zika virus illness in a population without previous immunity to Zika virus. Although precise estimates of the persistence of IgM antibody against Zika virus are not available, IgM antibodies to dengue virus generally do not persist longer than 90 days.33 IgM antibodies to West Nile virus typically persist for about 5 months.34-36 There were no reports of widespread disease outbreaks on Yap in the 2 years before this outbreak. These results support the conclusion that this outbreak resulted from a recent introduction of Zika virus.

Zika virus might have been introduced to Yap by a viremic nonhuman primate (monkeys live on nearby Palau but not on Yap), but there were no reports of any importation or recent arrival of nonhuman primates. No other nonprimate vertebrates or birds are known to be reservoirs of Zika virus; unless evidence of such a reservoir is discovered, introduction of Zika virus through an infected nonprimate vertebrate seems unlikely. It is more likely that Zika virus was introduced by an infected mosquito or a viremic human. We did not find any recently ill residents who had traveled outside of Yap, but the virus could have been imported by a person with undetected infection. Serologic evidence of Zika virus infection in humans has been reported in the Philippines, and travel between Yap and the Philippines is common.

The accessibility of air travel and the abundance of mosquito vectors of flavivirus in the Pacific region raise concern for the spread of Zika virus to other islands in Oceania and even to the Americas. The potential for such spread is illustrated by the following anecdote. A medical volunteer visited Yap from June 17 to June 29, 2007, and had onset of symptoms meeting the case definition of suspected Zika virus disease on July 7, 2007, after her return to the United States. She had IgM antibody against Zika virus and neutralizing antibody in her serum on July 20, indicating she had been infected with Zika virus on Yap and was probably viremic after arrival in the United States. The emergence of Zika virus as an important human pathogen on Yap in 2007 underscores the ease with which exotic pathogens are transported between continents and the need for clinical vigilance and strong epidemiologic and laboratory surveillance systems to detect the spread of infectious diseases.