Beyond the VA Crisis — Becoming a High-Performance Network — NEJM
Overhauling the health care system for Americans who answered the call of duty by serving in the military is a national priority. In the spring of 2014, the Veterans Health Administration (VA) faced a crisis with regard to veterans’ access to care. Systemic problems in scheduling processes had been exacerbated by leadership failures and ethical lapses. Demand for services was outstripping capacity. The result was that veterans did not have timely access to the health care they had earned.

My colleagues and I at the VA have taken ownership of these problems and are working to solve them and reestablish trust with veterans. The country’s largest integrated health care delivery system is responding to these ongoing challenges under a public microscope. With increased oversight from Congress and numerous other public and private organizations, ours is arguably the most scrutinized turnaround in contemporary U.S. medicine.

The aging population of veterans, their changing expectations, infrastructure limitations, and application of emerging therapies and technologies have all contributed to a mismatch of demand and capacity. Regardless of what caused the crisis, we aim to reestablish trust by expanding our methods of providing care, emphasizing the concept of “whole health,” and adopting a veteran-centric approach in everything we do.

In the nearly 2 years since unacceptable VA waiting times came to light, it’s become apparent that the VA alone cannot meet all the health care needs of U.S. veterans. The VA’s mission and scope are not comparable to those of other U.S. health systems. Few other systems enroll patients in areas where they have no facilities for delivering care. Fewer still provide comprehensive medical, behavioral, and social services to a defined population of patients, establishing lifelong relationships with them. These realities, combined with the wait-time crisis, have led the VA to reexamine its approach to care delivery. The Commission on Care, established by Congress in 2014, was charged with providing insights and recommendations on change in the VA and is considering a number of system-focused proposals for improving care delivery. Later this year, the Commission will present its recommendations to President Barack Obama through the secretary of veterans affairs.

Partnerships with federal and community health care providers may result in better access and broader capabilities than simply relying on the VA’s internal capabilities and current infrastructure — especially given that we expect the need for ambulatory services to increase in the future, while the need for acute inpatient medical, surgical, and rehabilitation services decreases. I believe that addressing veterans’ needs requires a new model of care: rather than remaining primarily a direct care provider, the VA should become an integrated payer and provider. This new vision would compel the VA to strengthen its current components that are uniquely positioned to meet veterans’ needs, while working with the private sector to address critical access issues.

The VA outperforms private industry in several areas. For example, we have lower risk-adjusted mortality rates, better patient-safety statistics, and better performance on a number of other accepted process measures.1-3 We have been leaders in integrated electronic health records, big-data analytic capabilities, and comprehensive care, including provision of support for team-based primary care, integration of behavioral health services, attention to social determinants of health, and caregiver involvement.

On October 30, 2015, the VA delivered to Congress its plan for evolving our current system into a high-performance network based on a foundation of timely access and the integration of private-sector providers to ensure the best achievable outcomes for all enrolled veterans. Building on more than a decade of working with community partners through multiple mechanisms, our plan is to establish an expanded network of providers to ensure that the VA and its partners build enhanced capabilities for services essential to veterans’ health.

The network would consist of three groupings of providers. The core network would include all VA-run hospitals, clinics, and centers, as well as appropriate facilities run by other federal agencies, tribal health partners, and academic teaching institutions that have already established relationships with the VA. Many of these facilities have expertise in military service–related conditions, and all have the core competencies required for providing comprehensive, coordinated care. These facilities would increase access to highly specialized care and address the needs of some veterans living in remote areas.

The second network would include organized private-sector delivery systems that meet performance criteria for clinical outcomes, appropriateness criteria, access standards, and service levels. The process for acceptance into this second network would be highly competitive and based on documented results. Integrated systems of care would be ideally suited for inclusion, since their providers have been investing in coordinated care for some time.

A third network would allow veterans to obtain care from additional participating private-sector providers, ensuring access for veterans who don’t live within a reasonable distance of providers in the other networks. Providers in this network would need to agree to submit clinical data and documentation to VA health information exchanges.

Our “whole health” model of care is a key component of the VA’s proposed future delivery system. This model incorporates physical care with psychosocial care focused on the veteran’s personal health and life goals, aiming to provide personalized, proactive, patient-driven care through multidisciplinary teams of health professionals. The VA will also maintain care registries, crisis lines, and centers-of-excellence programs in services for veterans that are not available in many communities.

Another critical component of the VA’s role in attaining the best achievable outcomes will be ensuring the application of best practices. We will use best practices in system science and engineering to improve the quality, safety, and consistency of veterans’ experience regardless of the site of care. We will also continue to use our health services outcomes research program and “lean” management techniques to improve the effectiveness of our delivery system.

In reimagining the future of VA health care delivery, it is vital to bear in mind the VA’s roles in research, education, innovation, and emergency preparedness. We believe our researchers should continue their important work to improve the health of not only veterans but all Americans. And our doctors, nurses, and other providers should continue to train tomorrow’s health care professionals.

The road ahead is clear, as the VA transforms itself to address future requirements. We need to strengthen our business processes so as to support clinical excellence and accelerate operational improvements to better serve veterans. By rethinking our systems, working with our current partners, and exploring new public–private partnerships, the VA is transitioning from a loose federation of regional systems to a highly integrated enterprise. Although we have requested and are awaiting several legislative changes to allow the VA to consolidate programs for care in the community and to have greater flexibility in spending for services provided by the private sector, much work has already begun, and we are engaged in intensive planning for the changes that require Congressional approval. Failing to execute a plan that supports strong and enhanced core services within the VA would have serious consequences for U.S. veterans. A well-run VA health system is essential to the nation and to U.S. medicine. The stakes are high, but we believe this vision is the best path toward delivering on President Abraham Lincoln’s promise to care for those who have “borne the battle.”