After Newtown — Public Opinion on Gun Policy and Mental Illness
The horrific loss of life at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, in December 2012 has prompted a national conversation about guns and mental illness in the United States. This tragedy occurred less than 6 months after 70 people were shot in a movie theater in Colorado and after highly publicized mass shootings in Arizona and at Virginia Tech. These four events share two common characteristics: all four shooters were apparently mentally ill, and all four used guns with large-capacity magazines, allowing them to fire multiple rounds of ammunition without reloading. As policymakers consider options to reduce gun violence, they should understand public attitudes about various violence-prevention proposals, including policies affecting persons with mental illness; past research findings on Americans' attitudes about policies for curbing gun violence1-3 need to be updated. In the aftermath of Sandy Hook, it's also important to understand how Americans view mental illness.

To examine these issues, we conducted two national public opinion surveys between January 2 and January 14, 2013, with the survey research firm GfK Knowledge Networks, using equal-probability sampling from a sample frame of residential addresses covering 97% of U.S. households. The surveys were pilot-tested December 28 through December 31, 2012. The order of the survey items was randomized. We fielded the gun-policy survey (n=2703) and the mental illness survey (n=1530) using different respondents to avoid priming effects. Survey completion rates were 69% and 70%, respectively. For the gun-policy survey, to report national rates of policy support and compare rates stratified according to respondents' gun-ownership status, we oversampled both gun-owners and non-owners living in households with guns. We reported the gun-policy results at the Summit on Reducing Gun Violence in America at Johns Hopkins University on January 15, 2013.

Some 33% of respondents reported having a gun in their home or garage, an estimate that's consistent with recent data from the General Social Survey and other surveys,4,5 though somewhat lower than a few 2013 polls have reported. Twenty-two percent of respondents identified the guns as personally belonging to them (“gun-owners”), and 11% identified themselves as non–gun-owners living in a household with a gun. Among gun-owners, 71% reported owning a handgun, 62% reported owning a shotgun, and 61% reported owning a rifle. The remaining 67% of respondents identified themselves as non–gun-owners living in households without guns (“non–gun-owners”).

Table 1. Table 1. Public Support for Gun Policies in 2013, Overall and by Gun-Ownership Status (N=2703).

Majorities of the respondents supported all but 4 of 31 gun policies (see Table 1). Public support was particularly high for measures prohibiting certain persons from having guns, enhancing background checks, and instituting greater oversight of gun dealers. Even policies banning the sale of military-style semiautomatic weapons and large-capacity ammunition magazines were supported by more than 65% of the general public.

We found smaller differences than we anticipated between gun-owners and non–gun-owners. All policies bolstering background checks and oversight of gun dealers were supported by majorities of gun-owners, as were most policies prohibiting certain persons from having guns. A majority of members of the National Rifle Association (NRA) supported many of these policies as well. For instance, 84% of gun-owners and 74% of NRA members (vs. 90% of non–gun-owners) supported requiring a universal background-check system for all gun sales; 76% of gun-owners and 62% of NRA members (vs. 83% of non–gun-owners) supported prohibiting gun ownership for 10 years after a person has been convicted of violating a domestic-violence restraining order; and 71% of gun-owners and 70% of NRA members (vs. 78% of non–gun-owners) supported requiring a mandatory minimum sentence of 2 years in prison for a person convicted of selling a gun to someone who cannot legally have a gun.

We found larger differences in support between non–gun-owners and gun-owners for policies banning the sale of semiautomatic assault weapons (77% vs. 46%), banning the sale of large-capacity ammunition magazines holding more than 10 bullets (76% vs. 48%), prohibiting handgun ownership for people younger than 21 years of age (76% vs. 52%), and requiring gun-owners to lock guns when they're not in use to prevent handling by children or teenagers without adult supervision (75% vs. 44%). Non–gun-owners and gun-owners held similar views on the policies that attracted the lowest levels of support, such as prohibiting gun ownership by persons with misdemeanor convictions for indecent exposure (28% vs. 21%) or drunk and disorderly conduct (40% vs. 32%).

In many cases, the views of non–gun-owners living in households with guns were aligned more closely with those of other non–gun-owners than with those of personal gun-owners. For instance, 76% of non–gun-owners living in households with guns supported requiring a person to obtain a license for a gun (vs. 84% of other non–gun-owners and 59% of gun-owners).

Most policies regarding persons with mental illness were popular with both non–gun-owners and gun-owners. Eighty-five percent of respondents supported requiring states to report to the national background-check system persons who are prohibited from having guns because they have either been involuntarily committed to a hospital for psychiatric treatment or been declared mentally incompetent by a court. Although this requirement has been in place since before the background-check system was implemented in 1998, many states do not report mental health records. Of the policies regarding persons with mental illness included in the survey, the one that had the least public support was allowing people who have lost the right to have a gun because of mental illness to have that right restored if they are determined not to be dangerous.

Table 2. Table 2. Public Attitudes about Mental Illness, Overall and among People with and without Experience with Mental Illness (N=1530).

Overall, respondents expressed ambivalence about mental illness (see Table 2). Almost half of respondents believed that people with serious mental illness are more dangerous than members of the general population, but less than a third believed that locating a group residence for people with mental illness in a residential neighborhood would endanger area residents. Most said they were unwilling to have a person with a serious mental illness as a coworker or a neighbor. However, 69% favored requiring insurance companies to offer benefits for mental health and drug and alcohol abuse services that are equivalent to benefits for other medical services. Such equity was the core idea behind a federal parity law that took effect in 2010.

Fifty-nine percent of respondents supported increased government spending on mental health care, and 61% favored greater spending on such care as a strategy for reducing gun violence. (Support was substantially lower for spending on treatment for drug and alcohol abuse.) Finally, 58% viewed discrimination against people with mental illness as a serious problem, while 56% believed that, with treatment, these people could get well and return to productive lives. In most cases, respondents who had direct experience with mental illness personally or through a close relationship had more positive views about mental illness than those without direct experience.

Findings from these surveys indicate high support among Americans — including gun-owners, in many cases — for a range of policies aimed at reducing gun violence. Gun policies with the highest support included those related to persons with mental illness. The majority of Americans apparently also support increasing government spending on mental health treatment as a strategy for reducing gun violence. Given the data on public attitudes about persons with mental illness, it is worth thinking carefully about how to implement effective gun-violence–prevention measures without exacerbating stigma or discouraging people from seeking treatment.