Health Insurance Coverage and Health — What the Recent Evidence Tells Us
One question experts are commonly asked is how the ACA — or its repeal — will affect health and mortality. The body of evidence summarized here indicates that coverage expansions significantly increase patients’ access to care and use of preventive care, primary care, chronic illness treatment, medications, and surgery. These increases appear to produce significant, multifaceted, and nuanced benefits to health. Some benefits may manifest in earlier detection of disease, some in better medication adherence and management of chronic conditions, and some in the psychological well-being born of knowing one can afford care when one gets sick. Such modest but cumulative changes — which one of us has called “the heroism of incremental care”51 — may not occur for everyone and may not happen quickly. But the evidence suggests that they do occur, and that some of these changes will ultimately help tens of thousands of people live longer lives. Conversely, the data suggest that policies that reduce coverage will produce significant harms to health, particularly among people with lower incomes and chronic conditions.

Do these findings apply to the ACA? Drawing on evidence from recent coverage expansions is, in our view, the most reasonable way to estimate future effects of policy, but this sort of extrapolation is not an exact science. The ACA shares many features with prior expansions, in particular the Massachusetts reform on which it was modeled. But it is a complex law implemented in a highly contentious and uncertain policy environment, and its effects may have been limited by policies in some states that reduced take-up,52 Congress’s partial defunding of the provisions for stabilizing the ACA’s insurance marketplaces,53 and plan offerings with high patient cost sharing. Furthermore, every state’s Medicaid program has unique features, which makes direct comparisons difficult. Finally, coverage expansions and contractions will not necessarily produce mirror-image effects. For these reasons, no study can offer a precise prediction for the current policy debate. But our assessment, in short, is that these studies provide the best evidence we have for projecting the impact of the ACA or its repeal.

The many benefits of coverage, though, come at a real cost. Given the increases in most types of utilization, expanding coverage leads to an increase in societal resources devoted to health care.8 There are key policy questions about how to control costs, how much redistribution across socioeconomic groups is optimal, and how trade-offs among federal, state, local, and private spending should be managed. In none of these scenarios, however, is there evidence that covering more people in the United States will ultimately save society money.

Are the benefits of publicly subsidized coverage worth the cost? An analysis of mortality changes after Medicaid expansion suggests that expanding Medicaid saves lives at a societal cost of $327,000 to $867,000 per life saved.29 By comparison, other public policies that reduce mortality have been found to average $7.6 million per life saved, suggesting that expanding health insurance is a more cost-effective investment than many others we currently make in areas such as workplace safety and environmental protections.29,54 Factoring in enhanced well-being, mental health, and other outcomes would only further improve the cost–benefit ratio. But ultimately, policymakers and other stakeholders must decide how much they value these improvements in health, relative to other uses of public resources — from spending them on education and other social services to reducing taxes.

There remain many unanswered questions about U.S. health insurance policy, including how to best structure coverage to maximize health and value and how much public spending we want to devote to subsidizing coverage for people who cannot afford it. But whether enrollees benefit from that coverage is not one of the unanswered questions. Insurance coverage increases access to care and improves a wide range of health outcomes. Arguing that health insurance coverage doesn’t improve health is simply inconsistent with the evidence.