My Vision for Universal, Quality, Affordable Health Care
The editors invited the Democratic and Republican presidential nominees, Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump, to answer the following question for Journal readers: What specific changes in policy do you support to improve access to care, improve quality of care, and control health care costs for our nation? Secretary Clinton responded. Mr. Trump did not respond.

For my entire career, I’ve fought to provide more fairness for families and more opportunities for children, so that every child growing up in our country can reach his or her God-given potential. That’s why working to expand health care access for every American and improving the health and well-being of kids and families has been the most important cause of my life.

In the last two decades, we’ve made tremendous strides in reducing the number of uninsured people to the lowest level in history and improving health outcomes for all Americans. Because of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), 20 million more Americans have health insurance and more than 8 million kids receive health coverage each year as a result of the Children’s Health Insurance Program. As a result of the ACA, around 3 million African Americans and 4 million Hispanic Americans have gained coverage. What’s more, expanded consumer protections and access to free preventive services — like vaccinations and cancer screenings — mean all Americans now have stronger, better health coverage.

Despite this progress, we still have real challenges ahead. Americans face rising out-of-pocket costs and a health care system that is too fragmented. We need to make health coverage affordable so people can access the care they need. We need to do more to break down barriers and achieve health equity across our communities. We need to expand Medicaid in every state so that everyone has access to care, regardless of their income and where they reside. And we need to devote more resources to the necessary scientific research into the diseases of our time.

As President, I will fight for every American to have access to affordable, quality health care — regardless of their ZIP Code, income, or medical history. Health care should be a right, not a privilege.

To achieve this, I believe we need to accomplish four big goals.