Health Reform and Changes in Health Insurance Coverage in 2014
Analytic Approach

We used three approaches to test for associations between the ACA open-enrollment period and coverage changes, using the largest national daily poll on health issues, the Gallup–Healthways Well-Being Index (WBI). First, we assessed coverage changes in the fourth quarter of 2013 and the first two quarters of 2014, using multivariate regression to adjust for the preexisting trend and potential confounders such as employment, income, and demographic characteristics.

Second, we tested for differential effects in the subgroups most likely to gain insurance under the ACA. As noted above, the ACA affects all states; however, coverage gains should vary according to income and state decisions regarding Medicaid expansion. Newly available subsidized coverage under the ACA is targeted to low-income adults (≤138% of the federal poverty level) in states expanding Medicaid and middle-income adults (139 to 400% of the poverty level) in all states. Adults with income that is greater than 400% of the poverty level may experience changes due to the mandate, cancellations of previous plans,7 and other regulations, but these effects are likely to be smaller than for other groups.

Third, we tested for an association between survey-reported coverage changes and state-level marketplace and Medicaid enrollment statistics from the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). Although HHS enrollment reports capture data both on persons who were uninsured previously and on those who had coverage beforehand, if insurance changes are due to the ACA, these state statistics should be correlated with survey-reported coverage gains. Last, we tested for any changes in access to care using a similar multivariate approach.

Data Sources

The most widely cited estimates of the uninsured population come from surveys conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau and the National Center for Health Statistics, which feature nationally representative sampling and high response rates, with the use of mailed and in-person interviews. However, they feature a time lag ranging from 6 to 18 months. Thus, early estimates of the effects of ACA coverage must rely on other sources.

Our primary data set was the Gallup–Healthways WBI, purchased from Gallup, for January 1, 2012, through June 30, 2014. The WBI is a daily telephone survey that asks a national sample of adults questions about health insurance, access to care, and health status. Like other data sets analyzed to describe coverage changes in 2014, the WBI is a rapid-turnaround survey with a much lower response rate (11%, on the basis of Response Rate 3, as defined by the American Association for Public Opinion Research) than government-conducted surveys.8 Previous research validated WBI estimates of the uninsured rate, as compared with well-established government-conducted surveys, with year-to-year correlations (2008–2011) with the American Community Survey and Current Population Survey of 0.87 and 0.85, respectively, and state-level correlations of 0.95 and 0.89, respectively.8 Although the WBI has undergone some changes since 2011 — including a reduction in sample size — questions for the outcomes studied here (see the Supplementary Appendix, available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org) have not changed. Even after the sample-size reduction, the WBI still has by far the largest sample among these rapid-turnaround data sources (with approximately 30,000 nonelderly [<65 years of age] adults surveyed in each quarter, as compared with 2500 to 7500 adults in other surveys2,5,9).

We compared WBI survey data with HHS enrollment statistics for Medicaid and marketplace coverage in each state during the open-enrollment period. These statistics are based on administrative data collected by the federally facilitated marketplace and data submitted to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services by state-based marketplaces (see the Supplementary Appendix). We also used information on state decisions regarding Medicaid expansion as of January 2014.10

Statistical Analysis

The sample included adults 18 to 64 years of age. Our study period was January 1, 2012, through June 30, 2014. Our primary model did not include data from before 2012, because coverage was changing rapidly during this period for several million adults owing to the provision in the ACA enabling young adults to stay on their parents' insurance plans until 26 years of age. This means that our results do not capture effects of that provision, which has been well studied in previous research.11-16 Similarly, our analysis does not estimate coverage gains from early Medicaid expansions that began in 2010 and 2011, which were generally much more limited than the 2014 changes.17 Our sample excluded adults 65 years of age or older, who are overwhelmingly enrolled in Medicare and thus ineligible for the coverage expansion under the ACA. The sample included 420,449 adults.

The primary outcome was insurance status at the time of the survey (insured vs. uninsured), and the secondary outcomes were two measures of access to care — having a personal doctor and having difficulty paying for medical care in the past year. The WBI has been validated for these measures, but it less reliably distinguishes between different types of coverage (e.g., Medicaid vs. private insurance).8 We used multivariate regression to model the likelihood of each outcome over time. The primary analysis modeled a linear monthly time trend, with sensitivity analyses that either added a quadratic time trend or did not include a time trend. We created binary variables for the beginning of the open-enrollment period (fourth quarter of 2013), for the beginning of the new coverage options (first quarter of 2014), and for the first full quarter after open enrollment (second quarter of 2014).

These variables measured any change in outcome at that point in time as compared with the baseline trend (before October 2013). Some previous analyses have focused on changes in coverage comparing the fourth quarter of 2013 with the first quarter of 2014,3 which may underestimate the effect of the ACA, since some people applying in the fall of 2013 were probably already eligible for Medicaid and were enrolled as a result of greater awareness regarding coverage options under the ACA.

All models (see the Supplementary Appendix) were adjusted for demographic and economic covariates: age, race, ethnic group, sex, household income, employment status, and state of residence. We also analyzed results for subgroups based on age, sex, and race or ethnic group.

We conducted a stratified analysis that was based on household income level and state decisions regarding Medicaid expansion. Gallup asks respondents to report household income in categories ranging from $0 to $10,000 per month and does not impute missing values. To convert income information and household size into a percentage of the federal poverty level, we used the midpoint of each income range and imputed missing values using a multivariate regression model, as in prior research (see the Supplementary Appendix).8 We then analyzed distinct income groups in states that were expanding Medicaid versus in states that were not: up to 138% of the federal poverty level (eligible for Medicaid in states with Medicaid expansion), 139 to 400% of the poverty level (eligible for tax credits in all states), and more than 400% of the poverty level (not eligible for subsidized coverage). We also compared the effect of state decisions regarding Medicaid expansion using a differences-in-differences analysis for low-income adults in states with Medicaid expansion versus those in states without Medicaid expansion.

We then compared survey-based coverage changes with enrollment reports from the HHS,18 dividing the total enrollment in each state by the size of its nonelderly population. This HHS enrollment variable captured the approximate percentage of the state population that signed up for ACA-related coverage through the marketplaces by the end of March 2014. We used the same regression approach as above, with the addition of an interaction term between the second quarter of 2014 and the HHS enrollment variable. This measured the relationship between the changes in the uninsured rate in the second quarter of 2014 and the per capita HHS enrollment statistics in each state. This analysis used robust standard errors clustered at the state level.

For ease of interpretation, we expressed our results as adjusted changes in the probability of each outcome, on the basis of linear probability models. Logistic-regression models — with results converted to predicted probabilities — produced nearly identical results.

This project was exempt from review by an institutional review board under federal regulations since it used deidentified secondary data. Analyses were conducted with the use of Stata software, version 12.0 (StataCorp), to account for the stratified survey design. Estimates were calculated with the use of nationally representative survey weights from Gallup, which were based on national targets according to age, sex, race or ethnic group, educational level, geographic region, and telephone status (see the Supplementary Appendix).