Las Vegas Shooting Witnesses Report Multiple Gunmen Dressed as Security Guards

Eyewitnesses say 'lone wolf' gunman story is a lie

© Neon Nettle/Facebook Eyewitness Brian Hodge saw multiple gunmen during the Las Vegas shooting

As the mainstream media in the US attempts to lock down the "crazy lone wolf gunman" narrative for the devastating shooting attack in Las Vegas, the truth has started to seep through foreign news outlets who don't follow the same political agenda as the American MSM. Australian citizens who witnessed the attacks have given their eyewitness accounts to the press in their native countries, and their statements differ greatly from the stories being peddled in the United States. One key witness is a man named Brian Hodge from Australia who was staying in the room right next door to the alleged shooter. Hodge was closer to the origins of the assault than any other person on that day and says that the entire floor he was staying on was a "crime scene" with "multiple shooters" firing weapons out of the windows. Mr. Hodge also confirmed that law enforcement was aware of more than one shooter as he saw them shoot and kill one of the gunmen, who was dressed as a security guard, in the corridor outside of his hotel room. Other witnesses from Australia also reported seeing other gunmen dressed as security guards being chased by police. These eyewitness statements completely conflict with the story that "lone wolf" shooter Stephen Paddock acted alone.

Speaking to the Courier Mail, Brian Hodge said he managed to escape the initial horrific scenes inside the hotel but found himself forced to hide in a bush for several hours after the event. “I got outside safely and was hiding in bushes,” Mr. Hodge said. “There were multiple people dead and multiple shooters. "I was just hiding waiting for police to come get us." “We were hiding in the bushes outside waiting for the police.” Mr. Hodge said he was staying in room 32134 while the gunman was in room 32135. “It was a machine gun from the room next to me,” he said. “My floor is a crime scene. They killed a security guard on my floor.” Mr. Hodge reported that one gunman was in the room next to his, but other gunmen were also operating on the same floor. This account seems to explain the images taken from outside the Mandalay Bay Hotel, where the gunfire came from, that clearly shows two smashed windows from two different hotel rooms on the same floor. READ MORE: False Flag: Las Vegas Shooter Who Killed 50 People 'Wasn't Alone' The mainstream media claims that Paddock was using multiple hotel rooms to shoot from, but why would they ignore the statements from eyewitnesses who saw multiple gunmen operating on the same floor? Why is the MSM so keen to push the "crazy gun-owner" narrative on the public..? Aside from the witness statement that completely scratches the lone-gunman theory, multiple reports have also emerged from outside the hotel that gunfire was coming from more than one floor of the hotel. Social media has been flooded with video uploads filmed by witnesses that show gunshots emanating from a 4th-floor window as well as two 32nd floor windows. SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO Videos of the 4th-floor shooter are being taken down by Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube as quickly as they are being uploaded, but why is evidence of the additional attackers being so desperately covered-up?

© press Two different hotel rooms were used by gunmen on the same floor

Another Australian witness says she and her husband were sat in the bar of the Luxor Hotel when they saw a heavily armed man dressed as security guard ran through the hotel being chased by the hotel's real security team. Speaking to Australian news outlet Courier Mail, Wendy Miller from Cooroy, on the Sunshine Coast, described the moment she was caught up on the attack when the "man of interest" ran past her. “We managed to make our way back to our room…” she told The Courier Mail. “We are in lockdown. “Our door is deadlocked and a chair against the door.” Ms. Miller said the man sprinted through her hotel after coming off an escalator from the Mandalay Bay. “The man that they [security] were chasing was wearing a security jacket like them,” she said. Of course, there's no mention of any of these events in the corporate owned mainstream media in the US. Why would this clear evidence, that points to a team of operatives carrying out a carefully planned attack, be completely ignored? READ MORE: Las Vegas False Flag: FBI Confirms Shooter Was an Antifa Member The MSM is focused on convincing the public that the devastation was caused by a crazy lone gunman and that the only answer is to change the United States Constitution. If the mainstream news was meant to truthfully report events to the people, then this information would be all over every television set in America, but it isn't. The "news" is nothing more than a propaganda tool used by the political elite to push an agenda onto the masses. This is another perfect example of "problem, reaction, solution". Problem: "Crazy gun-owner" has too many right and ends up shooting hundreds of people in a horric masacre. Reaction: The MSM reports the "official narrative" leaving the public angry and demanding a solution. Solution: Take away the rights of American people in the name of "safetly". A quick look at the "real news" on TV or a search on Google's heavily censored news feed and you can see this already being played out in the media. Only hours after the attack, Hillary Clinton has already called for a change in gun law demanding people "stand up to the NRA" to "stop this from happening again". Whether you are for or against gun laws in America, one thing the people must always hold precious is the United States Constitution. Once the oligarchs get their sticky fingers all over those sacred amendments, the American people can kiss goodbye to their civil liberties forever.