Seattle Police Begin Taking Citizens Guns Away, No Warrants or Charges

Fears that tyranny has finally landed in America are now rife.

© press The man's arrest set a dark precedent that the government can now

Seattle police are confiscating citizens guns without any charges, warrants or laws broken after a report that a man had his firearm taken by authorities without pressing any charges.

Has tyranny finally landed in America?

The man's arrest set a dark precedent that the government can now "forcefully take guns away" without any sort of crime being committed or warrant being issued - a complete violation of the 2nd amendment.

The mainstream media has pushed it's 'anti-gun' narrative with the likes of poster boy David Hogg, a fear-based rhetoric seemingly designed to sway the public to agree to be disarmed without any law protocol.

© press A new law has taken hold in other states that allowed courts and law enforcement to remove guns from individuals

The red flag: A new law has taken hold in other states that allowed courts and law enforcement to remove guns from individuals that are "deemed dangerous."

On man living in the Belltown neighborhood of Seattle, Washington has officially become the first citizen to have his gun confiscated without any arrest, charges or warrant.

David French, a conservative writer at National Review, has said the the the concept of Gun Violence Restraining Orders (GVROs) “empowers a person in a close relationship with a gun-owner to seek a court order that allows police to temporarily seize guns when there is evidence that the gun-owner is a danger to himself or others.”

© press A Seattle-King County law enforcement task force has an effective new approach to enforcing protection orders

But the law enforcement officers coming for the guns of Washington citizens is legitimate and legal, apparently:

A Seattle-King County law enforcement task force has an effective new approach to enforcing protection orders that call for taking guns away from domestic abusers and others.

The team is covering entirely new ground, helping people feel comfortable temporarily surrendering their weapons. These highly skilled police officers and sheriff’s deputies have managed to keep their interactions with these gun owners calm and professional. In addition, the team also can obtain search warrants or take legal action when someone claims they do not have a gun in contrast with information the victim has presented to the court or the team has discovered. The task force also has opened up a new online resource page to help Washingtonians learn about protection orders and more easily obtain one: http://protectionorder.org Most people don’t know that they can work through the courts to get weapons out of the hands of family members who have threatened them or from friends who have expressed thoughts of suicide. Nor are they aware that state law requires people served

© press Seattle police are confiscating citizens guns without any charges, warrants

Zerohedge reports: Neighbors complained that the man had been “staring” at people through storefront windows while wearing a holstered firearm.

He was not brandishing his weapon by any account, and open carrying is legal in the area, so he was abiding by the law. Other residents also complained that the man’s open carrying made them feel “uncomfortable” and “unsafe.”

“He was roaming the hallways with a .25 caliber automatic,” said Tony Montana, a man who lives in the same apartment complex as the gun owner and a person without any reasonable gun knowledge. Handguns are semi-automatic.

These lousy complaints from neighbors allowed police to use the newly passed state law to confiscate the man’s firearm because the man apparently stared at others. Maybe there’s a ban on staring at others in Washington we are unaware of. Under the extreme risk protection orders — also referred to as “erpos” or “red flag laws” — police (government officials) are now allowed to violate a person’s Second and Fourth Amendment rights (which are basic fundamental human rights) and take their legally acquired personal property if they are tattled on by offended liberals.