Pope Francis: Gun Owners 'Can’t Call Themselves Christian' Anymore

Head of Catholic Church says those who own weapons are 'hypocrites,' not Christians

© press Pope Francis says gun owners 'can't call themselves Christians'

As pressure mounts to tear up the US Constitution once and for all, Pope Francis has added to the sentiment by declaring that gun owners can no longer call themselves Christian.

Pope Francis continued his week of anti-gun comments on Sunday by saying that those who manufacture, sell or own firearms are "hypocrites," and not Christians.

The head of the Catholic Church said when people claim to follow the teachings of Christ but also support gun ownership, it "leads to a bit of distrust."

Francis's criticism wasn't limited to just owners, however, as also called out those who support citizens' rights to bear arms, adding:

"Duplicity is the currency of today… they say one thing and do another."

Speaking about the written words in the US Constitution that give people the right to own guns, Francis, real name Jorge Mario Bergoglio, said citizens should listen to the word of God, not men, saying:

“If you trust only men you have lost.”

© press A growing number of citizens are calling for guns to be banned

'Ban all weapons'

These latest comments follow the pope's recent statement in which he called for all guns to be banned, except for those used by United Nations troops.

The Pontiff asserted a globalist message of banning firearms in order for humanity to enter into a "new world unity."

In the past, other religious leaders had called for a ban on certain types of weapons including nuclear weapons.

But Francis has gone one step further and called for an outright ban on ALL weapons.

Do we really want peace? Then let’s ban all weapons so we don’t have to live in fear of war. — Pope Francis (@Pontifex) April 29, 2018

© press Many anti-gun protestors blame President Trump for gun violence

Pope Francis also said on his recent visit to Chile that he was very afraid that the world is now standing at the “the very limit" of a nuclear World War Three.

The head of the Vatican expressed worry that the human race is just one step away from a devasting nuclear war which could affect everyone on the planet.



His answer is that all countries should disarm all their nuclear weapons.