Nevada NewsMakers
Ray Hagar

News and commentary from Nevada's Ray Hagar.

More Stories from Ray

Latest Articles:

Harry Reid defends his funding for UFO research, convinced sightings are real

News - June 26, 2019

"It is no longer just speculation that people see these unidentified flying objects. That's beyond question. And it has even become more transparent in recent months."

Las Vegas cannabis CEO critical of proposed state rules on marijuana consumption lounges

News - May 22, 2019

"It is a significant issue, especially in southern Nevada. The vast majority of our customers at Planet 13 are tourists and they are here visiting. Under current regulations, they are permitted to buy (marijuana) product but there is no legal venue for them to use product. It is an issue that we all recognized and an issue that needs to be resolved."

Senate Democrats won't get that one critical GOP vote to hold off legal battle over state budget, Settelmeyer says

News - May 22, 2019

"So far the only thing they've asked the Republicans to do is to violate the Constitution. All they want is one critical vote to violate the Constitution, that's it. And in my opinion, they are not going to get it."

Feds must step in to fix U.S. problem with soaring prescription drug costs, Cancela says

News - May 20, 2019

"Until there is a significant overhaul of the entire drug pricing system in the U.S., it will still be true that when we go to Canada or Mexico or anywhere else on the globe, drug costs are lower. That doesn't make sense for patients. It is just wrong. Just wrong."

Raising gaming tax not discussed for boosting education funding, Senate Majority Leader says

News - May 17, 2019

"I don't know if we have had those specific conversations. Like I said, the primary thing that we have focused on is ensuring the marijuana tax money, which we need for education, went to education."

New Nevada school funding plan does not include new money, may be harmful to rurals, head of teachers' union says

News - May 8, 2019

"The rural counties are really in a precarious position, based on revenues. if there are not any additional increases in revenues, it is going to be a challenge for our rural school districts to continue to be able to pay their teachers and provide programs."

Yeager leads quest at Legislature to overhaul Nevada's criminal justice system

News - May 3, 2019

"For too long in this state, it has been a punitive system. You commit a crime, we are going to lock you up and then we act surprised when you get out and you re-offend."

Tolles wants Legislature to take 'holistic approach' to minimum-wage debate

News - May 2, 2019

"I appreciate where people are coming from ... because they are trying to address the needs of the vulnerable and provide more of a living wage. So as conservatives, we need to have a response to that. How do we get underemployed adults into work force development programs, educational programs, get them up skilled? We have to face the reality that more and more jobs are being automated."

Supreme Court Justice Hardesty all in with Legislature's overhaul of criminal justice system

News - April 24, 2019

"The biggest reform I think, is effectuating some changes in some of the Category B Felonies. What drives the prison population is the length of time some people are in there and the inability for any kind of rehabilitative service. We need to be able to address these more on the front end."

Nevada Legislature's issues with legal brothels not dead yet, brothel owner Gilman says

News - April 19, 2019

"There have been over 4,000 work cards issued in Mustang Ranch history, in my two decades there. And most of those ladies are in (the business) three-to-five years and out. And the majority will tell you that it is a safe, wonderful and rewarding experience. But you have to talk to the ladies to really understand that."

RSS Feed More From Ray Hagar