Sen. John Thrasher to chair Gov. Rick Scott's re-election campaign
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. -

Gov. Rick Scott has announced some of the key members for his upcoming re-election campaign committee.



Friday morning, Scott named State Sen. John Thrasher, R-Augustine, as chairman of his re-election campaign; Mike Fernandez and Darlene Jordan as finance co-chairs; and the hiring of Melissa Sellers as campaign manager, Tim Saler as deputy campaign manager and Matt Moon as communications director.

"I want to thank Sen. Thrasher for agreeing to be chairman of my re-election campaign," Scott said. "He has been a trusted adviser throughout my first term, and will be a key supporter in my campaign for a second term."

Thrasher currently represents State Senate District 6, which is comprised of St. Johns, Putnam and Flagler counties as well as part of Volusia County. Thrasher has served as chairman of the Republican Party of Florida was co-chairman of Mitt Romney’s Florida campaign in 2012.

Thrasher was first elected to the state Senate in 2009. Thrasher also served in the state House of Representatives from 1992 to 2000, and was elected by as Speaker of the House for his last term.

"I also want to thank my close friends, Mike Fernandez and Darlene Jordan, for leading the effort in gathering the resources necessary for a successful re-election," Gov Scott said.

"We've made much progress over the past three years, but there is so much more to be done, and I will keep my eyes focused on Florida's future. This campaign will be about how we continue and even accelerate job creation so that every Floridian has the opportunity to prosper."

Melissa Sellers, who will be the campaign manager for Scott, was most recently communications director for the governor's office

She has also served as director of regional media for the Republican National Convention in Tampa and as communications director for Bobby Jindal, R-La., during his campaign for governor in 2007 and his first term in office.

"I have full confidence in Melissa leading this campaign; she will do an excellent job. I'm also proud to have two enormously talented individuals in Tim and Matt joining my team. I'm confident they will effectively communicate my vision for an opportunity economy in the Sunshine State "