Robert Redford Says: Michelle And Barack Obama Should Get Five Years In Prison
athy Griffin went off the rails again in another classless display that shows why her career as a comedian hasn’t been as successful as other well-known people much more successful than her.

This time Griffin made repulsive comments that have people wondering if she has transitioned to the other gender while she’s been quietly hiding in the backend of the spotlight. In other words, she once again made remarks that would go viral, putting her back in the spotlight, but it’s in such a negative way that most people had to shake their heads and say “eeeeewwwwwww” right after what she said to the Deputy White House Press Secretary Hogan Gidley.

Gidley and Griffin were at the same event and Gidley was passing by the table she was sitting at. Griffin snapped at him by asking how he sleeps at night. Gidley replied that he sleeps well and said thanks. Then it seems like she said something else, and he asked if they were going to go at it right there on the spot, and that’s when Griffin went into the full nasty mode and talked with a repulsive next few words that had people questioning her behavior and gender at the same time.

Here’s what happened in full detail courtesy of the Washington Blade: “The event is a celebration of the First Amendment. As a longtime LGBT rights advocate, a comedian and provocateur, Griffin has made a long and successful career out of exercising her First Amendment right to free speech. The stunt last year in which she posed with a mock severed head of Donald Trump — which needlessly led CNN to fire her from a longstanding New Year’s Eve hosting gig with Anderson Cooper — was a textbook case of satire, which is constitutionally protected speech.

Thus, the decision to invite Griffin proved an easy and obvious one. (We also invited Stormy Daniels, but her attorney, Michael Avenatti, told me without irony that it would be too much of a “sideshow” for her to attend.)

Trending: Sarah Sanders Just Revealed What She Asked God For After Being Publicly Humiliated At WH Dinner

Griffin didn’t disappoint, bringing her quick wit and fearless, LGBT-centric sense of humor to the dinner table. I met her and her boyfriend, Randy Bick, on the red carpet and held her purse as she posed for photographers and granted a series of TV interviews. Inside the heavy purse was a stapler; it turns out she suffered a last-minute wardrobe malfunction leaving the hotel, breaking a strap on her gown. After it was repaired, she feared a repeat and asked to borrow the stapler, just in case.

She proved a good sport throughout the night, posing for an endless stream of selfies with (mostly gay) fans who congratulated her on surviving the Trump machine’s attacks in the aftermath of the photo scandal. When asked how her famous mom Maggie is at age 96, Griffin replied, “drunk.”

The only awkward moment came when Deputy White House Press Secretary Hogan Gidley tried to squeeze past our table. Griffin stopped him and said, “How do you sleep at night?” Gidley replied, “Very well, thank you.” When Griffin expressed doubt about that, Gidley asked, “Are we really going to do this?”

That’s when things got interesting. Griffin, in her trademark style, retorted, “Yes we are, suck my d-ck! No, really, suck my d-ck!”

There was some back-and-forth, then Gidley, who was holding a Tecate, announced he was off to enjoy his Mexican beer “before we build the wall and you can’t get these anymore.” That prompted a farewell “f-ck you” from Griffin, triggering nervous laughter around our table.”

It sure sounds like they had a fun time exchanging comments before Kathy Griffin took it to the levels of a unprofessionalism, acting exactly like the person who couldn’t hold a job with the Squatty Potty.

Even though she claims to be a comedian, there’s still a level of professionalism that people should exude when they’re not on stage. Griffin has been unable to differentiate that and consistently confuses real life for her stage life (or lack thereof).

Griffin might have some fans, but she’s constantly finding ways to lose them with her inability to act decently in public and her outrageous attempts to place herself in the spotlight.

She’s in the spotlight again, but it’s not the type of spotlight a celebrity should want to be in since this doesn’t seem to be a way to gain new fans.

After her generic low-brow comments, some people might jokingly question if Kathy Griffin is a man. Nowadays, you just can’t tell anymore!

How do you feel about Kathy Griffin’s remarks? Share your opinion and then post this on your Facebook page so other people can join the conversation.