Couple charged with odometer tampering at car dealership
A couple who ran a local car dealership have been arrested after investigators allegedly discovered that 19 cars sold on their lot showed signs of odometer fraud, according to the Florida Highway Patrol.

PANAMA CITY BEACH — A couple who ran a local car dealership have been arrested after investigators allegedly discovered that 19 cars sold on their lot showed signs of odometer fraud, according to the Florida Highway Patrol.

Jennifer Nicole Warren, 32, and Barry Wayne Wooten, 42, were arrested Monday on 19 third-degree felony counts of tampering with a vehicle’s odometer, the FHP reported.

In many of the cases, FHP investigators found odometers had been reduce by more than 100,000 miles before they were sold from Moto Import Distribution LLC at 7513-B Holley Circle, to unwitting consumers, according to the couple’s arrest reports.

Warren and Wooten, both of Cummings, Ga., have been released on a pretrial release program, according to court documents.

Attempts to contact them Tuesday were unsuccessful.

Moto Import has had its business license revoked, according to the state Department of Motor Vehicles.

Customers of Moto Import are calling for retribution from hardships suffered because of their purchase.

“I think the guy is a crook,” said Noel Cozart, a disabled retiree who bought a 1993 Ford pickup at Moto Import. Since then, the transmission has gone out on the truck, which he was under the impression had 128,000 miles on it when he paid $2,000. Its actual mileage was listed at 277,873, according to FHP records.

“I told (Wooten) that I was buying it for the mileage,” Cozart added. “He definitely deserves to be arrested, and I think the judge should make them pay restitution.”

Several Moto Import customers have begun to see defaults in their purchases. Marilyn Szenay, who bought a truck with a mileage of 91,360 on the odometer that was actually at 351,232 miles, said her family recently noticed strange noises.

“I guess it would make you suspicious, but I thought, ‘My gosh, they get so many of them at auction for such a good deal,’ ” Szenay said. “If I would’ve known that it had 350-some-odd-thousand-mile on it, we wouldn’t have bought it. We’re hard-working people and $5,000 is a lot to get duped out of.”

According to FHP reports, the investigation began in April when officers met with the owners of a 2002 BMW 325i at a repair shop.

The owner said when mechanics ran a computer analysis on the vehicle they found that the “cluster,” which is the odometer, had been replaced and displayed a different vehicle identification number (VIN) than the vehicle.

The mileage displayed on the new cluster was 85,551 while a bill of sale on the car stated it had 204,003 miles on it at the time it was sold at auction to Wooten, FHP reported.

FHP and the Bureau of Criminal Investigation and Intelligence conducted an inspection at Moto Import in June and allegedly found 50 vehicle clusters in the garage from various makes and models of cars, officers reported.

“This is a normal practice for operations that alter or replace clusters in vehicles for the purpose of committing odometer fraud by lowering the displayed mileage of vehicles without disclosing the change to customers,” officers wrote.

At the time of the inspection, officers allegedly also found two vehicles for sale on the lot. Both allegedly had a discrepancy of more than 100,000 miles between the displayed mileage and recorded odometer readings at the time of sale at auction.

However, when authorities returned days later with a signed search warrant, Moto Import had been cleared out of the clusters on its shelves, FHP reported.

Authorities seized records from the company that indicated 45 cars had been sold since January 2015. Of those, the FHP was able to contact 19 people, and each said their cars currently had lower mileage than records indicated were on the odometers at the time Warren and Wooten purchased them, FHP reported.

In a recorded interview, Warren and Wooten said they would go to auctions throughout the state and look for vehicles with broken gauges on the clusters, FHP reported. They said they were unaware of the law, which states that if one tampers with an odometer it must be reset to zero.

According to state records, Moto Import has been in business since 2008. It is unclear how many cars have passed since then.

In 2015, the difference between the actual value of the vehicle and the sale price totaled $13,333, according to FHP reports.