Parents concerned about cuts to Head Start
Under the federal "sequester" cuts that took effect March 1, officials with Head Start programs across the country were directed to cut 5 percent from their budgets.

HOLLY HILL — Cory Causey supports her three children by working as a grocery store cashier during the day and cleaning houses at night.

If her 5-year-old son, Aidan, didn't have access to the free federally funded preschool program, Head Start, the single mom said she isn't sure how she would support her family.

"I wouldn't be able to work," the Holly Hill resident said. "Day care is way too expensive. I would basically be working just to pay for child care."

She is among the low-income families concerned about the impact of federal budget cuts mandated by Congress as part of the sequester deal.

Under the cuts that took effect March 1, officials with Head Start programs across the country were directed to cut 5 percent from their budgets. Those cuts have forced many programs to close early, drop children from the program or lay off teachers.

Locally, one Head Start program in Seville has notified parents it will close two weeks early.

Other programs are cutting employee benefits, instead. Heidi Rand, director of Head Start programs in Volusia, Sumter and Hernando counties, said that will allow her to keep all 977 children enrolled in the three counties' programs — for now.

Mid-Florida Community Services, the nonprofit that administers her funding, must cut $454,296 from its budget of $9 million by Sept. 30.

In response, the agency decided to end retirement fund contributions for its 225 employees. Head Start has also halted new enrollment, reduced contracted cleaning services and shaved an hour off each teacher's workweek.

"We are already halfway through the school year, so we don't want to be cutting children at this point," Rand said. "Kicking children out of the program doesn't save me a lot of money. We've already screened them and put them through the enrollment process. The only thing I have left (to cut) is the cost of staff members."

Head Start works to ensure school readiness of low-income children by offering a wide range of services.

"We provide services not just for the child but for the whole family," Rand said. "We have oral health specialists, nutrition specialists, mental health counselors and behavioral therapists. We also have family advocates who will help a mom get her GED or if a family is evicted will help find them a new home."



STUDY QUESTIONS EFFECTIVENESS



But one federal study found Head Start services don't always produce academic gains in the children it serves.

A U.S. Department of Health and Human Services study last year compared the progress of children who received Head Start services and those who did not. The study tracked the preschoolers over the course of six years.

Children who attended Head Start demonstrated gains in some areas, but ultimately there were few differences between the two groups by the time the children finished third grade, according to the study.

The findings of that study signal that Head Start needs to be reformed, but that doesn't necessarily mean the program should lose funding, said Grover "Russ" Whitehurst, director of the Brown Center on Education Policy at The Brookings Institution, a think-tank based in Washington, D.C.

"Disruptions like that are bad for kids and parents," Whitehurst said Tuesday about the cuts to programs. "You can say that it's a bad idea to cut five percent without endorsing the current system as the best one to provide services."

Whitehurst suggested that federal funds could be better spent by allowing states to design their own preschool programs or by subsidizing the cost of private preschool programs for low-income parents.

Despite the study's findings, Joyce Drinkwater, a family advocate at the Holly Hill Head Start development center, said she sees the impact she's making on families and children every day. She and other family advocates help clients find jobs, housing and educational opportunities.

"In 1968, I started off as a protective services investigator," Drinkwater said. "I've seen everything. My biggest concern was that the cycle of poverty was never being broken. But this was the first time where I have seen where these families have opportunity."



SEVILLE CENTER CLOSING EARLY



Last week, parents of 41 children at the Head Start development center in Seville learned the center would close two weeks early, due to the federal budget cuts. The center receives funding from the Redlands Christian Migrant Association, which provides Head Start grants to 21 counties in Florida.

The nonprofit must trim $1.6 million from its $32.3 million budget before Sept. 30. The organization said it would not make any changes to its Head Start program in Bunnell.

The early closure has put many seasonal workers from Seville's fern industry in a child-care predicament, said the center's coordinator, Maria Villegas.

"Some will leave the children with older siblings," Villegas wrote in an email. "Really they're not old enough, like 14 years old. That concerns us. Some (parents) won't go to work."

Currently, 425 children are on the waiting list for Head Start programs administered by Mid-Florida Community Services. To qualify, parents must meet federal poverty guidelines and enrollment priority is given to children who meet additional risk factors, such as homelessness or being placed in foster care.

If Congress extends the cuts into fiscal year 2014, which starts Oct.1, Rand said her Head Start programs would likely remove 50 slots from its program and cut about four staff positions. Instead of kicking children out of the program, however, Rand said she would keep open the positions left by children who graduate to kindergarten.

Parents who rely on Head Start say the program has been invaluable.

Kelly Muhammad drops her 5-year-old son off each day at the Holly Hill center before heading to Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University where she is earning a degree in aerospace and occupational therapy. Muhammad and her family of five are surviving on her husband's income while she works on her degree.

"Without Head Start, I'd be unable to further my education," she said.