Phoenix gets county water contract
PANAMA CITY — Phoenix Construction of Lynn Haven has been awarded the design-build contract for Bay County’s secondary water source project, even though it wasn’t in the running for the project a month ago.

The project is estimated to cost $25 million.

During its meeting Tuesday, the County Commission heard presentations from the five firms competing for the contract, and the commissioners subsequently ranked each of the firms, with Phoenixscoring highest.

CPH/Western Summit Team of Panama City was second highest and will serve as first alternate if the county can’t come to terms on the contract with Phoenix.

A few weeks back, Phoenix had been knocked out of the running after the commission asked its staff to score the firms and eliminate the two low scorers. Phoenix ranked fourth after the scoring, earning a 66. The top-ranked firm, Brasfield & Gorrie LLC of Lake Mary, received an 84.

At its May 7 meeting, Commissioner Mike Nelson said he wanted to get a better understanding of how the project would be financed. He also said he wanted to expand the list of firms. Chairman George Gainer and Commissioner Guy Tunnell agreed.

On Tuesday all three of those commissioners named Phoenix as their first choice for the project.

In an interview after the meeting, Nelson said he liked that Phoenix offered the county a five-year “bumper-to-bumper” warranty on the project as opposed to just one year.

Still, Nelson said the firms were pretty similar. He said staff’s analysis of the firms “weighed” into his decision, but he thought all of the firms were capable of getting the job done.

“When all was said and done, I thought they were all pretty equal,” he said.

Nelson also said he didn’t think that the process was sidestepped by adding Phoenixafter it had been removed.

“I just don’t think so. … I don’t think it was circumvented. I don’t think that at all,” he said.

The county has only one potable water source, currently tapping into the southern part of Deer Point Lake. That location makes it susceptible to saltwater intrusion caused by hurricane storm surge.

The new project would put a pumping station at the northern end of the lake, which would alleviate concerns about saltwater intrusion.

Dozier not happy

After the meeting, Commissioner Bill Dozier was not happy with how the firm-selection process went down and who was chosen. His pick was Garney Companies of Winter Garden, which had received the second highest staff scoring, at 82. Commissioner Mike Thomas also ranked Garney No. 1.

“Based on the information given to me and their presentation, I thought that they would be best suited for the job,” Dozier said.

Dozier said he didn’t think it was “appropriate” that Phoenix was added back in right before the top three firms were slated to make presentations at the May 7 meeting.

“I thought that we should have stayed (with) the course that we were on,” he said.

But, Dozier is confident Phoenixcan do the work.

“I’m sure that the firm that was picked will do a good job. Our staff will hold their feet to the fire and follow through. I’m sure that they will produce a quality product,” he said.

Mark Kelly, a vice president at Garney, was disgusted by the commission’s decision.

“I’m very disappointed and confused. It’s a sad day for Bay County taxpayers and county staff,” he said in an interview after the meeting.

Kelly added: “When you evaluate the rankings that the qualified staff members made, and then you look at the scoring of the commissioners, it does bring into question the process.”

Funding

During the meeting, Clerk of Court Bill Kinsaul confirmed the Wholesale Water System fund, which will supply the cash for the project, is healthy and capable of bearing the cost of the project.

Tunnell had been concerned about the project’s funding and Tuesday’s vote fully committing the county to the $25 million project. He said last week he wanted to split the project into a separate design and a separate build phases.

But, Tunnell got assurances at Tuesday’s meeting the project would be rolled out in phases. A contract must be reached and the commission will likely vote to approve it, Tunnell said in an interview after the meeting.

That means the county can work with Phoenix to get the design and contract terms it wants and the commission would have a chance to halt the project if it saw any potential problems.

But, Tunnell admitted, once the contract is signed, the county is legally tied to a project estimated to cost $25 million.

Tunnell also said he wasn’t bothered by Phoenix being added back in late. He dismissed the idea that any work-around had been done to expand the list of competing firms to include Phoenix.

“My job as a county commissioner … is to do what I think is right for the county, and I think I’ve done that in this case,” he said. “I’m fully confident that we have done that.”

Phoenix’s owner, James Finch, was pleased his company got the contract because he said the company needs it.

“We’ve got less work now than we’ve had in the last 30 years,” he said.

Finch said company does no private jobs, only government work and things have been slow. He thought it was reflection on the economy.

Finch said his company specializes in pumping stations, so the project is a good fit. He said he made some concessions in his proposal to get the project, but didn’t foresee any problems in reaching contract terms with the county.

“I felt like we were the most qualified. We just needed the chance to show it,” he said.