Greitens, Koster take heat over treatment of women in competing St. Louis-area rallies
Buy Photo Eric Greitens, left, and Chris Koster (Photo: News-Leader file photos)Buy Photo

Two competing political events in St. Louis County on Thursday took shots at Missouri gubernatorial candidates Attorney General Chris Koster and Eric Greitens, who were each accused of behavior detrimental to women.

Supporters of Greitens, a Republican, Navy SEAL and author, gathered at the Brentwood Community Center to chastise Koster, a Democrat, for a vote on a bill in 2007, when he was a state senator.

Koster was one of four state senators to vote against House Bill 583, which changed laws pertaining to domestic violence and sexual assault victims. Among other provisions, the bill required the state to pay for sexual assault kits and made repeat first-degree domestic assault a Class A felony.

In a news release, the Greitens campaign said "Koster failed to stand up for victims of sexual abuse" by forcing them to pay for their own rape kits and also attacked Koster on the grounds that the bill he voted against included a provision to protect rape victims privacy

Koster campaign spokesman David Turner defended his candidate in a statement.

"Once again, Eric Greitens shows his lack of understanding of Missouri’s criminal justice system," Turner said. "The idea Attorney General Koster wants rape victims to pay for their own rape kits is beyond ludicrous."

Turner noted that the bill contained a provision allowing prison inmates convicted of killing a spouse or partner to be granted parole if they had been imprisoned for 15 years, which "could allow convicted murderers whose trials occurred decades earlier to get out of prison, based on potentially manufactured evidence. (Koster) couldn't support that and for that reason opposed the bill.”

Greitens' campaign also claimed Thursday that "Koster took dirty money from sex trafficking lobbyists" when he accepted $12,000 from SNR Denton, a legal firm that represented Backpage.com — a website for classified ads that was accused of enabling sex trafficking and sexual abuse against children.

After a merger, SNR Denton became part of Dentons, one of the largest law firms in the world. Democrats pointed out that the firm sponsored a 2013 banquet for nonprofit The Mission Continues, which Greitens founded in 2007.

Greitens campaign manager Austin Chambers said he was aware that the firm the campaign tied to Koster for taking "dirty money" had also sponsored one of his candidate's events.

"The Mission Continues is a charity that helps our nation's veterans," Chambers said. "It is not a career-politician taking donations from lobbyists and then going silent on a matter important to the lobbyists. Efforts to conflate the two show why the public don't trust career politicians or the media."

The Greitens camp said Koster was "silent" about alleged wrongdoing by Backpage.com after receiving money from SNR Denton in 2011.

That depends on your definition of silence.

Koster was the top signatory on a letter to members of Congress in 2013 calling for a change in federal law to allow prosecution of "those who promote prostitution and endanger our children."

Chambers said he thought it was fair to call the letter "silence."

"That's the problem with career-politicians like Chris Koster," Chambers said. "They think sending a letter and a press release counts for doing something."

The other event in Brentwood was a press conference organized by the Missouri Democratic Party and featured rape victims speaking out against the conduct of two men associated with Greitens' campaign, party spokeswoman Kristin Sosanie said in an email.

"Greitens has no problem with these people being associated with his campaign, and that indicates what kind of administration he would run," Sosanie said. "So today, rape survivors and women’s advocates stood up to call on Greitens to take down the ad and to stop defending and elevating those who perpetuate sexual abuse and rape culture."

Greitens was criticized because Robert Murphy, a spokesman for a recent Greitens campaign ad, shared content on Facebook that included a rape joke and anti-Muslim material, the St. Louis Post-Dispatch reported.

One meme shared by Murphy was a picture of two women: One was grabbed and groped by a man in a suit captioned "liberal anti-rape tips" that said "Urinate on yourself to ruin your rapist's mood / libido." A second woman was pictured holding a handgun above the words "conservative anti-rape tips" and "Pull out a Glock and make the rapist piss HIMSELF," according to the Post-Dispatch.

Chambers told the Associated Press that Murphy fought for the right to free speech, even if what he says or posts isn't something Greitens agrees with.

"The Democrats are trying to make something out of nothing," Chambers said.

Democrats also called on the Greitens campaign again to return the $1 million campaign contribution he received from California venture capitalist Michael Goguen, who is being sued by a woman who accuses him of continuous sexual abuse and harassment. Goguen has denied the allegations in the pending case.

Chambers did not comment on whether the campaign would return Goguen's donation.

Allison Dreith, executive director of NARAL Pro-Choice Missouri, said NARAL supporters were on hand with the Missouri Democratic Party to "call out Eric Greitens" for his supporters' behavior.

"This is just another case of Missouri Republicans being out of touch and wrong when it comes to women, in particular with instances of rape," Dreith said.

The Associated Press contributed to this article.

Will Schmitt is a reporter for the Springfield News-Leader. He can reached via email (wschmitt@news-leader.com), over the phone (417-836-1194) and on Twitter (@ws_missouri).

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/2dI8Em9