Beer bill remains tough to swallow
The Lakeland Republican this week filed an amendment to SB 1714 that purports to accommodate the state’s microbreweries by allowing them to sell their products in all sizes of sealed to-go containers, commonly called “growlers.” However, the bill is limited in scope, applying only to those businesses that brew fewer than 2,000 kegs of beer (the equivalent of 1,000 barrels). The amendment also allows larger craft brewers to sell 20 percent of their beer in bottles or cans from their breweries.

Joey Redner, founder and CEO of Cigar City Brewing in Tampa, recently told MSNBC that microbreweries don’t become profitable until they exceed 5,000 barrels. Capping the growler allowance so low severely restricts many businesses’ ability to grow.

That’s exactly what large distributors of traditional, mass-market beers are seeking to do, so as to blunt competition from the upstart craft beers. They want microbreweries to jump through regulatory hoops that will increase the price of doing business, namely by forcing them to participate in the state’s three-tiered system of alcohol regulation.

That consists of manufacturers, distributors and retailers. Businesses that brew and sell their beers on their premises would have to buy at least a portion of that product back from middlemen — at a markup — even if the beverages never leave the site.

Joshua Aubuchon, who represents the Florida Brewers Guild, said Stargel’s amendment was “just lipstick on a pig,” and that SB 1714 still “creates a layer of bureaucracy where one currently does not exist.”

In a column she wrote for Context Florida, Stargel comes across as a modern-day Carrie Nation, defending her legislation on the grounds that the Prohibition-era three-tier system must be preserved in the 21st century because “it is the backbone of societal protections against rampant alcoholism of the 1920s.”

“It has been pointed out in news reports that states where beer is unregulated, the per capita production is significantly higher,” she writes. “Higher beer production and higher consumption go hand-in-hand.”

In other words, if microbreweries are allowed to sell their beverages directly to customers without having to go through a distributor, she fears more Floridians will become drunk. That logic assumes that many of the people who pay extra for a craft beer do so so they can drink to excess.

According to the website of the Brewers Association, a craft-beer industry advocacy group, 36 states allow exceptions, called self-distribution laws, to the three-tiered system. Are they noticeably more inebriated than the 14, including Florida, that do not permit small breweries to self-distribute?

It’s not like Florida microbreweries are calling for the abolition of distributorships. Writing on his blog, Cigar City’s Redner notes that “most breweries, even in states where self-distribution is an option, ultimately choose to work with a distributor. Not because the government tells them to, but because it is a mutually beneficial business relationship.”

Indeed, the Brewers Association argues that self-distribution laws allow small brewers to build brand loyalties with customers and gradually grow their sales, which allows wholesalers to see the success of those beers before they bring them into distribution.

Craft beer is a growth industry in Florida, particularly in Volusia County, where several microbreweries have opened in the last year, with more on the way. That should be seen as a healthy development for the state and local economies, not cause for alarm and the enforcement of protectionist policies.