newsminer.com • Palin joins call for new Senate election after Stevens' case dropped
Palin joins call for new Senate election after Stevens' case dropped

JUNEAU — Gov. Sarah Palin on Thursday echoed a call from the Alaska Republican Party for U.S. Sen. Mark Begich to resign after the Justice Department asked a judge to toss out corruption charges against former Sen. Ted Stevens.

“I absolutely agree,” Palin responded in an e-mail Thursday to the Daily News-Miner.

She said Begich should step down and a special election should be held to fill the seat.

“Come to find out, (the Department of Justice) is now revealing (Stevens) should not have been found guilty,” she said. “This drastic change in circumstances, wherein truth is finally being revealed, leads me to support the call for a special, fair election — free from the improper influence of a conviction that DOJ now tells us was improper.”

Alaska Republican Party Chairman Randy Ruedrich stated in a news release that Alaskans should get a chance to choose between Begich and Stevens without the “improper influence of the corrupt Department of Justice.”

Ruedrich charged that “the only reason Mark Begich won the election in November is because a few thousand Alaskans thought Sen. Ted Stevens was guilty of seven felonies.

“A special election will allow Alaskans to have a real, non-biased, credible process where the most qualified person could win, without the manipulation of the Department of Justice,” Ruedrich stated in the release.

Begich spokeswoman Julie Hasquet e-mailed a statement from the senator.

“I got into the Senate race long before Senator Stevens’ legal troubles began because Alaskans were looking for a change and a senator as independent as Alaska,” Begich said. “Today, with our country in a severe recession, it’s more important than ever that we have a senator focused on fixing our economy so Alaskans have the jobs they need to support their families. That is my job in the Senate, and I’m honored to serve Alaskans for the next six years.”

Begich said the prosecutorial misconduct is apparent in the Stevens case and that he’s pleased the Justice Department “brought a new sense of ethics” to the matter.

Stevens, a 40-year senator, was found guilty on seven counts of ethics violations by a Washington, D.C., jury days before the November election.

He lost a re-election bid to Begich, a Democrat and, at the time, Anchorage mayor.

Justice Department officials this week said they will ask a judge to vacate Stevens’ conviction.

Palin called on Stevens to resign following his conviction in October despite Stevens’ insistence that he was innocent.

Palin, campaigning on an ethics platform for national office, did not voice confidence in Stevens’ assertions of innocence and called for him to give up his Senate seat.

Palin and Ruedrich have a lengthy and contentious history. Both were members of the state’s Oil and Gas Conservation Commission in 2004, when Palin brought allegations that Ruedrich conducted political work with state time and resources.

“We’ve agreed on a lot of things; this is just another place we agree,” Ruedrich said of Palin’s support of his call on behalf of the Republican Party.

The ethics investigation shaped Palin’s reputation as a reformer and as a politician outside the “good old boys” network.

She campaigned on those qualities for governor in 2006 and for vice president alongside John McCain in 2008.

A special election is held only when a vacancy occurs and could cost $700,000 to $1 million, state elections division head Gail Fenumiai said. The governor would have to call the election.

Without irregularities in the November election, University of Alaska political science professor Gerald McBeath doesn’t see much chance of a re-do. Voters had all information known at the time, even if new facts came to light later.

“The election was an honest election,” he said. “If Stevens wouldn’t have been indicted, yes, he would have been elected.”

Ruedrich said he thinks Alaskans would have a different response today to a Begich-Stevens contest.

“I’m fairly confident that the nominee of the Republican party would be elected by overwhelming margins,” Ruedrich said, adding that Stevens would be a “far superior choice to Begich.”

Ruedrich, who has faced charges that he breached state ethics standards, said any remnant violations in the Stevens case should be “a matter for his fellow senators to deal with, and the ethics committee.”

A jury found Stevens guilty of seven counts of lying on financial disclosure forms about thousands of dollars he allegedly received from oil field services company VECO and the company’s former head, Bill Allen.

The conviction came Oct. 27, days before the Nov. 4 election in which Stevens faced his toughest re-election fight in decades. The 85-year-old senator returned to Alaska for a whirlwind push to retain his seat in Congress but to no avail. The close race outcome was uncertain for days as votes were tallied from across Alaska.