Chapel Hill Town Council urges repeal of House Bill 2 | Raleigh News & Observer
The Chapel Hill Town Council passed a resolution in a special meeting Monday night affirming the dignity of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people and calling for the repeal of House Bill 2.

The resolution came the same day that state residents and advocacy groups filed a federal lawsuit challenging North Carolina’s new law that bans local anti-discrimination ordinances and requires transgender residents to use the public restrooms of their biological sex.

At their hour-long meeting in Town Hall, Town Council members cited Chapel Hill’s long history of LGBT support. The list began with the election of Joe Herzenberg in 1981 as the first openly gay elected official in the South and continued with the establishment of a domestic partner registry and benefits for town employees, including gender identity in town non-discrimination language and the election of openly gay former Mayor Mark Kleinschmidt and former member Lee Storrow.

In addition to the prohibition on LGBT protections, Mayor Pam Hemminger said mayors across the state are concerned about the law’s barring local governments from pursuing living-wage ordinances and anti-discrimination protections beyond what the state currently allows in government contracts.

Unlimited Digital Access: Only $0.99 For Your First Month Get full access to The News & Observer content across all your devices. SAVE NOW

“The greatest sentiment was the loss of local control,” Hemminger said. “There are a lot of pieces to House Bill 2 that have yet to be boiled down.”

The bill was founded in fear, the mayor continued, because North Carolina is changing and becoming more diverse. She called the state Republican leadership’s treatment of local lawmakers who opposed the law and how it was implemented “reprehensible, just not right.”

Monday’s meeting followed a special meeting Saturday in Carrboro, where the Board of Aldermen passed similar resolutions.

A handful of community members spoke, including Kleinschmidt, Alderman Damon Seils, Orange County Democratic Party Chair Matt Hughes and Michelle Doss, a transgender Gulf War veteran.

The former 13-year Marine came out as transgender two and a half years ago and has had no incidents using female bathrooms, Doss said.

“I wanted to come up here and be visible,” Doss told the council. “I’m a good person. I raised a daughter.”

“I understand the fear, but it’s based on ignorance,” Doss continued. “There’s a lot of anger and hatred out there, and I think I deserve better than that.”

Amanda Ashley, who is also transgender, urged the council to stand up to the legislature.

“You are being threatened with tyranny,” she said. “In times like this civil disobedience is mandatory. Resistance is necessary here.”

After the first resolution passed 7-0, with two council members absent, the council passed a second resolution to strongly condemn the actions of the governor and legislators who supported “this hateful bill.” The resolution, read aloud by council members, named the lawmakers who supported the bill.

The second resolution also passed 7-0, “unanimously and whole-heartedly,” Hemminger described it after the vote.

Council members then spoke, affirming equal rights and saying lawmakers used the issue of transgender people in public bathrooms as a “Trojan horse,” as member Jessica Anderson said, to move in and further strip local governments’ authority.

Council member Donna Bell said legislators are pitting groups against each other. “I will do all in my power to make sure this bill is repealed,” she said. “This is an election year. This is a year for all of us to get fired up.”

Council member Maria Palmer had announced in church on Sunday that the council would be having Monday’s special meeting.

“People need to support this (opposition to House Bill 2) because it’s going to make the community a better place,” she said. “We don’t do this for other people. We do this for ourselves.”

Member Nancy Oates suggested the town hold a public meeting to talk about local ramifications, including economic impact, of the new law.

“I think the law hurts all of us,” she said.