Pat McCrory: HB2 wasn't repealed | News & Observer
With House Bill 2 back in the headlines, former N.C. Gov. Pat McCrory made a bold statement about the law's compromise replacement during his daily radio appearance recently: "House Bill 2 was really never repealed," he told WBT radio in Charlotte.

The issue resurfaced last week when Gov. Roy Cooper, the Democrat who unseated Republican McCrory, announced a proposed settlement in a lawsuit challenging the law that replaced HB2 in March. The settlement would allow transgender people to use the bathroom that corresponds to their gender identity while in state government facilities controlled by Cooper's Cabinet agencies, such as state parks and highway rest stops.

McCrory told WBT he agrees with legislative leaders who oppose the deal. "He brings up bathrooms again without even defining what transgender is, and is making things extremely confusing," McCrory said. "He seems to like controversial social issues. But when a liberal does it, the media gives him a free pass. When a conservative does it, it's a bad thing to do."

Never miss a local story. Sign up today for a free 30 day free trial of unlimited digital access. SUBSCRIBE NOW

More Videos 2:15 'The 'why?' is the big question,' family ponders in Craven jail death Pause 0:29 Man skis behind Amish buggy in viral video 2:01 Coach Keatts: fast-paced-style, Braxton Beverly and free chicken 5:11 Peters: 'There's a lot of things to like,' in win over Montreal 4:15 "I've been working on my shot" says UNC recruit Coby White after 46-point effort 1:32 Changing how math is taught in Wake County schools 1:01 Christmas trees become mulch for Happy Trails program 2:57 Family looks for answers in Carteret County jail death 4:16 This 'mystery device' can unlock and start your vehicle 2:32 How to spot a skimmer at a gas pump or ATM Video Link copy Embed Code copy

Facebook

Twitter

Email

McCrory and Cooper spar over HB2 during debate North Carolina Governor Pat McCrory and his challenger Attorney General Roy Cooper spar over House Bill 2 during their debate Tuesday night, Oct. 12, 2016. McCrory and Cooper spar over HB2 during debate North Carolina Governor Pat McCrory and his challenger Attorney General Roy Cooper spar over House Bill 2 during their debate Tuesday night, Oct. 12, 2016. WUNC-TV

The former governor, who signed HB2 and faced immediate backlash from corporations, advocacy groups and sports organizations, is also making the case that the HB2 compromise legislation signed by Cooper didn't really change anything. He noted that the new law keeps a ban on local government nondiscrimination ordinances in place until 2020.

"All of the restrictions that were in place last October are in place this October," he told WBT. "Nothing's changed, but it is one of the best kept secrets in the media and in politics. Everyone's pretending the problem's solved and we're going to move on.

“It was a fake issue in many ways all along, and this is one issue where it's fake news that a bill was signed and very little changed except for the public perception."