NC lawmakers, governor, still negotiating HB2 repeal. | News & Observer
North Carolina lawmakers could repeal House Bill 2 on Thursday under a deal struck late Wednesday night by Democratic Gov. Roy Cooper and Republican legislative leaders.

Senate leader Phil Berger announced the deal shortly after 10:30 p.m. The announcement capped days of marathon, often contentious negotiations and closed-door meetings.

Berger and House Speaker Tim Moore took no questions. Details of the deal had not been released by 11 p.m. but were provided in a .PDF document soon after.

“I support the House Bill 2 repeal compromise that will be introduced tomorrow,” Cooper said in a statement. “It’s not a perfect deal, but it repeals House Bill 2 and begins to repair our reputation.”

Never miss a local story. Sign up today for a free 30 day free trial of unlimited digital access. SUBSCRIBE NOW

According to a statement from Berger and Moore, the bill would:

▪ Repeal HB2.

▪ Leave bathroom regulation to the state, essentially returning to the status quo before Charlotte passed a 2016 ordinance allowing transgender people to use the restroom of their gender identity.

▪ Enact a moratorium on similar ordinances until Dec. 1, 2020.

For over a year, HB2, widely seen as anti-LGBT, put North Carolina in the national spotlight and prompted boycotts and economic losses. The NBA moved its All-Star Game from Charlotte. The ACC and the NCAA moved championship games. But the compromise to repeal it drew fire from LGBT groups even before it was announced.

“The deal proposed would continue to actively discriminate against the LGBT community,” Chris Sgro, executive director of Equality NC, said in a conference call.

Sources said House Republicans narrowly approved the compromise in a closed-door caucus, but in numbers that would require Democratic votes on the floor.

That vote would come Thursday morning. The Senate is expected to vote at 9:15 a.m. The House will follow.

The movement on HB2 comes ahead of a reported Thursday deadline from the NCAA to make changes to the controversial law or lose the ability to host sports championships through 2022. The announcement of a deal capped a whirlwind day of meetings at the legislature and phone calls to the governor.

Senate Minority Leader Dan Blue said Wednesday afternoon that he, Cooper and Republican leaders had been negotiating “over the past 48 hours in a joint effort to find common ground and repeal House Bill 2.”

“We have been dealing with varying philosophical differences on a wide range of points related to House Bill 2 itself and various compromise proposals,” Blue said in a news release. “This is too important and we can’t throw in the towel on this.”

For some HB2 opponents, the proposed compromise was too much. Rep. Cecil Brockman, one of two openly LGBT lawmakers, slammed the door in frustration when leaving a caucus meeting. The Human Rights Campaign and Equality NC issued a news release as negotiations continued.

“The rumored HB2 ‘deal’ does nothing more than double-down on discrimination and would ensure North Carolina remains the worst state in the nation for LGBTQ people,” HRC President Chad Griffin said in a statement. “The consequences of this hateful law will only continue without full repeal of HB2. Sellouts cave under pressure. Leaders fight for what’s right.”

Wednesday’s action followed Tuesday’s drama in which Moore and Berger said they had agrees “in principle” to a repeal proposal with the governor, only to say the governor had denied that he’d agreed to it. Later, the two met with the governor for more than two hours at the executive mansion before breaking up with no agreement.

More Videos 1:16 'The opioid epidemic has taken lives and torn apart families all across North Carolina.' Pause 2:11 What is the best-case scenario for Panthers in playoffs? 4:15 "I've been working on my shot" says UNC recruit Coby White after 46-point effort 1:55 Amazon Prime Now prepares for holiday procrastinators 2:32 How to spot a skimmer at a gas pump or ATM 1:01 Christmas trees become mulch for Happy Trails program 1:32 Changing how math is taught in Wake County schools 0:29 Man skis behind Amish buggy in viral video 1:31 Jalen Lecque discusses playing in the Triangle, in front of NC State coach Kevin Keatts 0:24 NC State's Chubb picks Clemson's pocket Video Link copy Embed Code copy

Facebook

Twitter

Email

NC House Speaker Moore on HB2: 'We have not folded' North Carolina House Speaker Tim Moore tells reporters that he believes that a lot of companies that called for a ban to business in NC as a result of HB2 now have "buyer's remorse" and are trying to find a way out. NC House Speaker Moore on HB2: 'We have not folded' North Carolina House Speaker Tim Moore tells reporters that he believes that a lot of companies that called for a ban to business in NC as a result of HB2 now have "buyer's remorse" and are trying to find a way out. Lauren Horsch lhoursch@newsobserver.com

HB2 bans cities, towns and counties from passing nondiscrimination ordinances.

Two Charlotte-area senators have weighed in. Democratic Sen. Joel Ford of Charlotte introduced a bill last week that would repeal the bill and call for a “cooling off” period. Republican Sen. Jeff Tarte of Cornelius plans to introduce another repeal measure Wednesday. It would increase penalties for crimes committed in bathrooms or locker rooms and add sexual orientation to protected classes. And it has a “conscience” clause for people with religious objections.

“I’ve had leadership on both sides say it has major flaws – it’s too logical,” Tarte said. “It’s a true compromise.”