UnitedHealthcare leaving Florida Obamacare exchange
Screen shot from healthcare.gov. (Photo: Special to The News-Press)

UnitedHealthcare will announce its withdrawal from the 2017 Affordable Care Act exchange to Florida beneficiaries next month, a decision that could leave nearly 80,000 residents of Lee and Collier counties with a single provider on the individual market: Florida Blue.

The company announced last month it planned to exit Obamacare exchanges in 30 states, including Florida. A UnitedHealthcare spokeswoman confirmed this week it will send out its required 180-day advanced withdrawal notice to policyholders in June.

“Individuals will continue to have access to their health benefits until the end of 2016,” said UnitedHealthcare spokeswoman Maria Gordon Shydlo. “This decision will not impact our commercial, Medicare and Medicaid businesses in Florida.”

Nearly 50,000 Lee residents and more than 28,000 in Collier enrolled in plans on healthcare.gov for 2016. Plans were limited to those offered by Florida Blue and UnitedHealthcare.

The Florida Office of Insurance Regulation would not say this week if any other providers might enter the local market, saying any such interest is a trade secret until application reviews are complete in August.

But Laura Brennaman, policy and research director for the patient advocacy group Florida CHAIN, said she expects other insurance companies will offer exchange plans in Southwest Florida next year.

"If indeed there is only one carrier in the counties' marketplace I think that does not bode well for consumer choice, certainly," Brennaman said. "But I think we may be leaping to judgment to think that there is not going to be another carrier or two who may also step into the local marketplace."

Brennaman noted some insurance providers who sat out from the exchange in 2016, such as Cigna and Harken Health, will re-enter the Florida marketplace. Some regional players also may expand statewide, she said.

Lynne Thorp, who oversees Affordable Care Act sign-up efforts here as director of the Health Planning Council of Southwest Florida, said she is "not at all concerned" about UnitedHealthcare's departure from the exchange because other affordable plans will be available.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-468-0233. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

Jodi Ray, director of Florida Covering Kids & Families at the University of South Florida, which has received the state's largest share of federal grants to help with sign-ups, agreed.

"At least in our area, United is not a low premium issuer — (I) imagine it’s the same throughout the state — and most consumers price driven," Ray said in an email. "The partners (throughout the state) don’t seem to think there will be a large impact in those areas."

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services this week said 11 providers will offer plans on the exchange in Florida next year.

Insurers are seeking an average 13.3 percent increase in premiums next year, though the proposed rates vary wildly. The highest comes from Humana, which is asking to raise rates by as much as 43.6 percent.

These are only proposed increases and may bear little resemblance to premiums that actually take effect next year. They also don't factor in tax credits a majority of policyholders receive to offset costs.

People also may switch plans to better fit their needs or budgets. Last year, nearly 40 percent of Florida exchange users did so, federal officials said.

"Last year, the average monthly premium for people with Marketplace coverage getting tax credits increased just $2, from $82 to $84 per month, despite headlines suggesting big rate increases," said Jonathan Gold, spokesman for the Department of Health and Human Services. "People in Florida understand how the Marketplace works, and they know that they can shop around and find coverage that fits their needs and budget."

Connect with this reporter: @FrankGluck (Twitter)

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1TK8WoI