Locked in: Mentally ill languish in state hospitals
Patients are warehoused nearly a year as they wait for suitable housing.

Buy Photo Sara Klossner's oldest son spent ten months in the psychiatric hospital and was released earlier this year to a group home. He has severe frontal brain damage. He is back living at home and the family is having a hard time finding him a new group home to live in. He loves to cook. His mom said he has had two seizures since he has been home and has six medications in the morning and six in the evening he has to take. It is hard to find a home that will take him. (Photo: Andrea Melendez/The News-Press)Buy Photo

Sara Klossner scanned the cinderblock walls, the sparse furnishings and the industrial floors of a mental hospital in a tiny town west of Jacksonville. She'd never been to a jail, but she imagined it felt cold, like this.

How could her son be happy here?

In a matter of weeks, her 19-year-old son, who suffers from brain damage that makes him swift to anger, would be a patient at Northeast Florida State Hospital. She had asked for a tour because the prospect of her son in such a place shot terror through her heart.

Her fear grew when, on the tour, she learned he would be among the youngest at the locked and guarded hospital serving some of the sickest people in Florida. She'd never even left him alone in a mall. He still watched Scooby Doo cartoons.

The crisis unit where her son had been staying estimated his hospital stay at six weeks. Yet, he was institutionalized 10 months, which included three extra months of waiting for housing after he was well enough to leave.

This time was relatively short. Patients have been warehoused in Florida's locked mental hospitals for up to almost a year after they'd been deemed stable enough to leave, state data show. Officials often struggle to find housing for patients.

Buy Photo Sara Klossner's oldest son spent ten months in the psychiatric hospital and was released earlier this year to a group home. He has severe frontal brain damage. He is back living at home and the family is having a hard time finding him a new group home to live in. He loves to cook. His mom said he has had two seizures since he has been home and has six medications in the morning and six in the evening he has to take. It is hard to find a home that will take him. (Photo: Andrea Melendez/The News-Press)

"It's not fair to keep them there just because the state of Florida doesn't have its act together," said Klossner, a preschool Sunday school teacher in her 40s.

She conceals her anger from her son, relying on prayer to pull her through, though she often wonders about the people in Tallahassee deciding the amount of dollars dedicated to mental health services.

How would they feel if they walked in these shoes?

**

Florida ranked 50th in the nation for per capita mental health spending the last time the state reported data to the Kaiser Family Foundation. Yet, millions of dollars are being spent to unnecessarily institutionalize people because officials can't find appropriate places for them to live outside, which points to the scarcity of supportive housing. (An advocacy group sued the state for the lag, saying it violates their legal rights.)

“I felt trapped. I just never thought I was going to get out.” Mark Weaver, Cape Coral

In the past fiscal year, 850 people lingered an average of 102 days on a "seeking placement" list before being discharged from three state hospitals, according to state data The News-Press requested. With an average daily rate of $288, the annual cost of waiting, which is largely covered by public dollars, reached almost $25 million. (Most people reflected in the data had been involuntarily committed in civil cases. It does not include patients in criminal cases.)

Patients from Northeast Florida spent, on average, 309 days seeking placement. In Southwest Florida, the average was 73 days.

Mark Weaver of Cape Coral spent six months in a state hospital last year. The 55-year-old with a diagnosis of schizophrenia and bipolar disorder spent three of those months waiting.

"I felt trapped," he said. "I just never thought I was going to get out."

Mental health providers pointed to outliers stretching averages. A 51-year-old woman had been seeking placement more than 1,850 days, though she was not included in averages because she had not been discharged. No place would accept her because of her age and medical needs. It's tough to find homes for patients like her or those with sexual offenses or violence in their pasts. And, people who are undocumented don't have insurance to pay.

"The system would be negligent to try to place them some place because there's not a place to put them," said Paula Carter, civil state hospital liaison for Central Florida Behavioral Health Network, which manages services for this region.

Gov. Rick Scott and the Department of Children and Families Secretary Mike Carroll recently announced measures to reform the mental health system. On Sept. 21, Scott, after meeting with Carroll, said he would propose an additional $19 million in the state budget for mental health and substance abuse needs. The money will support Scott's executive order to better coordinate services so that fewer people come into state custody and there's more help for those coming out, according to DCF.

Carroll believes care coordination is key to reducing waits at the front and back ends of state hospital stays.

"The answer is not more brick and mortar, it's about making sure we use the capacity wisely," he said. "We need to make an investment in transition services…That's why we're pushing so hard to get some of these changes made."

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-468-0233. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

***

As Sara Klossner steered through the swampy heart of Florida this past January, her son turned to her.

Why doesn't anyone want me? she recalled him saying.

She swallowed the lump in her throat.

She wanted to hug him.

Buy Photo Sara Klossner's oldest son spent ten months in the psychiatric hospital and was released earlier this year to a group home. He has severe frontal brain damage. He is back living at home and the family is having a hard time finding him a new group home to live in. He loves to cook. His mom said he has had two seizures since he has been home and has six medications in the morning and six in the evening he has to take. It is hard to find a home that will take him. (Photo: Andrea Melendez/The News-Press)

It's not that no one wants you, she said. They just haven't found the right place.

She and her son had visited an assisted living facility. He had been cleared for discharge two months earlier but had nowhere to go. The place they had seen didn't have enough staff for his needs. Unfortunately, hospital discharge coordinators had steered them wrong as they weren't familiar enough with her son, she said.

Her son has epilepsy, and has suffered thousands of seizures, she said, which have damaged the part of his brain that guides impulse control.

Buy Photo Sara Klossner's oldest son spent ten months in the psychiatric hospital and was released earlier this year to a group home. He has severe frontal brain damage. He is back living at home and the family is having a hard time finding him a new group home to live in. He loves to cook. His mom said he has had two seizures since he has been home and has six medications in the morning and six in the evening he has to take. It is hard to find a home that will take him. (Photo: Andrea Melendez/The News-Press)

She asked her son not be identified for his privacy.

Before being committed to the hospital in April 2014, her son had been sent to a crisis unit a few times, the last time for turning over a couch holding his younger brother, she said. At the time, the family was living in the Gainesville area. Staff recommended he not return home, but after weeks of searching for other options, nothing came to fruition but the state hospital. Her fears about the hospital came true.

At one point, her son told her a patient choked and "beat the tar" out of him. Her son was moved. He wasn't attending classes, partly due to a staffing shortage, she said, or getting regular counseling.

What did you do today? she'd ask when they spoke by phone.

I went to breakfast, lunch and dinner, he told her.

Anything else?

I went to the bathroom.

(A Department of Children and Families spokeswoman could not discuss the details of his hospital stay, but she noted that not every patient receives or is appropriate for individual therapy.)

Finally, this past February, Klossner's son was discharged to a group home near Gainesville and although it was about five hours from their Southwest Florida home, the distance mattered less than her son's freedom.

"It was taking so long that I told them I would drive anywhere," she said. "I don't think he benefited from the experience at all."

***

Mental hospitals are a last-resort when other measures fail. Frankly, families share more complaints about trying to get loved ones into them than out of them. Parents of adult children with schizophrenia have spent years trying to access state hospitals, so it's surprising a 19-year-old like Klossner's son was committed so swiftly.

Two years ago, Disability Rights Florida, an organization funded by federal grants, filed a class-action lawsuit against DCF related to the lag time it takes individuals to be discharged. The lawsuit alleged the state violated federal law by unnecessarily segregating hundreds of people with mental illnesses in institutions unsuited for their needs.

Since the 1960s, there's been a shift away from institutionalization but Florida has lagged in providing enough support services in communities. People with severe mental illnesses often cycle between crisis units, jails or homelessness.

Buy Photo Sara Klossner's oldest son spent ten months in the psychiatric hospital and was released earlier this year to a group home. He has severe frontal brain damage. He is back living at home and the family is having a hard time finding him a new group home to live in. He loves to cook. His mom said he has had two seizures since he has been home and has six medications in the morning and six in the evening he has to take. It is hard to find a home that will take him. (Photo: Andrea Melendez/The News-Press)

"When you talk about moving people into the community, people feel like it's not their problem," said David Boyer, Disability Rights Florida's director of investigations. "There's a feeling that if a mentally ill person moves next door to you, you're going to be in danger. It's obviously not the truth, but a stereotype we have to fight."

Boyer pointed to a Supreme Court ruling that requires states to ensure people with disabilities receive services in the most integrated setting for their needs. Community help is much cheaper than a hospital stay. The lawsuit quoted an estimated average annual cost of $100,244 per person for inpatient treatment in Florida versus $20,000 for community treatment.

Leaders at DCF and Disability Rights Florida agree people should not languish in institutions, but the department depends on lawmakers to provide money for supportive services.

"Right now what happens to folks when they're in the state hospital, when they are discharged, they are discharged to either a nursing home or an assisted living facility, neither of which are acceptable to us," Boyer said.

People also move into small group homes, like foster care for adults, but they can cost more than what disability benefits cover.

In September, Disability Rights Florida and DCF settled the lawsuit. As part of it, the state agreed to ask for money to start a pilot housing voucher project.

Mental health providers are heartened state leaders are dedicating money and time to the problem.

"This is a live and somewhat hot topic for us as a state with increasing discomfort that the current state is not all that good," said Kevin Lewis, CEO of SalusCare, which provides mental health services in Lee County.

***

Klossner's son, now 20, slugged root beer at the kitchen table that held a Bible and a Billy Graham book in his family's south Fort Myers town home. He returned to live with his parents and brother after a Lee County group home didn't work out. He had moved there in July to be closer to them.

"Based on the number of phone calls I have made and the amount of time I have spent on the Internet searching, I'm very concerned about the future living arrangements," Klossner said, who sat with her son. (He provided input about experiences Klossner described.)

"I don't know what will happen next but I know we cannot allow this to repeat itself."

"There's probably a chance…" he said.

"No, honey."

She said this gently, but adamantly.

One day, she hopes, this story, will have a happy ending.

BY THE NUMBERS

102 DAYS

Average amount of time 850 people lingered on a "seeking placement" list before being discharged from three state hospitals in the past fiscal year. Find a breakdown of time spent on the list by circuit.

$25 MILLION

The annual cost associated with waiting, which is largely covered by public dollars.

GET INVOLVED

A task force that has been formed to find solutions for the housing crisis for people with severe mental illnesses meets Oct. 8 from 1:30 to 3 p.m. at SalusCare, 3763 Evans Ave., Fort Myers.

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1L8QmUc