McCain the Maverick Fights for His Soul: Margolick
Late last month, at a dusty fairground outside Tucson, John McCain stood behind the person who is, at least for the next few years, surely his most important legacy to American politics. And speaking to the adoring mob, Sarah Palin stood behind John McCain, repaying his inestimable gift to her in the most compelling possible fashion: by helping him to survive.

Facing an impertinent challenge for his Senate seat in the Republican primary this summer, McCain listened to the former Alaska governor heap praise on him. Throughout, he fidgeted with a couple of pieces of paper, sneaking peeks at them every few seconds, and wore a slightly nervous smile, as if not knowing quite what might come out of Palin next. Periodically he applauded, clapping with the bum right hand whose fingers, courtesy of the North Vietnamese, still don't quite come together.

Many, many years ago she'd competed in a beauty pageant, Palin declared, as women howled (and a few men growled) approvingly. McCain would surely win the talent and debate portions of any such contest, she went on, but no way would the Washington elite and "pundints" and "lame-stream media" ever crown him "Miss Congeniality"! "He's never been a company man, he's never been one to just 'go with the flow,'?" she crowed. For there was at least one thing she'd learned in her years of commercial fishing in Alaska: only dead fish do that.

SUBSCRIBE

Much as the crowd ate up her every word, Palin had apparently missed the real message this electoral season in Arizona: for his three decades in Congress, McCain hadn't gone with the flow enough, at least not enough to satisfy many Arizona Republicans. Why else would his rival, former congressman J.D. Hayworth, be billing himself as "the consistent conservative"? Many of the GOP's most faithful, the kind who vote in primaries despite 115-degree heat, tired long ago of McCain the Maverick, the man who had crossed the aisle to work with Democrats on issues like immigration reform, global warming, and restricting campaign contributions. "Maverick" is a mantle McCain no longer claims; in fact, he now denies he ever was one. "I never considered myself a maverick," he told me. "I consider myself a person who serves the people of Arizona to the best of his abilities." Yet here was Palin, urging her fans four times in 15 minutes to send McCain the Maverick back to Washington.

In contrast to Palin's chirpiness, McCain's subsequent remarks sounded ragged—he got the date of the fall election wrong, for starters—and belligerent, far less pleasing to the crowd, some of whom began drifting off. (Anyone watching via computer could see the size of the online audience dwindle the longer McCain spoke.) But the old warrior, who has not faced a proper homegrown challenge since 1982, had snapped back into fighting form. Even a man who can't applaud quite properly can still form a fist. The unlikely spectacle of a party's most recent standard-bearer—and, despite Palin's popularity among the tea-party types, still its titular leader—facing such a challenge is yet another sign of the polarized state of American politics and the narrowing bandwidth of its parties, one that McCain acceded to, and then intensified, by picking Palin. "The extremes tend to punish any deviation from party orthodoxy," said Sen. Evan Bayh of Indiana, who blamed such rigidity in part for his own decision to retire.

With mainstream politicians paying an ever-greater price for their moderation—witness the Republican gubernatorial primary in Texas and upcoming senatorial primaries in Florida and Utah—mavericks like McCain are becoming an endangered species. That is, if McCain the Maverick is not already extinct. After retreating on a number of issues—gays in the military, climate change, the creation of a national-debt commission—the erstwhile iconoclast has morphed into what the Senate minority leader, Mitch Mc-Connell, calls "a fabulous team player." It was McCain of all people who pledged that, after the president managed to get health care enacted, Obama would get no cooperation from the Republicans for the rest of the year. (He has since backed off that threat a bit, at least on matters of national security.)

If McCain's onetime mentor, Barry Goldwater, could write The Conscience of a Conservative, McCain could pen The Machinations of a Maverick. His dramatic shifts raise several questions: How much of his maverick persona over the years has been real and how much simply tactical? Is he in the midst of some struggle for his soul, or is this evolution simply the latest example, dating back to his days at the Hanoi Hilton, of McCain doing whatever it takes to survive? Is the anger people sense in him anger at Obama, or the American electorate, or fate, or himself? And if, as seems likely, John McCain goes on to serve another term, which John McCain will it be?

Taking absolutely no chances, McCain is tending aggressively to Arizona these days, reestablishing ties, holding town meetings, mending a few of the many, many fences he's knocked down in state Republican circles over the years. "The last time I had a conversation with John I had to hold the phone three feet from my head," says Randy Pullen, the Republican state chairman, whom McCain has repeatedly tried to replace.

Taking on McCain has always required the delicacy of those soldiers in The Hurt Locker, defusing roadside IEDs. Listening to his adversaries in his various presidential runs, you'd think the name on his birth certificate reads "With All Due Respect John McCain" or "We Honor His Service John McCain." But such is the anger this nasty political season that even McCain is not immune. Hayworth beat him up regularly on his drive-time radio show in Phoenix, perfecting a McCain imitation, decrying the "Double Talk Express," nominating him "weenie of the week," suggesting that someone put together a "John McCain Alphabet Book." (A is for amnesty for illegal immigrants, B is for bitter, C is for clenched teeth, D is for difficult, etc.)

Hayworth, who's worn only the uniform of the Eagle Scouts, still pays homage to McCain's military service at the start of every speech. He does not talk about throwing him out of office but of "welcoming him home." But otherwise the gloves are off. Every six years, he says, McCain pays attention to Arizona and pretends to be a conservative, only to revert to moderate form once he's reelected. ("The Johnny Mac Shuffle," he calls it.)

Something about John McCain leaves people, on both left and right, feeling betrayed and disappointed. Even Joe the Plumber has grown disillusioned, concluding he's just another exploitative, elitist pol. But leaving people betrayed and disappointed attests, too, to the extraordinary respect McCain has generated over the years through his personal story, heterodox positions, and apparent authenticity. There's no other politician like him.