Meghan Markle and Prince Harry’s Wedding Invitation to Obama May Not Happen Thanks to Trump
Prince Harry and Meghan Markle want to invite the Obamas to their royal wedding in the spring, but the British government may leave them off the list to avoid offending President Donald Trump, according to a report.

“Harry has made it clear he wants the Obamas at the wedding, so it’s causing a lot of nervousness,” a senior British government source told The Sun. “Trump could react very badly if the Obamas get to a royal wedding before he has had a chance to meet the queen.”

The tabloid’s report published on Tuesday states that there are deep fears among senior foreign office officials that a snub of Trump, whom the prince and Markle dislike, could make it impossible for Prime Minister Theresa May to connect with the polarizing president.

“Conversations are ongoing...and ministers will eventually have to decide. If the (prime minister) lays down the law, Harry will just have to suck it up,” the source told The Sun.

The prince and former President Barack Obama became friends after the royal invited Obama as his guest to the Invictus Games, a sporting event for war veterans, in Toronto late September. The two were pictured talking and laughing together.

May invited Trump to visit the United Kingdom and meet with the queen earlier this year, but no date has been set for the visit. Early this month, The Telegraph reported that U.S. diplomats dropped plans for Trump’s “working visit” planned for January after the American president on Twitter criticized the U.K.’s response to terror attacks as well as London’s Muslim Mayor Sadiq Khan.

In late November, the British government condemned Trump for retweeting a series of videos by Jayda Fransen, deputy leader of the extreme-right group Britain First, portraying Muslims as dangerous and violent.

With relations between Trump and Britain reaching their lowest point since he was elected, there is no assurance that Trump’s visit will be scheduled before the prince and Markle’s wedding on May 19.

What does seem clear is that the engaged royal couple themselves are not interested in inviting Trump to their big day.

In May 2016, long before her engagement with the prince was announced, Markle said, “Yes of course Trump is divisive.”

“Think about just female voters alone. I think it was in 2012, the Republican Party lost the female vote by 12 points,” Markle said. “That's a huge number and with as misogynistic as Trump is and so vocal about it, that's a huge chunk of it.”