NFL Foundation grant recipients who receive funding for youth football programs or initiatives also receive information about health and safety, including concussion prevention and management materials from the CDC Heads Up program. Additionally, the NFL Foundation supports health and safety efforts through its work with USA Football – to make the game safer to play. USA Football offers a variety of important services, including the sport’s only nationally accredited football coaching education course. More than 100,000 youth coaches since 2007 have completed this course which instructs on the game’s fundamentals and advances player safety. USA Football’s website – www.usafootball.com – also provides free information on concussion awareness and management, proper equipment fitting, injury prevention, heat and hydration, nutrition and conditioning that can help your organization promote a better, safer game for your players.

The NFL Foundation currently is reviewing its space within the medical research grant category. In the meantime, we strongly encourage eligible researchers and medical institutions to learn more about medical research grant opportunities provided by the NFL with its following partners:

Foundation for the National Institutes of Health (NIH): The NFL is providing $30 million in grant funding to the Foundation for the NIH to support its Sports and Health Research Program (SHRP). The initiative allows experts in the field to conduct research focused on the long-term health effect of injuries sustained by professional and amateur athletes in order to gain more insight into serious medical conditions that affect both athletes and the general public.

Through support from the SHRP, the NIH is calling for the best and brightest scientists and physicians to conduct ground-breaking medical research to enhance our understanding of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) and other long-term effects of traumatic brain injury (TBI) and spinal cord injury.

While the NFL’s support of the SHRP is initially focusing on brain injury, especially in athletes and veterans, SHRP may eventually expand to encompass other sports-related issues such as chronic degenerative joint disease, the transition from acute to chronic pain, sudden cardiac arrest in youth athletes and heat and hydration related illness and injury.

For more information, please visit http://www.fnih.org/work/key-initiatives/sports-and-health-research-program

GE/NFL Head Health Initiative: GE and the NFL have teamed to accelerate concussion research, diagnosis and treatment by launching the Head Health Initiative – a four-year, $60 million partnership to help improve the safety of athletes, members of the military and society overall. The initiative includes two components: 1) a four-year, $40 million research and development program to determine the key imaging biomarkers in the brain; and 2) a two-year, open innovation program to invest up to $20 million in research and technology to better understand and diagnose mild traumatic brain injury (MTBI).

The Head Health initiative will include two Challenge topics:

Challenge I: Methods for Diagnosis and Prognosis of Mild Traumatic Brain Injuries

Challenge II: The Mechanics of Injury: Innovative Approaches for Preventing and Identifying Brain Injuries

To learn more, please visit www.nflgebrainchallenge.com