Trump points to voter fraud for NH election loss; Ayotte not so sure
Feb 10, 2017 5:20 PM

Source: NH1 News Political Director

CONCORD - President Donald Trump claims that both he and former U.S Sen. Kelly Ayotte would have won in New Hampshire in November’s election, if not for voter fraud.

But a spokeswoman for Ayotte, the Republican incumbent from Nashua who lost to then-Gov. Maggie Hassan by less than a 1,000 votes out of around 750,000 cast, told NH1 News on Friday night that ”it’s impossible to attribute the outcome to any one factor.”

Trump won the electoral college, and thus the White House, in the presidential election. But he lost the national popular vote by around 3 million to Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton. He also lost to Clinton by around 3,000 votes in the battle for New Hampshire’s four electoral votes.

After the election, and again last month, Trump blamed massive voter fraud in New Hampshire and other states for his popular vote defeat. But he didn’t offer any proof to back up his claims.

On Thursday, at a meeting with a bipartisan group of 10 U.S. senators in which he was making a pitch for his Supreme Court nominee Neil Gorsuch, the President once again revived his allegations. Ayotte, who’s now shepherding Gorsuch through the Senate, was also attending the meeting. Trump said that both he and Ayotte would have won in New Hampshire if not for voters bused in from out of state.

Politico, citing sources with knowledge of the meeting, was first to report on the President’s comments.

Some New Hampshire conservatives in recent years have criticized the Granite State’s same day registration law, which they allege allows Democrats to game the system by bringing in non-residents to vote on election day.

Just days before the election, then-GOP gubernatorial nominee Chris Sununu told conservative radio host Howie Carr “there’s no doubt there’s election fraud here and they’re kind of – I don’t want to use rigged, that’s like the word you’re not supposed to use anymore – but they have really gamed the system in their advantage.”

But two weeks after the election, Sununu, who beat Democratic gubernatorial nominee Colin Van Ostern by around 17,000 votes, said he didn’t believe there was voter fraud. And in an interview with NH1 News in December, he said “we don’t have fraud in this state but we do have laws that are a little bit loose. There’s a lot of gray area. A lot of room for interpretation about who’s a resident.”

Dating back to his gubernatorial campaign, Sununu had advocated for election reform. And the Republicans who control both the state House and state Senate are moving forward with bills to tighten rules regarding declaring domicile and residency requirements.

Ayotte’s spokeswoman, Liz Johnson, told NH1 News that “the senator does believe the legislature should examine residency requirements, which they are doing.”

Source: Trump thanks Ayotte

A source with knowledge of the Thursday meeting told NH1 News on Friday night that Trump and Ayotte “had a light hearted exchange, in which the President said to her, ‘I wish you had endorsed me like you endorsed him (the judge)’,”

The source added that Trump thanked Ayotte for her work to help guide Gorsuch through the Senate confirmation process.

Ayotte kept her distance from Trump last year. After he locked up the GOP presidential nomination, she said she wouldn’t endorse Trump but would vote for her party’s White House nominee. After the audio recordings of Trump making lewd sexual comments rocked the campaign trail in October, Ayotte broke with Trump, saying she wouldn’t vote for him. Instead she said she wrote in the name of now-Vice President Mike Pence on her ballot in November’s election.

New Hampshire’s senior U.S. senator, Democrat Jeanne Shaheen, said in a statement Friday afternoon that "there is absolutely no evidence whatsoever of major voter fraud in New Hampshire's elections. President Trump continues to spread a dangerous lie and it's long past time for Republican leadership in New Hampshire to stand up and defend our state's electoral system."