National Health Insurance Company
About NHIC

The National Health Insurance Company (NHIC) is a government-owned entity that manages and operates Seha; the national health insurance scheme in the State of Qatar. The scheme provides mandatory health insurance coverage through a network of public and private providers and forms a key component in the realisation of the National Health Strategy and the overall Qatar National Vision 2030

Vision

A catalyst for change for the health system in Qatar by providing sustainable decision support to contribute to the success of QNV2030



Recognised internationally as a leader in healthcare financing

NHIC aspires to be

Mission

To run the National Health Insurance Scheme providing access to reliable and quality healthcare for all people in Qatar in a cost effective manner.

Value

To protect the reputation of the company by delivering on our promises, behaving with responsibility, honesty and integrity.

Seha - the National Health Insurance Scheme

Seha was borne out of Qatar’s long-term development goals, in particular the Qatar National Vision and the National Health Strategy, which calls for the establishment of a social health insurance system to bring greater efficiency and transparency to the nation’s healthcare sector.

The Seha network includes both public and private providers, offering people quality and choice depending on their preferences and needs. View the list of Seha network providers here.

Stage 1 of the scheme was launched in July 2013, covering Qatari females aged 12 and above for gynaecology, obstetrics, maternity and related women’s health conditions. As of 30 April 2014, the second stage provides comprehensive insurance coverage to all Qatari nationals for their basic health care needs. View the Schedule of Benefits.

The introduction of the Seha puts Qatar at the forefront of global initiatives calling for universal health coverage, including United Nations and World Health Organization resolutions calling for member countries to provide universal health care as a key goal for development.

The National Health Insurance Company

NHIC is an independent organization wholly owned by the Government of Qatar. It is governed by a Supervisory Board and managed by an Executive Management team led by the Acting Chief Executive Officer.

The six member board consists of HE The Minister of Public Health as Chairman and representatives from the Ministries of Finance, Labour and Interior, the Central Municipality Council and two members from the private sector nominated by the Qatar Chamber. Read more about the Acting Chief Executive Officer.

Social Health Insurance Law

NHIC came into effect through the Social Health Insurance law (No. 7, 2013), which tasks the company with the implementation and management of the health insurance scheme.

The various articles of the law cover the provision of services, the responsibility for premiums, the financial management and scope of NHIC and the penalties liable for deviations from the law.

Please visit the Ministry of Justice website to download a copy of the official gazette (Issue No. 10 dated 16 June 2013) which includes the official publication of Law 7.