Don't force union membership
June 3, 2011

Don't force union membership

Imagine getting your dream job that pays well, offers generous benefits and is located a few miles from your home.



But there’s a condition: You must pay Harold Camping $75 every month to help spread the word about his next doomsday prediction.



That’s probably not a problem for those who believed Judgment Day was May 21 and are now convinced it’s coming Oct. 21, but most would object to an employer telling us what we should believe and how we should spend our money.



In America, people are free to believe whatever they want and support their beliefs however they choose.

In New Jersey and many other states, however, workers are forced to join unions and fund their political priorities, regardless of their wishes.



I support workers’ right to organize, but that should be a personal choice. Those who agree with their union representatives have every right to join, but others should have the freedom to work without subsidizing and endorsing a group they disagree with.



A poll conducted after last year’s congressional elections revealed that union members objected to their dues funding political campaigns.



Forced unionization warps our First Amendment freedoms and has hurt states’ economic growth and ability to attract businesses that create jobs.



I’m drafting legislation that would make New Jersey the 23rd Right-to-Work state, which would allow workers to decide whether to join a union.



Those who like their current status would be free to enjoy the same representation they do now.

No state has enacted such a freedom since 2001. New Hampshire may do so if its legislature overrides the governor’s veto.



The labor movement deserves tremendous credit for fighting against unsafe working conditions, unfair wages and onerous working hours during the last century. But today, especially in the public sector, we can no longer maintain Depression-era labor laws that hinder economic growth.



Employees are no longer mistreated as they were in the 19th century, and union membership has steadily declined since 1965. Public union members now outnumber those in the private sector – a clear indication that organized labor has become more about preserving benefits and pensions that taxpayers can’t afford than making sure 12-year-olds aren’t forced into work in sweat shops.



Right to Work also would quicken New Jersey’s economic revival.



Right-to-Work states had 497,000 new businesses from 1993 to 2009, compared with 340,000 in forced union states, according to U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics recently cited by the Wall Street Journal. That’s remarkable because just 40 percent of American workers live in Right-to-Work states.



A study by Ohio University economics professor Richard Vedder proved that Right-to-Work states are more economically competitive and attractive to businesses and workers:



• More than 4.7 million people, or one per minute, have moved from forced union to Right-to-Work states from 2000 to 2008.

• Right-to-Work laws increase economic output by 2 percent.

• Incomes in Right-to-Work states increased by 164.4 percent from 1977 to 2008, compared with a 92.8 percent growth in forced union states.



New Jersey is still recovering from the national economic collapse, which combined with a decade of disastrous tax, spend and borrow policies by the Democrats, has decimated the state’s revenues and left our unemployment rate above the national average.



The only solution from Trenton Democrats has been a “Back to Work” legislative package that would cost more than $600 million with no guarantees of replacing one of the 156,100 private-sector jobs they cost New Jersey. A better way to get New Jerseyans back to work is to guarantee their right to work without impediments on economic growth.



If you want to spend your money promoting the end of the world or a union leader’s political rhetoric, I’ll support your right to do so. But your colleagues should be equally free to work according to their own beliefs.