Ad by conservative PAC attacks Cory Booker on abortion
NEWARK — As rhetoric heats up in the New Jersey Senate race, a conservative political action committee has launched a minute-long ad attacking Newark Mayor Cory Booker's support of abortion rights.

"Democrats used to call for abortion to be safe, legal and rare, but not Cory Booker," the announcer say as ominous music plays in the background. The ad then cuts to Booker's address last year to Planned Parenthood at the Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, N.C.

"I was a co-chair for the DNC platform, when we affirmed a woman's right to choose," Booker told the group.

The Booker campaign said the online ad, produced by the American Commitment Action Fund and the Susan B. Anthony List, was an attempt to steer attention from Booker's Republican opponent.

"This is yet another attempt by a shadowy, radical group to shift attention away from Steve Lonegan, who would outlaw abortion even in cases of rape and incest — a position that puts him far outside mainstream values in New Jersey," spokesman Kevin Griffis said.

Booker is shown delivering a speech to members of Planned Parenthood in Charlotte. The next shot is from an appearance on ABC's "This Week" where Cokie Roberts chides Booker for removing the words "safe, legal and rare" in discussing abortion.

"I think this Democratic convention was really over the top in terms of abortion," Roberts said.

The ad charges Booker with supporting unsafe, unregulated abortions at taxpayers' expense largely based on his work with the DNC platform.

"Like most New Jerseyans, the mayor believes that a woman’s health care decisions should be between her and her doctor, and that we should do more to support family planning, generally, so that abortions happen less often," Griffis said.

New Jerseyans generally favor a more liberal approach to abortion rights. In April, a Monmouth University/Asbury Park Press poll said that 56 percent of registered voters in the state considered themselves "pro-choice" compared to 36 percent who considered themselves "pro-life."

Lonegan and Booker will be facing off Oct. 16 in a special election to fill the remainder of Sen. Frank Lautenberg's term. Lautenberg died in office in June.

RELATED COVERAGE

• At dueling events, Booker and Lonegan trade barbs in contentious Senate race