State control of Newark schools upheld by panel of appellate court judges
NEWARK—Newark public schools have been controlled by the state for nearly 20 years, and the monitoring will continue until Trenton deems the large urban district ready for autonomy, a panel of state appellate court judges has ruled.

In a sharply worded decision, the judges said Education Commissioner Christopher Cerf appropriately exercised “broad discretion” in 2011 when he determined Newark was not yet ready to govern its school system – the largest in the state with nearly 40,000 students.

Though the district had met or exceeded state standards in four of the five areas monitored, Cerf said at the time that Newark’s low graduation rate and sagging test scores required state officials to remain involved indefinitely.

“Under (the law) the commissioner is not compelled to recommend withdrawal of state intervention in any area of school district effectiveness merely because the district has achieved a score of 80 percent or more,” the ruling, issued Monday, states.

The law governing state takeover of public school districts, known as the Quality Single Accountability Continuum (QSAC), requires districts to earn scores of at least 80 percent in each of the areas monitored before local control can be restored.

Newark earned control of district operations in 2007, and last month, Cerf announced that he would begin discussions with the district about restoring control of its finances, which will allow the board to vote on district contracts.

Advisory Board President Antoinette Baskerville Richardson called the court’s decision, “disappointing, but not discouraging.” She credited the board with forcing Cerf to give back local control of district finances.

“We will continue to highlight the inequity of this system that gives complete power to the commissioner to the exclusion of the school board, the parents and the statutory guidelines,” Baskerville Richardson said.

David Sciarra, who directs the Newark-based Education Law Center and brought the appeal on behalf of the board, said he and the board had not yet decided whether to file an appeal with the state Supreme Court.

Related Coverage

• For first time in 18 years, Newark school board to regain control of fiscal operations

• Newark's fight to take control of schools from state hits snag over new numbers