VP Joe Biden tells Jerseyans Corzine will work for health care and the economy VP Joe Biden tells Jerseyans Corzine will work for health care and the economy

EDISON -- With the governor’s race entering its final two weeks, Vice President Joe Biden stumped for Gov. Jon Corzine today in Edison, the first in an assembly line of top Democrats visiting this week.

Biden, speaking to a cheering crowd of hundreds in a gymnasium at Middlesex County College, said the governor will fight for better health care and a stronger economy.

"We need folks like Jon today," he said. "We need smart, honest, serious and tough politicians who get it."



"I literally picked up the phone and called Jon Corzine and said 'Jon, what do you think we should do?'" he said. "The reason we called Jon is because we knew he knew about the economy, about world markets, about how we needed to respond."

Biden said the recession has been difficult across the country, but Democratic policies are helping the nation to turn the corner.

"Jon has said he's governed in hard times," Biden said. "Let's give the man a chance to govern in good times."

Corzine -- who introduced Biden as "my friend, our partner, a true champion of all our people" -- said his re-election would push the state in a progressive direction, toward President Obama's goals and away from unsuccesful Republican policies.

"The election is not about me. It's about the future. It's about our children," Corzine said. "Do we really want the failed policies of the past?"

"There's only 14 days to election day," he said. "I ask you to stand strong with me."

Three members of Congress revved up the crowd before Corzine and Biden took the stage, framing the governor's race as a battle between Republican "special interests" and "the little guy."

Rep. Frank Pallone (D-6th Dist.) accused Republican challenger Chris Christie of being "in bed with the insurance companies." Rep. Rush Holt (D-12 Dist.) said Christie is a relic of the Bush administration.

"He wants to contine their ideas," he said. "He wants to work with people who are no longer there, and thank goodness."



The recurring campaign issue of access to mammograms resurfaced today, with about two dozen breast cancer survivors standing to the side of the stage.

"Can you imagine that Christie would allow all insurance companies to drop coverage for mammograms?" U.S. Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D-N.J.) said.

Christie has denied his plan would affect access to mammograms, saying it's aimed at getting more people insured by increasing the availability of low-cost insurance plans.

About two hours before Biden spoke, hundreds of supporters and a small number of protesters began gathering at the college. A half-dozen Republican college students waved signs in support of Christie ahead of the 1 p.m. event that was held in the school's gymnasium.

One of the protesters, Rowan University sophomore Tom Szymanski, chanted "Christie" and "Down with Corzine, down with socialism" through a megaphone.

He said this week's planned visits by Biden and other national Democrats show Corzine can't stand on his "own failed record."

"There"s a lot of Democrats who support the Obama administration but don't support Corzine," he said. "They're trying to change these people's minds."

Bill Lavin, president of the New Jersey Firefighters Mutual Benevolent Association, said Corzine's furlough plan was disappointing, but Christie has an "anti-labor theme" in his campaign. He said the White House's support for Corzine is encouraging.

"We're glad to see the president and vice president are both behind the governor," he said. "Joe Biden has been a champion of firefighters' rights and the working man in general."

In addition to Biden, Democrats President Obama and former President Bill Clinton are expected to come to New Jersey this week to boost Corzine’s campaign as the hotly contested gubernatorial race nears its final two weeks.

A Quinnipiac University poll that was released Wednesday showed Christie leading by just 1 point, 41 percent to 40 percent. Independent candidate Chris Daggett finished third with 14 percent.

Although Corzine's unfavorable ratings remain in the 50-60 percent range, he is now running about even with Christie in several public opinion polls. Christie's once-formidable lead has collapsed amid a barrage of Corzine attack ads and increasing support for independent Chris Daggett.

Clinton is scheduled to make two appearances tomorrow, first with Corzine’s running mate, state Sen. Loretta Weinberg (D-Bergen), in Collingswood and then with Corzine at Rutgers University in New Brunswick.

On Wednesday Obama is making his second stump visit to New Jersey, campaigning with Corzine at Fairleigh Dickinson University's Rothman Center in Hackensack. He previously spoke with Corzine at the PNC Bank Arts Center in Holmdel in July.

“It shows the commitment from the White House, and the belief that the momentum is with us, and we’re going to win this election,” Democratic State Committee Chairman Joseph Cryan said. “Bringing these guys in sends a message. They’re not here if there’s not a path to victory.”

Cryan said Biden, who has campaigned with Corzine twice so far, is appealing to core Democratic constituencies like labor unions and law enforcement agencies.

Christie has downplayed the role of national political figures in his campaign.

After the gubernatorial debate Friday, he said he doesn't "expect many" national Republicans to visit New Jersey on his behalf during the final two weeks of the campaign. Former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani and former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney have already campaigned here with Christie in recent months, but Christie did not invite other prominent Republicans like former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin.

"I think you've seen I've kind of gone it on my own for the most part," Christie said.