Newark Mayor Cory Booker says crime down over past 3 years
NEWARK -- Despite an uptick in the number of killings in Newark last year , Mayor Cory Booker today pointed to the steady drop in overall crime since taking office three years ago as proof that his public safety initiatives are working.

The hourlong press briefing at the Newark Police and Fire Communications Center took place the same day Booker filed papers to seek a second term.

"Over the last three years in the significant categories of violent crime, we have seen precipitous reductions," Booker told reporters. He was flanked by Newark Police Director Garry McCarthy and local elected officials who stood next to a table covered with rifles and semiautomatic weapons recovered from last month’s gun buyback program.

Easels held boards that displayed facts and figures highlighting crime reductions and police and community initiatives, including a prisoner reentry program the city created last year for former prison convicts.

Overall crime in Newark is down 21 percent from 2006, the year that Booker succeeded Sharpe James. The decrease occurred despite the city’s then-hobbled police force, and the police department’s antiquated technology.

That has changed, Booker said, with overall declines in the number of shootings and homicides, an increase in the number of officers on the street, and a reinvestment in police infrastructure and technology.

The police department has added 234 officers since 2006, moved more officers to evening shifts, installed surveillance cameras and sonic gun shot detectors in the streets, and created anonymous tip lines to help apprehend suspects, Booker said.

The police department’s change in strategy all "starts with accountability," McCarthy said. "We’ve pushed accountability down to the precinct commanders. It’s great to have a policy change…but the devil is in the details, and the hardest part of a strategy like this is the implementation. The training is ongoing."

One of the few crime categories to rise last year is also the most noticeable.

Homicides in Newark increased to 77 in 2009, from 67 the year before, according to police statistics. The Essex County Prosecutor’s Office recorded 80 homicides in Newark for the year.

The discrepancy in numbers is part of the reason why Clifford Minor, who is running against Booker in the May election, said he remains unconvinced that the crime statistics are recorded accurately. For most residents, he said, life in the city has not changed.

"I don’t believe that people in the community think Newark is safe," said Minor, a former Essex County prosecutor and Newark police officer. "I don’t think they can take their kids and walk them down the street and think it’s safe."

Booker acknowledged as much, saying that despite the improvements, "we find ourselves in 2010 as a city that still has work to do. There are still too many shootings. But in terms of progress made, we have a significant record of progress."

Location of Newark murders in 2009

Note: When the map opens, click on the red pins for additional details about each murder.







Map and data compiled by Fred Kaimann, Rohan Mascarenhas and James Queally

Source: Essex County Prosecutor's Office

Read The Star-Ledger's full coverage of Newark Mayor Cory Booker

• Newark Mayor Cory Booker, Gov.-elect Chris Christie patrol Newark streets

• Murders in N.J. decline for third straight year