Gov. Corzine signs new law limiting N.J. gun purchases
TRENTON -- Gov. Jon Corzine today signed a controversial bill limiting handgun purchases to one every 30 days, a measure he said is aimed at slowing the supply of firearms to criminals.

"While we are winning some important battles against violent crime, we must remain aggressive in combating illegal possession, use and trafficking of firearms in New Jersey," said Corzine, who signed the legislation on the steps of Trenton City Hall.

New Jersey becomes the fourth state in the nation to approve such legislation, joining California, Maryland and Virginia.

Proponents say the law will cut the handgun supply line to gangs and others involved in illegal activity who use straw purchasers -- those with a gun permit who act as surrogates to buy weapons for criminals.

"It seems that every day we wake up to more gun violence, we wake up to a child who's been shot, we wake up to a policeman who has been killed... or we wake up to someone beating someone with a gun," said Sen. Sandra B. Cunningham (D-Hudson) a sponsor. "The main ingredient of this violence is easy access to black-market handguns."

Under the law, citizens would still have the ability to buy up to 13 guns a year.

Gun rights advocates charged it tramples on the Constitutional rights of citizens.

"Trying to reduce gun crime by rationing guns to law-abiding citizens is as absurd as trying to reduce drunk driving by rationing cars to non-drinkers," said Scott Bach, president of the Association of New Jersey Rifle and Pistol Clubs. "

The bill idea was introduced after Jersey City Mayor Jerramiah Healy's effort to implement a one gun a month ordinance was struck down by a Superior Court judge in 2006. The case was heard by the state Supreme Court, which has not issued its decision.

Approval of the measure did not come easily in the Legislature, where lawmakers, mainly from rural areas, argued it only penalized law-abiding citizens and did little to solve the gun-violence problem.

The bill only passed in the Senate after Corzine agreed to create a task force to study the impact of the law on firearms collectors and competitive and recreational firearms users. The nine-member panel will issue its findings in the fall.

Healy acknowledged today that these types of bans will not entirely solve the problem.

"Criminals are still going to be able to get a gun, no doubt about it," he said. "This is going to close up one source of illegal guns getting into the hands of gang-bangers, drug dealers and criminals ... that's a step in the right direction."

Salaam Ismial, of Elizabeth-based United Youth Council Inc., a youth and family advocacy group, however, said the bill is nothing but a "feel-good" piece of legislation.

"Drug dealers and thugs and these organized crime groups, they buy guns from other states," said Ismial, who believes the state should attack the problem by conducting a study on gun violence in urban areas and holding public hearings.

Bryan Miller, executive director of Ceasefire NJ, however, said nearly a third of all guns used in crimes in the state are bought in New Jersey legally. He said the law will make a marked difference.

"The only people who need more than 13 handguns a year are legitimate collectors, exempted by the law, and handgun traffickers who need to buy and sell handguns in volume to make a profit from their dirty and damaging and illegal trade," Miller said.

The measure prohibits gun sellers from "knowingly delivering" more than one gun during a 30-day period. It exempts the transfers of guns between licensed retail dealers and licensed firearms collectors.

The law takes affect Jan. 1. Violation of the law would be a fourth-degree felony, which carries a penalty of up to 18 months in prison and a fine of up to $10,000, or both.

Target shooting as a hobby

Previous coverage

June 26 -- Bill to limit N.J. gun purchases gets legislative approval

April 27 -- N.J. Supreme Court considers limits on gun sales

April 26 -- Gun buffs are buying lock, stock and barrel