Jersey Hustle: The real-life story of Abscam
The producers of “American Hustle” call it a work of fiction.

The film is already attracting Oscar buzz, described as “a world of Jersey powerbrokers and mafia that’s as dangerous as it is enchanting ... hinging on raw emotion, and life and death stakes ...”

Directed by David O. Russell, “American Hustle” stars Christian Bale as a fast-talking con man being squeezed as an informer, and Bradley Cooper as the FBI agent who uses him.

But while names have been changed, and many of its characters transformed or wholly invented by the screenwriters, it is no secret that the highly awaited film, which opens later this month, is based on the infamous Abscam case.

The real story of Abscam, the sweeping and still controversial federal corruption investigation that played out from Jersey to Florida in the late 1970s and early 1980s, turned out to be far more bizarre and outrageous than anything Hollywood could ever imagine.

The elaborate sting ensnared seven members of Congress, including six in the House of Representatives and a veteran U.S. Senator, along with a powerful New Jersey state legislator, three Philadelphia councilmen and a number of high-level political operatives. Abscam involved phony, oil-rich Arab sheiks with suitcases full of cash, stolen artwork, payoffs for Atlantic City casino licenses and backroom influence peddling that generated worldwide headlines and set off political shockwaves for years thereafter.

The undercover probe, which came to light in February 1980, ultimately led to the convictions of Sen. Harrison A. Williams (D-N.J.), Camden Democratic Mayor Angelo Errichetti, New Jersey Democratic Congressman Frank Thompson Jr., and other lawmakers, who were caught on secretly recorded surveillance video accepting tens of thousands of dollars in bribes.

It was a sting that still enrages defense attorneys who say it was based on crimes the government itself created. Sharply criticized by one federal district judge who accused the government of using “outrageous” tactics, the affair was flatly labeled a case of prosecutorial misconduct by a former U.S. Attorney for the District of New Jersey.

But it was an enterprise that rewrote the books for FBI undercover operations and led to more than a dozen criminal convictions and rejected appeals.

At the center of it all was an unrepentant, cigar-chomping Runyonesque swindler from Long Island by the name of Mel Weinberg. Barely controlled by his FBI handlers, he helped orchestrate the sting operation. Unscrupulous in every way, Weinberg had the kind of chutzpah that would enable him to convince his marks, even after inadvertently arranging for delivery of heaping hot corned beef sandwiches and coleslaw to a payoff meeting with an FBI undercover agent posing as an Arab prince, that an emir from the Middle East could love Jewish deli food.

Weinberg, now near 90 and living in Florida, chortles with delight when asked about the corned beef on rye. “Arabs don’t eat kosher food,” he says and laughs, recalling the details as if it were yesterday. “I couldn’t believe what was going on. I said to myself, ‘If we get away with this, we can get away with anything.’”

He makes no excuses about his reputation as a swindler. “I did run cons, no doubt about it,” he admits. “But that’s how they got Abscam started.”

I couldn’t believe what was going on. I said to myself, “If we get away with this, we can get away with anything …”

- Mel Weinberg

According to former FBI agent John Good, who masterminded the two-year sting, Abscam grew out of a routine inquiry into white-collar crime on Long Island. At the time, he recently had been reassigned from the FBI’s Manhattan office to Long Island. Good was in the midst of an ongoing inquiry into alleged payoffs to party bosses in Suffolk County during the construction of the $640-million Southwest Sewer District project, but he was under mounting pressure from his bosses to develop more major cases.

“I made it mandatory that guys develop, or make an attempt to develop, more confidential sources,” Good explains.

That’s about when Weinberg turned up on the radar.

Mel Weinberg had been running quick-buck schemes all his life, ranging from insurance fraud to investment scams, and spending his ill-gotten gains as fast as he took them in — not only on the props needed to make his act convincing, such as chartered jets and chauffeured limousines, but also on women, the horses and expensive booze. He lived on the edge, balancing a wife, a mistress, the mob, the feds and the people he gleefully swindled, as he jetted from Europe to the Caribbean to South America, working the next big scheme, according to the book “The Sting Man” by the late Newsday investigative reporter Robert W. Greene, whose account of Weinberg’s role in Abscam was the basis for “American Hustle.”

“Mel was a fabulous con man,” says Good. “He was a very, very intelligent guy. A little on the crude side, but with a magnificent ability to con people. He was a significant part of the case. Without him, it’s unlikely we ever would have had a case.”

Weinberg dreamed big and it was only after setting up one of his more elaborate scams that he finally was nabbed by the FBI.

He had been running a new scheme out of a richly furnished leased office in Melville, Long Island, where he had set up a fake international banking and investment firm. He called it London Investors and had bogus agents in Zurich, London and New York. London Investors held itself out as a facilitator for offshore financing, targeting desperate businessmen unable to obtain loans from conventional banks. It was really a “front-end” or advance-fee operation.

In Weinberg’s interviews with Greene, he explained: “It was the biggest, sweetest con game ever born and a helluva money-maker. ... I was very democratic. No matter who sent ’em, I scammed ’em.”

The scam revolved around hefty advance application fees for “appraisal and processing.” That was the front end. But there was no money at the back end of the pipeline. Weinberg would take the fees and then stall for months, sometimes generating more charges, until a letter came from the supposed offshore bank rejecting the loan application. In most cases, the victims did not even realize they had been scammed.

But Weinberg’s luck ran out in 1977, when a Pittsburgh real estate man taken in by the scam went to the FBI. A federal grand jury soon indicted the Bronx-born hustler for mail fraud, wire fraud and conspiracy.

It seemed the end of the line for Weinberg. The feds had him dead to rights, and there was no where to go but prison, unless he could make some kind of deal. That’s when Good — looking for an opening to break new major crime cases on Long Island — stumbled across Weinberg by chance. The Pittsburgh office had sent a routine FBI interoffice memo summarizing the case against Weinberg to the field office in Hauppauge. Although the criminal complaint had originated in Pittsburgh, London Investors had been operating in Good’s backyard, so the FBI supervising agent was alerted. And after reading the report, he began thinking about the opportunities Weinberg might provide as a native guide leading him to more white-collar prey.

He just might, Good mused, make for a pretty effective informant.

“Mel Weinberg and I had met and he agreed to cooperate and he began working with us,” Good says. “One thing led to another, and we had the potential for a major undercover operation.”

And that, he says, is how Abscam was born.

"Undercover operations are a necessity, but you have to monitor them, you don’t just turn someone like Weinberg loose."

- Robert Del Tufo

From the start, Weinberg was an enthusiastic participant. Put on a monthly allowance, with bonuses for every case he made, he did what he did best — he worked as a con man — for the FBI. But the agency wasn’t targeting politicians at first, says Good. “We never had any idea it was going to evolve into that.”

For months, the focus of the operation was on bringing down others working the same type of scams Weinberg had been working. Always ready with a story, the informant himself came up with yet another scam.

“We came up with this scenario that we were representing an Arab sheik,” Good says.

The idea was to dangle the promise of big money from some OPEC-nation Arab investors with deep pockets, who were ripe for the taking. As a cover, in case anyone checked their backstory, the FBI created a company called Abdul Enterprises Ltd., to represent the interests of the fictitious Kambir Abdul Rahman, supposedly a fabulously wealthy Arab businessman tied to royalty.

Weinberg was president of the company. The FBI special agents assigned to the case took on aliases and corporate titles in the hoax company, including undercover operative Anthony Amoroso, who became “Tony DeVito,” serving as Abdul’s “personal construction engineer.” A bank was recruited to vouch for Sheik Rahman’s wealth. A second sheik, Yassir Habib, was later introduced, and produced, when the FBI brought in an agent of Lebanese descent to play him. It was at that point the FBI operation finally took on a name, based on Abdul and scam. It became known as Abscam.

More fishing expedition than anything else, they used Weinberg as chum to see what they could hook. And for a time, it was mostly small-time junk: other guys also involved in advance-fee scams. Stolen securities. The peddling of fraudulent certificates of deposit. After it was revealed that the sheiks wanted to invest oil money in valuable artworks, the FBI arrested several individuals dealing in stolen art and recovered two 17th-century paintings missing since 1966 and estimated to be worth $1 million.

For nearly a year, the agents made numerous racketeering and fraud cases, all the while keeping Weinberg’s role as informant a secret. But there soon came a turning point in the investigation when one of the many middlemen lured by the smell of Arab money — a convicted swindler named William Rosenberg who had already done time for stock fraud — approached Weinberg with a deal involving the port of Camden, and the city’s dapper mayor, Angelo Errichetti, who Rosenberg intimated was on the take.

Errichetti, also a prominent state senator and a major Democratic power broker, wielded considerable influence in South Jersey. He was said to have connections with state regulators overseeing the casino boom of Atlantic City, where all development was contingent on the awarding of gaming licenses. A meeting was arranged with Weinberg and on Dec. 1, 1978, the mayor arrived at the office of Abdul Enterprises in Long Island.

"I can only blame myself for the tremendous ego I developed, the kind of ego that gets a politician into trouble."

- Angelo Errichetti

Weinberg says he liked Errichetti a lot.

“He was a nice guy. But he was just an unbelievable crook. He had no fear,” he says.

According to surveillance tapes of the meeting with Errichetti, the South Jersey politician made it clear he could deliver. “I’ll give you Atlantic City,” he said. “Without me, you do nothing.” He claimed he had influence with the state’s Casino Control Commission and its vice chairman, his good friend Kenneth N. MacDonald.

Good says they gave him cash and he walked away with it.

“The politicians were just unbelievably unethical and ruthless,” he says.

Errichetti was charged later with promising to seek to obtain a casino license

for Abdul Enterprises in return for an immediate payment of $25,000 and a total payment of $400,000.

The approach to Errichetti shifted Abscam into a major political corruption investigation, using the mayor as the critical go-between to even bigger fish that ran all the way to Capitol Hill. At one meeting with Weinberg and the agents, Errichetti said he knew congressmen willing to take bribes. The names of Raymond F. Lederer and Michael Myers, both of Philadelphia, would later come up.

And the list quickly grew. There was Rep. Frank Thompson Jr. of Trenton, a tall, silver-haired man who had served in Congress since 1955 and had been a political ally of John F. Kennedy. Thompson served as chairman of the powerful House Administration Committee. Democratic Congressmen John M. Murphy of Staten Island and John Jenrette of South Carolina, along with Republican Richard Kelly of Florida. And Senator Harrison A. Williams of New Jersey.

The FBI arranged meetings at airports, in a rented home in Washington, in Atlantic City hotel rooms, offices on Long Island and in Florida. They arranged for chartered jets, limos and parties. The team later even acquired a yacht, seized by U.S. Customs in a drug bust, to hold parties with politicians. The 65-foot Cheoy Lee motor yacht, decked in teak, was fitted with video and audio surveillance gear that could pick up and record conversations anywhere on board.

“Tony (DeVito, played by Amoroso) loved that boat,” says Weinberg. “When it came time to name it, he said, ‘I’m left-handed. Let’s call it Left Hand.’ I told him, ‘Tony, left hand means the Mafia.’ He put it on anyway.”

The script for most was remarkably similar. When Lederer, a Democrat from Philadelphia first elected to Congress in 1976, knocked on the door of room 717 of the Hilton Inn at Kennedy International Airport on a Tuesday evening, Errichetti was there waiting for him with Weinberg, and other undercover FBI agents posing as representatives of the fictitious sheik. The meeting was videotaped. It was explained that the sheik was looking for a sponsor in case he needed help getting into the country one day.

Amoroso explained later that he came up with the immigration ruse after reading a newspaper story about possible deportation problems facing deposed Nicaragua dictator Anastasio Somoza.

“I understand you can introduce legislation,” said DeVito, the conversation recorded and later played back before a federal jury.

“Right, a bill. Private bill,” agreed Lederer. “Sure.”

The congressman left the hotel with a brown bag containing $50,000 in cash.

“Spend it well,” DeVito told him.

Michael “Ozzie” Myers, a former longshoreman with a vocabulary to match, brought one of the most memorable quotes to the sting operation when the issue of special legislation was introduced.

“I’m gonna tell you something real simple and short: Money talks in this business and bullshit walks. And it works the same way down in Washington,” he said. Before he left, he too, was given an envelope containing $50,000 in $100 bills.

DeVito again repeated his signature line. “Spend it well,” the undercover agent said.

"Impress the sheik with the baloney. This was a baloney session."

- Sen. Harrison A. Williams

Harrison A. Williams was considered the biggest prize of the FBI investigation. A long-time member of Congress who served more than two decades in the U.S. Senate, Williams was a liberal Democrat known as a tough legislator and champion of organized labor and social welfare programs who authored federal laws protecting pension rights and the first law providing mass transportation assistance to states. Known as “Pete” to his friends, Williams was low-key with a ready smile who served as a Navy pilot in World War II and later graduated from Columbia Law School.

But the FBI had learned Williams had a hidden interest in a titanium mining venture in Piney River, Va., and close associates of the senator were informed that Sheik Habib was willing to lend $100 million in exchange for using his influence to obtain government contracts for the mine’s output.

The subsequent meeting produced one of the most spellbinding images of the investigation, when surveillance video was presented at the trial of the senator. The “sheik” was played by Richard Farhart, an FBI agent brought in from the Ohio office, who wore an Arab headdress and a suit, but said little during his meetings with Williams. Also there was Errichetti.

“You know what you could do and what not,” DeVito told him. “Based on that, I’ve explained it to the sheik and this is what we’ve really based our strength on, the strength that you have.”

Williams turned to the sheik. “If this can be put together, in my position with, within the government here, which goes back decades, and knowing as I do the people that make the decisions, with, when we’ve got it together, we move.”

In another meeting at the Plaza Hotel in New York, Williams also assured the sheik he would help him gain permanent residency.

“You can leave with my assurance that I will do those things that will, will bring you on for the consideration of permanency,” he said.

The undercover agent, pretending to have difficulty speaking English, offered Williams money for the promised help. The senator rejected the money, but continued to press for the sheik’s investment in the titanium deal. “My interest is with my associates — to see this very valuable mining area appropriately developed,” he said as the conversation was being recorded on surveillance tape.

By now, the case was being directed by the Justice Department’s Organized Crime Strike Force in Brooklyn, headed by federal prosecutor Thomas P. Puccio. But not everyone in law enforcement was pleased with the direction the case was taking. The U.S. Attorney in New Jersey, Robert Del Tufo, had been briefed early in the matter when Puccio called to tell him that Errichetti and McDonald had been drawn into an undercover sting.

“It sounded like they were making great cases,” says Del Tufo, who would later become state attorney general and now is an attorney in private practice at the New York City firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom.

Del Tufo assigned a number of deputies to the case, including Executive Assistant U.S. Attorney Edward Plaza, to work with Puccio’s office. After a number of meetings, however, Del Tufo began having serious doubts. “We weren’t getting information. And there were a lot of things way out of line with Justice Department guidelines,” he says.

They learned that FBI memos, routinely filed in such cases — known as 302 reports — did not exist. And that Weinberg was getting a bounty for each case he made.

Plaza, now an attorney in private practice in Red Bank, called Abscam a seriously flawed case. “It was a sting operation, but Weinberg, as far as I was concerned, was pulling a scam within a scam. He was scamming the government officials trying to monitor the operation,” he says.

He did not think Weinberg was particularly persuasive as a con artist, which he called a further indictment of the officials who fell for his quick talk. But more troubling to him was his discovery that Weinberg was coaching the targets of the investigation on what to say, suggesting specific language that would ensure an indictment.

“He would tell them there is an ‘Arab way’ to do business,” Plaza says. They would be told to make themselves sound important, because the sheik would be more willing to invest if he knew politicians were involved — that’s how things got done in the Middle East.

“I told Mel, ‘You can’t do this. You can’t be putting words in people mouths.’” says Plaza. “Mel said if he didn’t do it that way, ‘Then we won’t have any cases.’”

The attorney says that the elected officials pulled into Abscam disgraced themselves. “But the question was, what was really taking place? Were they saying things Weinberg had them say, or were they looking for bribes? It was difficult to figure out,” Plaza says.

Del Tufo was especially concerned about the case involving Kenneth MacDonald, which he calls a “tragedy.” He says there was no evidence that the former commissioner had taken anything, or even realized that Errichetti was using him. But, he adds, Puccio refused to back down.

When Del Tufo was pressured to convene a grand jury for Errichetti and the others, he refused. His objections were later dismissed by higher-ups at the Justice Department and the cases were handled out of Brooklyn and Philadelphia. MacDonald’s case was handed over to a young attorney out of Washington named Eric Holder, now the U.S. Attorney General, but it never went to trial. Stricken with cancer, MacDonald died still seeking exoneration.

MacDonald’s attorney, Justin Walder of Roseland, calls him one of Abscam’s victims.

“Ken MacDonald was an innocent man who asked for nothing, received nothing, and engaged in no improper conduct. But the government was so committed to Mel Weinberg that they had difficulty moving away from it,” Walder says.

To this day, Del Tufo remains angry about how it all came down, especially the accusations that he was protecting Williams because the senator allegedly nominated him to become U.S. Attorney — something that was not true.

“Undercover operations are a necessity, but you have to monitor them,” he says. “You don’t just turn someone like Weinberg loose.”

Abscam became public in February 1980, when details of the still ongoing investigation were leaked to the media. According to Weinberg, Puccio — who denied being the source — allowed a New York Times reporter to see the criminal complaints.

In the following months, Williams, Thompson and the other members of Congress ensnared by the sting were indicted. And in time, all were convicted, as were three Philadelphia councilmen, Errichetti and several political operatives with ties to Williams and Errichetti.

Many are now dead. Lederer, convicted of conspiracy and bribery, served 10 months in prison. He died in 2008 at the age of 70. Re-elected while under indictment, he resigned from Congress the day after the House Ethics Committee voted to expel him.

Thompson served almost two years in federal prison. He died in 1989 at the age of 70.

Richard Kelly, the only Republican nabbed in Abscam and who claimed he had accepted $25,000 in cash as part of his own investigation of corruption, was convicted of bribery and conspiracy. His conviction was subsequently thrown out by U.S. District Judge William B. Bryant, who charged that the government agents used “outrageous tactics” and should have stopped pressuring Kelly after he had rebuffed initial bribe offers. His conviction was reinstated on appeal.

Errichetti served nearly three years in prison. “I can only blame myself for the tremendous ego I developed, the kind of ego that gets a politician into trouble,” he said after his release. The former Camden mayor later worked as a consultant in real estate, and died this past May at his home in Ventnor. He was 84.

Williams, sentenced to three years in prison, fought his expulsion from the Senate in an effort to show he was a victim of FBI misconduct. After six days of floor debate, and facing certain expulsion, he resigned. In his farewell to the chamber, the senator said, “I believe time, history and the Almighty God will vindicate me and the principles for which I have fought here in the Senate.”

The senator died in 2001 at the age of 81.

Puccio, who went on to gain a reputation as the go-to defense attorney in many high-profile cases, last year succumbed to complications from leukemia. He was 67.

Good, 77, is now a partner in the Babylon, N.Y., security and investigations firm of Lawn, Mullen & Good. He retired from the FBI in 1986 as supervisor of the Hauppauge office after spending 30 years with the bureau. He served as a consultant for “American Hustle.”

The FBI agent, played in the film by Bradley Cooper, is not based on any one guy, Good says. But Christian Bale, the Welsh-born actor from “Return of the Dark Knight,” plays Weinberg, who says he also was a consultant on the film and spent three days with Bale.

“Nice guy, but I’m from the Bronx and he’s from England,” says Weinberg. “That’s Hollywood.”

Weinberg now lives on the Space Coast of Florida, not far from the Kennedy Space Center. Nearly blind from macular degeneration, he remains sharp at the age of 89, able to recall even the smallest detail of Abscam.

“It was so easy,” he says of the investigation. “But it could never happen again.”

This story appeared in Inside Jersey magazine's December 2013 issue.