NJ Transit director says fare hikes would come with job cuts to reduce costs
TRENTON -- A day after confirming NJ Transit passengers will face a sizable fare hike and service reductions, the agency’s executive director said today management jobs also will be cut.

James Weinstein told the Assembly Transportation Committee that all positions would be examined, including those Gov. Chris Christie characterized as "political patronage" jobs.

"Reducing costs, frankly, is going to mean eliminating jobs," Weinstein said in his first public acknowledgment the agency workforce will be reduced.

Weinstein also said that if employees are asked take pay cuts, he will "start at the top" and reduce his own $261,324 salary.

Weinstein has said the agency is facing a shortfall of up to $300 million this year. In addition, Christie has said he wants to withhold nearly $33 million in subsidies to NJ Transit as a way to help close a $2.2 billion state budget gap.

"There’s over 11,000 jobs at NJ Transit, and it has been a political patronage mill for a long time — I want (Weinstein) to ferret those people out," Christie said today during a press event in Burlington County.

But, he said, fare hikes may be unavoidable.

"There has not been a fare hike of any kind in almost three years. Yet the people who drive on our roads just had toll increases again," Christie said. "Those who drive on the Turnpike and the Parkway and people who cross over the Delaware River bridges and the Hudson River bridges have also had increases. A fare increase may be necessary."

At the same time, the governor said, the state will continue to fund NJ Transit.

"We are going to continue a significant subsidy ...," he said, noting there has been an overreaction to his decision to freeze what he said amounts to a month-and-a-half of subsidies. "You’d think we closed down the system."

Transportation Committee Chairman John Wisniewski (D-Middlesex) said that fare increases should be the last option and service cuts should be the second to last option.

On Wednesday, Weinstein said NJ Transit bus, train and light rail riders could be hit with a "not insignificant" fare hike as early as May.

By Mike Frassinelli and Susan K. Livio

• NJ Transit director says fare hike may happen by May

• Blind 13 year old tells N.J. Assembly panel about impact of Gov. Chris Christie's budget cuts

• Gov. Chris Christie warns N.J. districts school aid could be cut 15 percent in next budget

• Gov. Chris Christie says he will need N.J. legislature to move money into general funds

• NJ Transit union leader warns of fare hikes of up to 30 percent, service cuts, employee furloughs

• N.J. Democrats take aim at Gov. Christie's cuts to NJ Transit, school funding

Christie announces cuts to 375 different state programs Christie announces cuts to 375 different state programs