Tight budgets, increased enrollment cause tuition hikes at N.J. county colleges
Tuition will go up an average of 4.4 percent at New Jersey’s county colleges this fall as the two-year schools deal with state budget cuts and record enrollment brought on by the struggling economy.

Students at all 19 county colleges will pay higher tuition when they return to class next semester, according to a survey by the New Jersey Council of County Colleges. The tuition hikes will range from 1.9 percent at Atlantic Cape Community College to 7 percent at Burlington County College.

The increases mean New Jersey students will continue to pay some of the highest county college tuitions in the nation. For the first time, the state’s average county college tuition will surpass $100 per credit — or more than $300 for a typical three-credit class.

Higher-education officials said the tuition increases are unavoidable in a year when state funding to county colleges was cut nearly 10 percent and enrollment soared 12 percent.

"It is good news that so many are turning to community colleges, but at the same time we have to find ways to accommodate these students with reduced public funding," said Lawrence Nespoli, president of the county colleges council.

New Jersey began its system of two-year county colleges in the 1960s to provide open enrollment and low-cost degrees for state residents. The original plan was to split the cost of running the system between the state, counties and students, with each group paying 33 percent.

But over the years, the state and counties have been paying less and less of their share, forcing the schools to raise tuition. This year, student tuition and fees will cover 58 percent of the cost of running the schools, according to the county college council survey.

Though the state Legislature capped tuition increases at the state’s four-year colleges at 4 percent this year, the county colleges were free to raise tuition at their own discretion. Most schools weighed the effect of the state and county budget cuts with how much of a tuition increase they thought their students could handle, college officials said.

"You get to the tipping point, where you say you can’t pass this cost on to the students anymore … It’s that delicate balance," said Joann La Perla-Morales, president of Middlesex County College, which raised tuition 2.1 percent.

Tuition will continue to vary widely from school to school. The state’s highest-priced county colleges are: Brookdale Community College ($118.50 per credit), Bergen Community College ($118.30) and County College of Morris ($110). The least expensive are: Gloucester County College ($85 per credit), Burlington County College ($92) and Ocean County College ($94).

Most classes are three credits, and full-time students typically take 30 credits per year. This year, the average full-time county college student in New Jersey will pay $3,035, or $129 more than last year.

That is well above the national average of $2,544 a year at public two-year colleges, according to the American Association of Community Colleges.

However, attending county colleges is still a fraction of the cost of attending four-year public colleges, where tuition and fees averaged $7,020 last year, according to the College Board.

Some students at New Jersey’s county colleges said they are lucky the state’s student financial aid system, one of the most generous in the nation, will help cover part of the tuition hikes.

"Middlesex has been extremely good to me with financial aid, so honestly I didn’t even notice the increase," said Danielle Hobbs, 25, a biology and English major at Middlesex County College, where tuition will go up $2 a credit.

County college enrollment hit an all-time high in New Jersey last year. Higher-education officials credit the sagging economy with inspiring many people to head back to school to change careers or improve their job prospects. The NJ STARS program — which provides free county college tuition to students who graduate in the top 15 percent of their high school class — has also helped drive up enrollment.

Last year, 177,173 students enrolled in the state’s county college classes for credit, according to the survey. When non-credit classes and work training programs are added in, the two-year schools educated nearly 400,000 students last year. Several county college officials said their early enrollment numbers indicate they are headed for record increases again this fall.

"The growth has been spectacular," said Steven Rose, president of Passaic County Community College. "There is just a growing awareness of what we are and what we do."