NJ Transit's record 25 percent fare hike troubles those who rely on buses, trains
Unable to drive because of a sight impairment, lawyer David Peter Alan has spent a lifetime getting around New Jersey by train.

Whether attending court hearings in Newark or visiting his mom, he has happily relied on rail.

But after NJ Transit announced a record 25-percent fare hike today, the South Orange resident was wishing he could get behind the wheel of a car.

"This is an absolute nightmare for all transit riders, and it must have been done with either intentional malice or reckless disregard for the mobility of people who don’t have automobiles," Alan said. "NJ Transit’s slogan is ‘The Way to Go.’ But Gov. (Chris) Christie is telling us that the automobile is the way to go."

Alan predicted some cash-strapped riders would eat less or attempt to save money elsewhere.

"I’m transit dependent, I don’t have a choice," he said. "If I had an automobile, I’d certainly be on the highways."

NJ Transit’s nearly 900,000 daily train, bus and light rail riders will have decisions of their own to make on May 1, when the fare hike is set to take effect. Public hearings will be held around state beginning March 25.

Under the proposal, customers would see fewer trains and buses and have longer waits in addition to paying higher fares.

Newly hired NJ Transit executive director Jim Weinstein said he wanted to make the cuts with a scalpel, not a meat cleaver. But having to close a $300 million budget deficit turned the process into what must seem like major surgery to some commuters.

"It’s sad that in these hard economic times, NJ Transit has indicated to us that we bear the brunt," said William Hathaway, an Orange resident who uses NJ Transit buses and trains to get to Newark and New York, among other places.

A train trip from Orange to New York is set to increase from $5 to $6.25. In other examples, the cost of a bus trip from Paterson to New York would jump from $5.25 to $6.50 and the cost of a train trip from Montclair State University to New York would rise from $5.75 to $7.25.

Off-peak round trip discounts would be eliminated.

In addition to paying 25 percent more in fares, customers would also have fewer trains and buses from which to choose, with 32 trains and three buses being dropped. At least two trains were deleted from each of NJ Transit’s 11 train lines.

Bus riders are expected to experience reduced service frequency on about 50 routes, with waits expected to increase by 5 to 20 minutes.

While not unexpected the size of the increase was still stunning.

The 25-percent proposed increase would be the highest in the 30-year history of NJ Transit, the nation’s third largest public transit system. Other increases over the years, including the last one in 2007, have been in the 10 percent range.

"We recognize that any increase is a burden for our customers, particularly during a recession," Weinstein said. "However, we have worked to keep local bus fares below the regional average and preserved some important discounts for seniors and people with disabilities, as well as for students and others who are among the most transit dependent."

He said that with a reduced state subsidy of $33 million, the loss of $150 million in one-time federal stimulus money, a 4-percent decrease in ridership due to the economic downturn and contract obligations, there was no choice but to raise fares.

The fare increase comes on the heels of an announcement earlier this week that NJ Transit was laying off 200 workers, cutting contributions by one-third to the employee 401(k) retirement fund and decreasing executive pay by 5 percent.

For more information on the proposed fare hikes and route changes, visit www.njtransit.com