N.J. college students' tuition bills continue to rise despite increased financial aid
Though cash-strapped undergraduates and their families may beg to differ, a new report says the cost of going to college may actually be getting cheaper for some students.

The sticker price to attend public and private colleges is still climbing faster than inflation, according to the national study released today by the College Board. But the net price — the amount the average student will pay this year after receiving grants, scholarships and other aid — is less than it was five years ago thanks to increases in financial aid funding.



“The silver lining is that record federal aid in the form of Pell grants and tax credits is helping to make a college education more affordable,” said College Board President Gaston Caperton.

However, not everyone is celebrating. While the average student is paying less out of pocket to attend college, most of the increased cash for financial aid is going to low-income students and returning military veterans.

About one-third of students receive no grants or scholarships. Those students, who are mostly from middle- and upper-class families, do not qualify for income-based grants and scholarships. They are paying bigger tuition bills with no additional help.

All students also need to find money to pay increases in room and board, textbook costs and other fees.

“While we’re encouraged by significant increases in financial aid, under the current economic conditions, too many students and families are still struggling to pay for college,” said Sandy Baum, who co-authored the report by the College Board, the nonprofit group that oversees the SAT and tracks college trends.

This year, the average public four-year college is charging $7,605 annually in tuition and fees, an increase of $555 over last year, the study found. The average four-year private college is charging $27,293, or $1,164 more than last year.

However, the study estimated the average student at a four-year public college will pay $1,540 in net tuition and fee costs this year once grants, scholarships and tax credits are taken into account. That is nearly $500 less than students paid in 2005-2006, when the rates are adjusted for inflation.

Students at private colleges are also paying less out of pocket, the study found. The average student at a private college will pay an estimated $11,320 in net tuition and fees this year, about $1,430 less than in 2005-2006.

In New Jersey, four-year public colleges were forced to keep their tuition hikes to 4 percent this year under a provision Gov. Chris Christie and lawmakers included in the state budget.

However, New Jersey colleges continue to charge well above the national average.

Among the public four-year colleges, annual tuition and fees range from $9,347 at New Jersey City University to $13,549 at the College of New Jersey. At the private colleges, annual tuition ranges from $21,200 at Bloomfield College to $39,816 at Stevens Institute of Technology.

New Jersey’s two-year county colleges are charging an average $3,035 a year for full-time students. That is $322 more than the national average.

College funding analysts discouraged students from getting too excited that increasing financial aid will continue to offset the cost of rising tuition. The numbers in the new study reflect last year’s $10 billion jump in funding for federal Pell grants, the largest increase in the program’s history.

It is unclear if Congress will continue to increase funding to the federal financial aid program in future years. In New Jersey, low-income college students are already getting smaller state financial aid checks this year thanks to the state’s budget problems.

A boom in the number of students qualifying for New Jersey’s Tuition Aid Grant program, known as TAG, forced the state cut aid checks as much as $872 per student this year.

At New Jersey City University, a small group of students held a campus protest earlier this week to draw attention to the effects of the cuts.

Criminal justice major Carolina Garcia said her term bill is significantly larger this semester due to a 4 percent increase in tuition and a cut in her state financial aid check. Other students are also struggling, she said.

“It’s affecting the working- class students,” said Garcia, 22, of Franklin Park. “I know a lot of students who can’t even get books right now.”

Higher education analysts said they understand if students are skeptical of a report that says college is getting cheaper. Even if the net cost of going to school has fallen slightly, many families don’t feel the benefits because they are struggling with unemployment and pay cuts brought on by the economic downturn.

“Everyone is feeling a pinch because no one’s income is keeping up with inflation,” said Kathy Payea, a College Board policy analyst.