Port Authority toll hikes were unavoidable, chairman says
403 Forbidden

403 Forbidden

NEW YORK — Bryan Flynn and David Samson were pretty much of the same mindset today about the Port Authority’s planned toll hike for its bridges and tunnels.

"It’s got to happen," said Flynn, 37, of Cedar Grove, a salesman who was gassing up his Mini Cooper outside the Holland Tunnel on his daily commute into New York. "From the standpoint of my money, I don’t want to give it to them. But it is what it is. They need the cash..."

Samson, chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, also characterized the increase as a necessary burden before he and the rest of the agency’s commissioners voted unanimously to approve a $4.50 toll hike for E-ZPass users, along with a $1 fare increase for PATH riders.

"We are mindful of the real, genuine concerns over the amount of the proposal and the commuters’ ability to pay for such toll and fare increases," Samson said.

Tolls will increase by $1.50, to $9.50, on Sept. 18, for E-ZPass users, followed by additional annual increases of 75 cents through 2015, when the E-ZPass toll will be $12.50. Cash-paying customers will be charged an additional $2. However, the fee will actually be $2.50 at the start because the cash toll will be rounded up to the next whole dollar. That will put the cash toll at $12 starting Sept. 18 and $15 by 2015.

Truckers will pay $2 more per axle followed by $2 per axle increases each year through 2015. Cash paying truckers will be hit with a $3 per axle surcharge.

The increases affect the Lincoln and Holland tunnels, the Outerbridge Crossing and the Goethals, Bayonne and George Washington bridges.

At the same time, the one-way PATH fare will increase by 25 cents on Sept. 18, to $2.00, followed by three more annual increases of 25 cents each, reaching $2.75 in October 2014. Monthly passes will also begin rising that day, $65 from $54, stepping up to $73, $80 and $89 over the next three years.

Today’s vote was no surprise.



On Thursday, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo signed off on the increases, which were smaller than those the Port Authority originally proposed earlier this month. A condition of the governors’ approval, however, was a stipulation the commissioners would also approve an audit of the agency’s finances.

Christie and Cuomo demanded the audit after two recent reports from New York State Comptroller Thomas DiNapoli said the Port Authority wastes millions of dollars on overtime and consultants.

"On an ongoing basis, this board will direct, and closely oversee, management to review all aspects of our operations, including a comprehensive review of compensation and benefits, and a reevaluation of the Port Authority’s capital projects," Samson said after the board approved the audit.

Commissioner Ray Pocino praised Christie and Cuomo for their bipartisanship — Christie is a Republican, Cuomo a Democrat.

Pocino was asked by an opponent of the increases to recuse himself because he is an official of the Laborers International Union of North America, of LiUNA, whose members packed Tuesday’s public hearings. He did not.

The laborers hope to fill some of the 131,000 jobs the Port Authority says will be generated by $25 billion worth of capital projects financed by the toll and fare increases. Samson said those projects include redevelopment of the World Trade Center, raising the Bayonne Bridge roadbed, and a $1.5 billion public-private partnership to replace the Goethals Bridge.

Several commuters at the meeting spoke out against the hikes. One opponent who was not at the meeting was U.S. Sen. Frank Lautenberg (D-N.J.) who, in a press release, condemned what he called Christie’s "war on commuters."

It was a reference to the governor’s cancellation last fall of a trans-Hudson commuter rail tunnel because, Christie said at the time, he was concerned that cost overruns would be borne by taxpayers.

Related coverage:

• Port Authority approves modified toll, fare hike for Hudson River crossings PATH



• Gov. Christie, N.Y. Gov. Cuomo say OK to scaled-back toll hikes

• Govs. Christie, Cuomo announce $1.50 Port Authority toll hike

• Toll hike hearings in New York and New Jersey draw supporters and opponents

• Ahead of Port Authority toll-hike vote, N.Y. audit says agency wastes millions on overtime

• Port Authority defends huge toll hike, calling it 'absolutely necessary'