Gov. Christie proposes 10 percent N.J. income tax reduction
TRENTON — Gov. Chris Christie today proposed a 10 percent reduction in state income taxes regardless of income — phased in over three years — and restoration of the earned-income tax credit that would benefit the state's poorest citizens.

Understand what this means," Christie said in his State of the State message, the second one he has delivered since becoming governor in January 2010,. "Every New Jerseyan will get a cut in taxes. The working poor. The struggling middle class. The new college graduates getting their first job. The senior citizens who have already retired. The single mom. The job creators. The parents trying to afford to send their son or daughter to college.

As he put it: " Everyone made the sacrifice. Everyone will share in the benefit."

Looking back on his first two years in office, the governor said New Jersey's economy has turned a corner from the "dark days of 2010."

He began his address in the Assembly chamber by touting some of his signal accomplishments: scaling back pensions and benefits for public workers, capping property tax increases and arresting the growth of the state's unemployment rate.



"We have restrained the growth of property taxes," Christie told legislators, state Supreme Court justices and former governors gathered in the Statehouse. "We have put our pensions on a more stable and sustainable footing. And in doing all this, we have restored confidence and pride in New Jersey."

Christie vowed that even with those gains, he would remain a hyper-vigilant budget hawk.

He rejected a proposal by Assembly Speaker Sheila Oliver (D-Essex), made hours earlier, to increase income taxes on the state's millionaires.

"Let others choose tax increases," Christie said. "We choose responsible tax cuts to give our overburdened citizens real relief."



Christie, who criticized Washington politicians for partisan gridlock, praised Oliver and Senate President Stephen Sweeney (D-Gloucester) for crossing the aisle to work with him.

"Our economy suffers while Washington politicians — in both parties — fiddle," he said. "Over the last two years New Jersey did the exact opposite. We achieved results because we did it together."

The governor's address to a packed Assembly chamber then moved to education reform.

Christie said he would keep pushing for "sweeping" changes to the tenure system for teachers, opening up more pathways for charter schools to set up in New Jersey, allowing layoffs based on performance and not seniority, merit pay for teachers, and "vouchers" for students in failing schools.

"I have worked with this Legislature — on a bipartisan basis — to put in front of you a package of bills that will address the biggest challenges facing public education," he said. "We have had a year to debate, discuss and deliberate. Now, in 2012, it is time to act."

Christie said New Jersey had also turned a corner another front — the battle of public relations and public perceptions. The state is no longer a punch line in popular culture, the governor said.

"Over the last two years, New Jersey is now seen around the country once again, not exclusively as the butt of late-night jokes, but as a focus of the evening news and Sunday talk shows," Christie said. "Why? Because, once again, we are leading America — by taking on the big things in public policy."

Related coverage:



• Live video: Christie's 2012 State of the State address

• Live blog: Gov. Christie gives State of the State address, legislature reorganizes

• Gov. Christie in action: State of the State address, busy day in Trenton to come

• N.J. Gov. Chris Christie opens up about his woulda-coulda-shouldas