Judge rules state pension, benefits overhaul does not apply to N.J. judges
TRENTON — Superior Court judges and Supreme Court justices, protected by the state Constitution from salary reductions while in office, are exempt from Gov. Chris Christie’s new pension and health benefits plan requiring them to contribute a larger share of their salary, a judge ruled today.

Christie immediately lashed out at the ruling handed down by Superior Court Assignment Judge Linda Feinberg and indicated the state would appeal.

"This outrageous, self-serving decision, where a judge is protecting her own pocketbook and those of her colleagues, is why the public has grown to have such little faith in the objectivity of the judiciary," the governor said in a statement issued by his office.

In reaching her decision, Feinberg concluded that the increased contributions Christie is requiring of judges and almost 700,000 current and retired state employees is an indirect reduction in pay that the Constitution specifically forbids for judges and justices.

Feinberg also rejected the state’s contention that the increase is similar to a tax and is not discriminatory because it applies to all state employees.

"Quite simply, the salaries of New Jersey justices and judges during their term of appointment may not be diminished in any way for any purpose," Feinberg, who sits in Trenton, wrote in a 59-page decision. "Clearly, plaintiff’s salary is being diminished — not by a tax imposed an all citizens of the state of New Jersey, but by legislative action that mandates higher pension and health care contributions in contravention of the Constitution of the state of New Jersey."

She said contributions to health benefits and pensions are no different from paid vacations, sick days and personal time; they all comprise compensation for work done.

Superior Court Judge Paul DePascale of Hudson County filed the lawsuit challenging the measure in July after Christie signed legislation on June 28 increasing judges’ pension contributions from 3 percent to 12 percent of their annual salaries and requiring them to pay 35 percent of their health care premiums.

Dismissing Feinberg’s ruling, Christie said: "These political appointees, who are the most lavishly paid public workers, with the richest lifetime benefits, have now had one of their own rule that they are above the law and should be treated preferentially. We trust that the Supreme Court will reverse this ridiculous decision and find that judges should have to pay their fair share, just like every other public employee."

State law allows judges to hear cases that directly affect them when there is no other appropriate court to address the matter. The case did not go to U.S. District Court because it does not involve any federal allegations.

It is not the first time Christie has tangled with the courts, though this time he is seeking redress from the very body he has had sharp words for. He has repeatedly said the state Supreme Court justices have overstepped their bounds by influencing policy and budget decisions best left to the governor and the Legislature.

In making her ruling, Feinberg said the salaries can’t be touched — even in difficult economic times — and noted the provision is in the Constitution to protect judges from potentially vindictive acts of the executive and legislative branches of government.

Two weeks ago a group of state employees tried to tie their own legal challenge to the changes in pensions and benefits to DePascale’s case, but Feinberg ruled the two were not closely enough related to consolidate them.

DePascale, who earns $165,000 a year, said his contribution for health benefits would more than double, to $5,230.86, and his biweekly pension deductions would go from $126.44 to $697.59 under the new law. The increased deductions were scheduled to take effect Oct. 14.

It was not immediately clear whether those higher contributions were withheld from the judges’ paychecks and whether the increased deductions would be made in the future.

Justin Walder, DePascale’s attorney, said Feinberg’s decision affirms their position.

"The court appropriately enforced the constitutional mandate that the salaries of the justices of the Supreme Court and the judges of the Superior Court shall not be diminished during their term of appointment,’’ he said.

Related coverage:

• Judge: N.J. public workers, judge cannot jointly challenge pension overhaul



• State employees challenging legality of pension law want to combine lawsuit



• N.J. Supreme Court won't rush to hear Superior Court judge's challenge of pension overhaul



• N.J. judge sues state, says increased pension and health benefits costs should not apply to judges



• N.J. judge files lawsuit against new pension and health benefit increases for public workers



• Editorial: Courts should toss judge's lawsuit over health, pension benefits