While U.S. SAT scores dip across the board, N.J. test-takers hold steady
The Class of 2011 had the lowest average SAT scores in years as a record number of high school seniors nationwide took the college entrance exam, test officials said Wednesday.

The 1.65 million students who sat for the exam averaged 497 (out of 800) on the reading section, 514 on the math section and 489 on the writing section. That’s a total score of 1,500 (out of 2,400) — a six point drop from last year.

The across-the-board dip in scores is the largest since the College Board revamped the SAT and added a writing section in 2006.

But College Board officials said they were not too concerned. The record number of students taking the test, including more minority and low-income students, probably contributed to the decrease.

"We are very pleased to see more prospective, first-generation college-goers taking the SAT than ever before, with a 12 percent increase over the past five years," College Board president Gaston Caperton said. "It’s all part of our commitment to access, equity and minority participation."

The news was better for New Jersey students. The state’s high school seniors scored above the national average on the math section for the first time in recent memory.

The average New Jersey student scored 495 on the reading section (the same as last year), 516 on the math section (up two points) and 497 on the writing section (the same as last year) — for a total of 1,508.

State education officials said they were pleased with New Jersey’s rising test scores.

View full size

"The No. 1 focus of the Department of Education is to ensure that all students in New Jersey graduate from high school ready for college and a career. The SAT is one more data point that we will use to monitor the state’s progress," said Christopher Cerf, the state’s acting education commissioner.

This year, the College Board used a new method to calculate the average SAT score to include more test-takers who took the exam as late as June of their senior year. The board’s statisticians also recalculated the average SAT scores for each state for each year going back to 2007 to include the larger number of test-takers. The new charts allow states to more accurately compare how their students performed on the test year to year.

Critics said the dip in the national average scores shows the No Child Left Behind and other education reform efforts that rely on standardized testing are flawed.

"With exploding cheating scandals and declines in college readiness scores, how many wake-up calls do policy-makers need before they admit that their test-and-punish strategy is a failure?" said Bob Schaeffer, a leading SAT critic and spokesman for the Massachusetts-based FairTest, the National Center for Fair & Open Testing.

College Board officials defended the SAT as the fairest and most accurate predictor of college readiness. Exam officials also unveiled a new "benchmark" score to help policy makers determine if students will do well in college.

According to the College Board researchers, students with a combined SAT score of 1,550 have a 65 percent likelihood of achieving a "B-" average or higher during the first year of college. But, colleges should not use the 1,550 benchmark as a reason to admit or not admit students, said James Montoya, the College Board’s vice president.

"We want to be very clear that the SAT benchmark should not be used to evaluate an individual student’s college readiness," Montoya said. "The SAT benchmark was developed to provide education leaders with tools to evaluate and track the effectiveness of academic programs in preparing students for college."

In New Jersey, 86,515 students — or 78 percent of high school seniors — took the SAT this year, according to the College Board. That is about 800 more students than last year.

More than 40 percent of New Jersey’s SAT takers asked that their scores be sent to Rutgers University because they were considering applying, the College Board’s report said. The next most popular colleges were Montclair State University, The College of New Jersey, Rowan University, Penn State and the University of Delaware.

By Kelly Heyboer and Nic Corbett/The Star-Ledger