Gov. Christie offers compromise tax cut at special Legislature session
TRENTON — He appealed, cajoled and lectured on bipartisan compromise.

But almost as soon as the doors to the Assembly chamber closed, Gov. Chris Christie made Democrats an offer they would easily refuse: forget the millionaires tax and accept his compromise tax cut.

To sweeten the deal, he said he would expand a top priority of the Democrat-controlled Legislature, the earned income tax credit for the working poor, which he had vetoed just days earlier.

The Republican governor’s offer during a special session of the Legislature today fell on deaf ears, with Democratic leaders saying what they had been all along: The tax cut will come in January if revenue collections live up the administration’s optimistic projections.

"Our state is a better place because of what we have done and our people can feel it," Christie told a chamber packed with lawmakers who had reluctantly returned. "Let’s not stop now. We know that we have the means after the years of shared sacrifice to give the people of New Jersey relief."



Unmoved by the 17-minute plea, Democrats dismissed the session as a stunt intended to increase his YouTube hits and bolster his national credentials eight weeks before the Republican National Convention in Tampa.

Senate President Stephen Sweeney (D-Gloucester) said tax relief would have to await evidence of the Jersey Comeback that Christie has been promoting across the state and beyond. As if on cue, he plans to appear on several national news shows today.

"This is a YouTube moment," Sweeney said. "That’s all this was. We provided a responsible budget, spent less than he did, (and) put the money in to ensure a tax cut. What it comes down to is, we have to make sure the money is there."

In making his bipartisan pitch, Christie ticked off a list of what he saw as victories for New Jerseyans achieved through reaching across the aisle, including teacher tenure reform, mandatory drug treatment and a "historic reorganization" of higher education.

"Whether it’s the accomplishments of this year or the work of the last two years," he said, "we’ve proven one thing: If we can make it happen in New Jersey, real leadership can make it happen anywhere."

Shortly afterward, he conditionally vetoed the millionaires tax — which he called a $800 million tax increase — and proposed a $50 million restoration of the earned income tax credit on the condition that Democrats sign on immediately to the tax cut he and Sweeney had arrived at.

He has already spelled out his alternative to Democrats and audiences at recent town hall meetings: a long hot summer spreading the message that "Corzine Democrats" are holding taxes hostage.

But he tempered his message today. While last week he called the Senate budget committee chairman, Paul Sarlo, (D-Bergen) an "arrogant SOB," Christie struck a more playful note with Sweeney and Sens. Loretta Weinberg (D-Weinberg) and Jeff Van Drew (D-Ocean).

He said the lawmakers had initially agreed with him to let residents claim 10 percent of their property taxes as a dollar-for-dollar credit against their income tax bill.

"Imagine that — a tax cut plan endorsed by Sweeney, Van Drew, Weinberg and me?" he said. "Let’s not let a moment that comes with the frequency of Halley’s Comet pass us by ... Let’s show our state we can work together and finish the job before we leave for this holiday weekend."

Democratic leaders, who later spoke to reporters, were in no mood for compromise. Assembly Speaker Sheila Oliver (D-Essex) was quick to note her chamber had never agreed to such a deal.

"As we move into 2013 fiscal year, no one in the country has projected the type of revenue realization that the state of New Jersey is in," Oliver said, shaking off a question about whether sending Christie a millionaires tax for a third straight year was a mistake.

"The residents of this state expressed to this Legislature that those that earning $1 million or more are more positioned to carry tax burden than they are," she said.

View full size

Asked how the Democrats would combat Christie’s plans to, as he put it, "kick their rear ends from one end of the state to the other," Oliver referred to a name-calling episode on the weekend. She said they would ignore him, the same way a reporter he called an "idiot" and "stupid" had.

But even as Christie made his softer sell to lawmakers, the state Republican Committee began running bruising automated phone calls targeting Sens. Richard Codey (D-Essex), Barbara Buono (D-Middlesex) and Bob Gordon (D-Bergen) as well as a radio ad that will be broadcast statewide for at least two weeks.

Christie’s call for lawmakers to return to the Statehouse — four days after they left town for the summer — made for some unusual circumstances.

Assemblyman David Russo (R-Bergen) left his family in the wake of his daughter’s wedding in Princeton on Sunday to attend the session. But since he had only a tuxedo, he borrowed a suit jacket and tie for the special session to dress up his short-sleeve shirt, khakis and loafers without socks.

And Sen. Kevin O’Toole (R-Essex), who said he would usually take his 12-year-old daughter to the pool on a day like this, brought her with him instead. He said he wanted her to experience the rarity of a special session.

"It’s the right thing, coming back," O’Toole said.

Star-Ledger staff writer MaryAnn Spoto and Matt Friedman contributed to this report.

Related coverage:

• Christie pushes Legislature to support Senate Democrats' tax plan in special session

• Gov. Christie addresses special session of Legislature -- read the full text of his speech

• 'Nightline' to air interview with Gov. Chris Christie on Tuesday

• Republicans begin phone campaign in blue districts, criticizing Democrat lawmakers for millionaires tax