Christie proposes $32.1B budget with increased education funding, revenue expectations
18 Gallery: Governor Chris Christie Delivers 2012-2013 Budget Address 2-21-2012

TRENTON — Gov. Chris Christie proposed a $32.15 billion budget today that relies on robust revenue growth to deliver about $2 billion in increased spending in several areas, including higher education and aid to local schools.

Saying it is "time to put the New Jersey comeback into high gear," Christie unveiled a spending plan for the fiscal year 2013 that relies on a 7 percent increase in revenue — even though collections in the current year have fallen short of expectations. The plan is in stark contrast to his two previous budgets, which called for steep cuts or flat funding.

“We have left the dark times of lost jobs worsened by overtaxing, overspending and over borrowing,” Christie told the Legislature in his budget address. “Please be clear on this point — we will not return to the path of higher taxes under any circumstances. Not on my watch. To do so would risk stopping the New Jersey Comeback in its tracks.”

A 7 percent increase in revenue would be the fourth-highest year-to-year increase since 2000, records show; in 2003, revenue jumped by 14 percent.



The budget calls for a 6 percent increase in funds for higher education, which is across the board and includes direct aid and tuition aid grants, comes on the heels of two years of flat or decreased financing.

“Because the people of New Jersey stood strong and had faith over the last two years, I am proud to say this budget proposes a nearly 6 percent increase in direct aid to our senior public colleges and universities,” Christie said. “We are able to help make college more available and affordable for New Jersey families. But we need to do more.”

Christie also proposed boosting aid to local school districts across the state by $120 million, bringing the total amount to $7.79 billion, records show. He will also increase financing for preschool by $14.6 million and school choice aid by $14.2 million.



In a briefing earlier today, State Treasurer Andrew Sidamon-Eristoff could not immediately say how the additional money would be disbursed, adding that the allocations would be made public Wednesday.



One group that will not see an increase in financing is property tax payers. Christie is proposing to keep financing for the Homestead Benefit and Senior Freeze program flat.

Reitering the proposal Christie made in his State of the State address last month, he said he wanted to cut income taxes by 10 percent across the board. The cut will be phased in over three years, starting on Jan. 1 , 2013, and costing the state $183 million next year and $1.1 billion by 2016, according to the governor’s estimates.

“A 10 percent tax cut for every working New Jerseyan will help families to keep more of what they earn,” Christie said. “It will make us more competitive with other states and attract more new jobs to New Jersey. Every New Jerseyan deserves a tax cut.”

But Democrats were largely dismissive of the income tax cut, and said the real emphasis should be on reducing property taxes. "No matter how the governor dresses it up, a 10 percent across-the-board income tax cut is still a disproportionately generous gift for the wealthiest among us,"Assembly Speaker Sheila Oliver (D-Essex) said at a news conference after the governor's address. "Even more puzzling is the lack of details on how the Governor intends to pay for his millionaires’ gift."



She added, “The most glaring omission in his speech, however, was the complete and utter absence of a plan to address property taxes."



The projected revenue increase will help Christie make a $1.06 billion payment into the state’s troubled pension system. While the payment is the largest payment in years, it is well short of the $3.74 billion payment that actuaries say is necessary to meet its obligations.

The lack of a full payment undermines the increase the system saw from last year’s overhaul of pension and health care benefits for public employees.

The $32.1 spending plan for fiscal 2013, which begins July 1, represents an 8 percent increase from the spending in the current budget.

The plan relies on a $288 million surplus, reducing the expected balance to $300 million. The Christie administration has said in the past that maintaining a high surplus was crucial.

“We are comfortable with the level and feel that we can manage spending if necessary,” Sidamon-Eristoff said.

Related coverage:



• Editorial: Gov. Chris Christie's budget address: Consistent themes, dubious claims

• Gov. Chris Christie budget speech full text

• Gov. Christie's budget proposal expects revenue boom, adds $200M in school funding

• Gov. Christie's budget speech will announce plan for proposed income tax cut

• Poll: N.J. voters favor Gov. Christie's proposed income tax cut, prefer property tax cut

• Analysis: Christie's proposed N.J. income tax cut would largely benefit state's wealthier residents

• As Gov. Christie prepares 2012 budget speech, fiscal realities may jeopardize income tax cut