Christie pushes Legislature to support Senate Democrats' tax plan in special session
TRENTON — Gov. Chris Christie made a bipartisan appeal to lawmakers today to get to work and enact a tax cut this week, but Democrats who control the Legislature showed no signs of granting him his wish.

In a 17-minute speech to a special joint session of the Senate and Assembly that was cordial by the hard-charging governor's standards, Christie reviewed crucial pieces of legislation he and the Democrat-controlled Legislature had worked together to pass, such as bills to overhaul teacher tenure, health and pension benefits for public workers and the state’s higher education system. He said the tax cut could be another example.

“So I ask all of you today, what are we waiting for? What are we waiting for?” said Christie. “We are better than this. I know we are. I know you know we are. I know because we have proven it not by what we have said over the last two-and-a-half years, but by how we have acted.”

But Assembly Speaker Sheila Oliver (D-Essex) said Democrats would not act unless and until state revenues meet his ambitious expectations.

Christie said he conditionally vetoed a millionaires tax on households earning more than $1 million a year, instead turning it into an income tax credit based on property tax bills.

In calling the session, the governor gave lawmakers the minimum 48-hour notice of the special session on Saturday, one day after slashing $86 million from the Democrats’ budget and vetoing a separate bill providing $50 million to fully restore the earned income tax credit.



Although Christie initially called for an across-the-board 10 percent income tax cut, he eventually accepted Senate Democrats’ plan for residents to take a credit on their income tax credits worth 10 percent of what they paid in property taxes, up to $1,000. Households making less than $400,000 a year would be eligible. The governor also proposed fully restoring the earned income tax credit for the working poor, which Christie vetoed in the budget Democrats sent him last week.

“I have come to the center of the room and agreed to the Senate Democratic tax plan. Will you join me? Will you act today to guarantee a summer of tax relief, job competitiveness and increased confidence in state government for our citizens?” said Christie. “I am ready. Are you? I leave this Chamber full of hope that you will put aside politics and join me in leading our state to a better tomorrow.”

Democrats set aside more than $180 million for a tax cut, but will not enact it unless Christie’s revenue projections – the most optimistic in the country – bear out. Revenue for the budget year that just ended has been short of expectations, Assembly Speaker Sheila Oliver noted.

“The issue gets to be revenue, affordability, and the Democrats in the Assembly are more than willing to effectuate a plan. But not until we settle this issue of revenue,” she said.

But Democrats called the session a career-boosting move for the Republican governor, who is rumored to be on Mitt Romney's short list of possible vice presidential nominees and is considered a potential candidate for president in 2016.

“The governor will move from 30-second sound bite to 30-second sound bite because he needs the media attention like you and I need oxygen in this room,” said Assembly Majority Leader Lou Greenwald (D-Camden).

Related coverage:

• Gov. Christie addresses special session of Legislature -- read the full text of his speech

• Sen. Sweeney: Christie's special Legislature session is political theater to boost national profile

• Tension apparent in Trenton, hours before Gov. Christie's special tax session

• Assembly Dems bite tongues, plan to attend Gov. Christie's tax session on little notice

• Gov. Christie turns up heat in tax fight, calls Legislature to special session Monday