N.J. Assembly committee OKs private school builders
TRENTON — An Assembly committee unanimously endorsed legislation yesterday that would allow private companies to build and manage up to a dozen public schools in three of the state’s neediest cities, where school construction has otherwise ground to a halt in recent years.

Known as the Urban Hope Act, the bill is one of four Gov. Chris Christie has been pressuring the Legislature to advance during its lame duck session, which ends next week. The measure could give businesses unprecedented control over public education in Newark, Camden and Jersey City, the three districts where companies could soon build and own schools.

The Schools Development Authority is responsible for construction in these and other low-income districts, but dozens of projects have been stalled since Christie took office — and no schools have been built to replace those that are crumbling or overcrowded.

Amid the bill’s supporters is a former opponent — and frequent Christie target — the New Jersey Education Association. The state’s largest teachers union had called the legislation a veiled effort to "funnel tax dollars" to the private sector. But yesterday, union president Barbara Keshishian released a statement endorsing the act.

"NJEA supports this legislation because it allows for innovation while providing meaningful public accountability," Keshishian said. "It is a creative expansion of public school choice that uses public funds to support public education."

One of the bill’s sponsors, state Sen. Donald Norcross (D-Gloucester), said he expects the full Senate and Assembly to pass the measure Monday, the last day of the current legislative session.

"We have spent enough money and endured enough failure, especially in our urban districts," Norcross said. "It’s time to do things differently in a limited, focused way."

Nonprofit operators interested in starting up to four new schools, called "renaissance school projects," must apply to the state Department of Education and demonstrate experience working in a "high-risk, low-income urban district," according to the bill.

Those nonprofit groups are free, however, to contract with businesses to purchase land, construct facilities or manage the schools. They are not required to follow public bidding laws to select contractors.

The governor unveiled the Urban Hope Act in June at Camden’s Lanning Square Elementary, a school slated for reconstruction by the school development agency. After August’s earthquake, city officials condemned the dilapidated building as unsafe for students.

Assembly Budget Committee Chairman Lou Greenwald (D-Camden) said the SDA’s inaction has been a "major stimulus" of the legislation.

"Not one school has been built under the Christie administration over the past three years," Greenwald said. "For students in Camden where the walls are falling down and students in Phillipsburg who take class in trailers, it’s a tragedy to deprive those children of better facilities."

Others said inaction by the SDA is no reason to sign a law authorizing private companies to do its work. Nearly a year ago, Christie said the agency would begin work on 10 school-construction projects, but it did not have the money to take on any more. Lanning Square did not make the cut.

"Lanning Square was promised to us 10 years ago," said R. Mangaliso Davis, a Camden resident who testified before the Assembly Budget Committee yesterday. "If the SDA had done its job, we would have many more schools than we have now."

If approved Monday, the proposal would be a major win for Christie, whose other education reforms have stalled.

That win could lead to court action, however. David Sciarra, executive director of the Newark-based Education Law Center, took issue with the legislation’s allowing land currently owned by the state and slated for school construction to be transferred to private companies at little or no cost.

"Such transfers of these taxpayer-funded assets could very well run afoul of state and federal law," Sciarra said.