Gov. Chris Christie signs $31.7B budget with spending cuts
9 Gallery: Gov. Chris Christie holds town hall in Mahwah

TRENTON — Gov. Chris Christie brandished his veto pen Friday before signing into law a $31.7 billion budget, cutting spending and policy language presented to him by the Democratic-controlled Legislature.

The governor’s signature, along with a sea of red slashes, capped a bitter budget season in Trenton marked by taunts and insults and tax-cut proposals that failed to take off.

The result was a budget that cost exactly what Democrats proposed, and 6.7 percent larger than the one Christie had approved last year. Although the governor cut $86 million from various programs, he used that money to help bulk up the state’s cash reserves to $648 million.

Christie’s cuts this time around were a far cry from the nearly $1 billion he red-lined last year. His budget pumps $1 billion into the strained pension fund, and boosts financing for education to an all-time high of $8.9 billion.

But with a separate set of vetoes, the governor quashed Democrats’ plans to restore money for social services and other programs. He nixed a bill to pump $7.5 million into clinics for women, refused to return $66 million in energy tax revenue to cities, and vetoed a proposal to bolster tax credits for the working poor after slashing them in 2010.

Left untouched was a bill to raise taxes on millionaires that Democrats passed Thursday. Christie has vowed to veto that, too, but didn’t address it Friday, leaving lawmakers to wonder when that shoe would drop.

"This spending as usual is just more of the same mentality that plagued the eight years before I became governor, when there was reckless spending and a cycle of raising taxes and fees every 25 days," Christie said in a statement.

Medical services for the elderly were cut by $21 million, and Christie made a series of smaller multimillion-dollar cuts to some educational programs and emergency aid to cities. As he did last year, Christie also removed layers of legislative oversight that the Legislature had proposed.

But the governor also let stand $14 million Democrats added to his budget, distributed among programs for the elderly, child care, cancer research and legal services for the poor.

Christie has been clamoring for a tax cut all year, and he banged that drum again. "This budget is a critical step to keep our state moving in the right direction and, when coupled with a much-needed tax cut, will send a signal that we are rooting for New Jersey," Christie said. "After two hard years of shared sacrifice we’re no longer on the brink of fiscal catastrophe."

But State Sen. Paul Sarlo (D-Bergen), chairman of the budget committee, said a tax cut now, when the economy is still wobbly, would be irrseponsible.

Sarlo said Christie’s prediction for a 7.4 percent surge in revenue for the fiscal year beginning tomorrow was unrealistic. "The governor’s insistence on tax cuts now, before we know if we can truly afford them and six months before they would even take effect, is a platform built on national campaign rhetoric rather than fiscal reality," Sarlo said.

View full size

In his State of the State speech in January, Christie proposed a 10 percent across-the-board income tax, assuring lawmakers the state could afford it because the "New Jersey Comeback" had begun. Weeks later, he unveiled a $32.1 billion budget that included the first down payment on his tax cut — $183 million. His plan would have been phased in over three years beginning Jan. 1, costing $1.3 billion by 2016.

Democrats answered with their own plans to slash property taxes instead, but only for residents with household incomes under $250,000. Democratic leaders contended Christie’s plan favored the rich — who struggle more with the state’s progressive income tax structure — over the middle class.

Trenton suddenly acquired a newfound appetite for cutting taxes, but it was stifled by a dizzying series of poor economic news over the next few months.

New Jersey was one of few states falling short of revenue projections, the unemployment rate inched up every month, the state’s economic performance came in 47th in the nation for 2011, a federal report showed, and Standard & Poor’s panned Christie’s budget as a rickety plan that could falter under pressure.

Then, in May, the Office of Legislative Services warned the administration could be overestimating revenue by $1.4 billion through June 2013.

Despite evidence pointing to one of the slowest economic rebounds in the country, Christie never backed off his ambitious revenue projections for fiscal 2013, which are the highest of any governor.

Fixated on a tax cut, he reneged on promises to rely less on one-time revenue sources, raiding various funds and money earmarked for transportation, even raising the state’s debt load for road and bridge projects.

For Assembly and Senate Democrats, the economic indicators were alarming enough to cool their dueling tax-cut plans. They set aside $183 million for a new property tax credit but declined to pull the trigger until year’s end — and only if the finances improve.

For a brief moment, it looked as if Christie might get his tax cut. On May 15, the governor was prepared to stand side-by-side with Senate President Stephen Sweeney (D-Gloucester) to announce a compromise. But Sweeney never told other Senate Democratic leaders, who were steamed, and the news conference was abruptly canceled.

"We agreed everybody was talking the same language," Christie said at a recent town hall before lashing out at Democrats. "I got fooled. And it’s hard to admit in front of 750 people you got fooled, but I got fooled."

He vowed a summer tour to berate Democrats. "I am going to kick their rear ends from one end of the state to the other to get you a tax cut."

Star-Ledger staff writer Jarrett Renshaw contributed to this report.



Related coverage:

• N.J. Democrats: Gov. Christie needs to hold up his end of budget bargain

• Gov. Chris Christie: Democrats wrong not to cut taxes

• During town hall, Gov. Christie hints he'll sign Democrat budget contingent on tax cut

• Christie calls Senate Budget Committee boss an 'arrogant SOB,' vows to fight Dems for a tax cut