6 of Pope Francis' most controversial comments
Pope Francis isn't shy about expressing his views and has made many statements in his relatively short time as leader of the Catholic church that have sparked debate, joy and, for some, anger.

Magazines have labeled him their Man of the Year, treating him as more of a celebrity than a religious figure. Francis is regarded by many as a reformer who isn't afraid of upsetting the Vatican establishment.

Through all of this hype, though, the pope's words have drawn intense scrutiny. He has spoken on issues ranging from abortion to economics and climate change and will likely touch on these themes and many others when he arrives in Philadelphia late this month.

"I think the interesting thing about him is what he is talking about," said John Wall, a professor of philosophy and religion at Rutgers University-Camden. "He's coming out strong on climate change and property."

The last few popes have tended to focus on traditional topics of marriage and abortion, Wall noted.

"I think that to hit the ground running so hard is a bit unusual," Wall said of Francis. "I haven't seen that before."

As for the subjects he has tackled so far, Wall pointed to this pope's background.

"He's the first pope from a non-European perspective," Wall said.

As an Argentinian, Francis brings a Latin American form of Catholicism that emphasizes liberation theology, which focuses on standing up for the poor and oppressed.

That's why he has waded into issues such as climate change, Wall said, since the poor are among the most affected.

As for issues Wall hopes to hear Pope Francis discuss during his visit to the United States, climate change, poverty and the Catholic church's sex abuse scandal are among them.

Here are a few of the big topics Pope Francis has tackled so far:

Gays and civil unions

In 2013, Francis surprised many with conciliatory comments on homosexuality.

"If someone is gay and searches for the Lord and has good will, who am I to judge?" he said.

In 2014, he said the church could be open to same-sex civil unions. At the same time, however, he stressed that marriage remains between a man and a woman only.

Abortion

Earlier this month, Pope Francis announced that as part of a Year of Mercy starting in December, Catholic priests around the world would be allowed to forgive the "sin of abortion."

Economic inequality

Pope Francis has criticized growing economic inequality in the world, condemning the "idolatry of money."

"Some people continue to defend trickle-down theories which assume that economic growth, encouraged by a free market, will inevitably succeed in bringing about greater justice and inclusiveness in the world," Francis wrote.

"This opinion, which has never been confirmed by the facts, expresses a crude and naive trust in the goodness of those wielding economic power and in the sacralized workings of the prevailing economic system."

Climate change

In June, Pope Frances tackled the issue of climate change, blaming corporations, energy companies, politicians and many others for bringing the plant to a "breaking point."

"The idea of infinite or unlimited growth, which proves so attractive to economists, financiers and experts in technology ... is based on the lie that there is an infinite supply of the earth's goods, and this leads to the planet being squeezed dry at every limit."

Guns

He criticized the weapons industry in June, suggesting that people who manufacture or invest in weapons cannot consider themselves Christians.

Some took issue with the pontiff on this point, noting that he relies on armed security officers to keep him safe.

Vatican bureaucracy

In December 2014, Pope Francis criticized the Vatican bureaucracy, accusing some of lusting for power and suffering from "spiritual Alzheimer's."

He went on to list 15 sins of the Holy See's administrative apparatus, including committing "terrorism of gossip," "feeling immortal or immune" and becoming "spiritually and mentally hardened."

Matt Gray may be reached at mgray@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MattGraySJT. Find the South Jersey Times on Facebook.