Newark teachers strike historic deal including bonuses for top educators
NEWARK — The Newark Teachers Union has reached a historic deal with the state that will make the district the first in New Jersey to offer bonuses based on how teachers perform in the classroom, union officials said today.

Education officials will announce a deal on a three-year contract today that includes annual bonuses that range from $2,000 to $12,500 for teachers rated "effective" or "highly effective" under a new evaluation system, said Joseph Del Grosso, president of the Newark Teachers Union.

Some of the money for the bonuses will come from the $100 million Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg pledged to Newark schools in 2010.

"It was a long, arduous road to get to an agreement," Del Grosso said. "But we struck a really good deal."

Teachers unions have traditionally resisted merit pay or any system that would link compensation to student performance. Del Grosso said the key to the Newark deal was a provision in the contract that will allow teachers to serve on the committees evaluating colleagues’ performance in the classroom.

Each school will have a three-person evaluation committee that includes a school administrator, a principal and a teacher with equal power, Del Grosso said.

"We will have a say in our own destiny," Del Grosso said. "We’re militant in that we want to control our own profession."

Union officials and Newark Superintendent Cami Anderson will sign the preliminary deal this afternoon, said Nat Bender, a spokesman for the American Federation for Teachers New Jersey, the statewide union associated with the local Newark teachers union.

Bender said the union and the district discussed merit pay — or "performance enhancers" — for months.

"All of the negotiations have been at the table," Bender said.

Newark school officials declined to comment on the deal tonight.

The Newark Teachers Union represents nearly 3,300 teachers, who oversee 37,000 students in the state-run district. The teachers have been working under the terms of a contract that expired more than two years ago while the two sides tried to reach a new deal.

Del Grosso said the new contract will also include $31 million in "retroactive pay" for union members to make up for the two years teachers have been working without a new contract. The money will be split among all union members, he said.

Newark’s merit pay program will be based on a four-tier rating system included in new teacher tenure rules Gov. Chris Christie signed into law over the summer.

The new law includes annual evaluations for teachers that will rate them "highly effective," "effective," "partially effective" or "ineffective."

STAY CONNECTED 24/7 Download our Download our free NJ.com mobile and tablet apps to keep up with the latest New Jersey news, sports and entertainment.

Under Newark’s system, teachers rated "highly effective" or "effective" would get extra pay. Teachers who work in less desirable schools or subject areas would also be eligible for bonuses, union officials said.

Teachers with low ratings will be eligible for a mentoring program to help them improve, union officials said. Under the new contract, teachers deemed ineffective or partially effective will also get merit bonuses if they improve their rating.

Newark’s schools have been under state control since 1995, initially because of financial problems. More recently, the state has declined to return the schools to local control because of low test scores.

Efforts to overhaul Newark’s schools have attracted millions of dollars in private donations, including the Zuckerberg money and grants from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Prudential Foundation and the Victoria Foundation.

Newark teachers are scheduled to vote on the new contract Monday, Oct. 29, union officials said. The union will also hold an information session Tuesday at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center, in Newark where teachers will get to ask questions about the deal.

Star-Ledger staff writer Jessica Calefati contributed to this report.

Follow @starledger



Related coverage:

• Newark teachers reach tentative contract, union says

• More Essex County news