School vouchers, aid increase, included in Christie budget
TRENTON — Inside the nearly $9 billion that Gov. Chris Christie's budget allocates for schools is funding to revive a controversial pilot program that would, for the first time, offer scholarships for students to attend private and parochial schools with public money.

The budget includes $2 million to create a pilot "opportunity scholarship" program, that would allow about 200 children to transfer from failing public schools to private schools.

Christie has touted the idea of opportunity scholarships — or school vouchers — since entering office, but the idea has failed to win legislative approval. Today, he proposed a way.

"Any child in a chronically failing school should have the choice to find a better one, whether it be out-of-district or non-public," he said. "I have been fighting for three years to end the abandonment of these children and their families. Today, that fight continues."

And a fight may be ahead.

The Newark-based Education Law Center said only the Legislature, through separate legislation, can enact such a program into law.

"The governor's attempt to use the budget bill, which is strictly limited to appropriations, to put in place a voucher pilot program that has not gained the support of legislators over the last several years is an illegal end run ," said ELC Executive Director David Sciarra. "This proposal should be dead on arrival."

Others said the matter may not be so clear-cut, however, and that the proposal could be enacted through the budget appropriations bill, without separate legislation.

In terms of overall K-12 school spending, Christie's budget includes an additional $97.3 million for schools, which will increase state aid to 378 of the state's roughly 600 school districts. No district will see a reduction in aid, he said.

The modest increase was welcome in a state that just a few years ago saw Christie cut nearly $1 billion from schools .

"I imagine we'll get flat funding, and we're thankful for that," said Marlboro School Superintendent David Abbott. His district lost $6.2 million in the 2010 cut.

The New Jersey School Boards Association also called the numbers promising, especially in a climate where the threat of federal "sequestration" cuts could take millions away from the state's schools.

N.J. NEWS ON THE GO Our redesigned mobile site has quick page loads and app-style navigation, and lets you join the conversation with comments and social media. Visit NJ.com from any mobile browser.

Individual districts won't know where the numbers fall until district-by-district aid numbers are released, however. That is expected to happen by Thursday.

"That will tell the whole story," said Frank Belluscio, communications director and deputy executive director of the association.

Christie's budget also included $5 million for an "Education Innovation Fund" for the state's schools.

Christie proposed a modest increase in parts of the higher education budget, including a $17 million increase in Tuition Aid Grant funding to help low-income students pay for college. The state's private four-year colleges will also get a $1 million increase in funding under the governor's proposal.

But Christie did not propose any large increases for the rest of the state's colleges and universities, noting they are getting $1.6 billion in state and private funds for building projects. That money includes the historic $750 million higher education bond issue approved by the voters in November. The state will borrow the bond money and divide it among the state's two- and four-year colleges to fund the construction and renovation of classrooms and labs.



Star-Ledger staff writers Jessica Calefati and Kelly Heyboer contributed to this report.

Follow @ NJ_Politics