Christie's wishful thinking on Bridgegate | Moran
Gov. Chris Christie wasted no time on Friday.

About 15 minutes after federal prosecutors finished describing the psychotic and criminal behavior of his senior staff, the governor issued a statement saying the Bridgegate scandal is basically over.

To prove it, his office e-blasted this quote from U.S. Attorney Paul Fishman across the digital universe: "Based on the evidence that is currently available to us, we're not going to charge anybody else in this scheme."

The message was that the storm has passed, it's time to move on. Go ahead and write those checks to his presidential campaign.

But did Fishman really say this scandal is winding down? Let's parse that.

We learned almost nothing new Friday, but for one stomach-turning detail.

Who knew that the plotters waited until the first day of school to create this gridlock, knowing that their stunt would have more sting if kids were stranded on school buses for hours? What kind of creeps think like that?

The bigger deal is that Friday's events opened new doors in this investigation that should give Christie pause before he dances his jig.

Prosecutors now have Bill Baroni and Bridget Kelly in an iron vise. The crimes they were charged with on Friday carry long prison terms, up to a theoretical maximum of 86 years each. That gives them both new reason to talk.

Kelly, especially. She is a single mother of four children. Will she really hold her ground, and risk a long prison term? Or will she cut her losses like Wildstein, plead guilty, and start talking to Fishman?

Fishman made his hopes clear: "It is not uncommon for people after they are indicted to plead guilty," he said.

Note how carefully he parsed his words, saying he would not file more charges "based on the evidence that is currently available to us." He's working to make more evidence available by squeezing Baroni and Kelly. Game on.

Another potential problem for Christie: Fishman said nothing about the investigation of David Samson, who used his position as chairman of the Port Authority to benefit his law firm's clients, and reportedly had United Airlines arrange a special commercial flight to South Carolina so that he could visit his wife there on weekends. It was usually half empty, and was cancelled days after Samson resigned from the Port Authority.

Of all the players in this tawdry scandal, Samson is closest to Christie. He headed Christie's transition team, and the governor appointed him as chairman of the Port Authority.

If Samson is charged with a crime, as most observers expect, Christie will be wounded. And if Samson, 75, knows of other skeletons in Christie's closet, he will be sorely tempted to share his stories with prosecutors in return for a lighter sentence.

For a moment, though, assume Christie is right, and that he is in the clear legally.

Even then, this scandal will haunt his efforts to win the presidency. Because the behavior of these misfits says something about the dark culture that Christie has created in Trenton.

He is a bully who yells at little people who can't fight back during town halls. He uses his power without restraint, as when he defied the Supreme Court over affordable housing. He lies as a matter of routine for political gain, as when he recently accused Democrats of shorting the pension fund in this year's budget. And he brushes past ethical restraints, gorging on luxurious gifts from his so-called "friends" like the King of Jordan, and Jerry Jones, the owner of the Dallas Cowboys.

It's no shock that his staffers, eager to please him, embraced his frat-boy style, and then went overboard.

Friday's events probably won't change many minds. There was no bombshell. And Fishman said that nothing prosecutors presented should be seen as implicating Christie, or clearing him.

But this isn't over, not by a long shot.

Fishman was asked about that, too, at his press conference. Here's what he said: "It's like the end of Downton Abbey. You've got to wait for a whole nother season."

When this scandal broke, Christie was flying towards the sun, triumphant at home and the hottest property in the national Republican Party. Bridgegate will be remembered as the scandal that took him down.

And the bad news for him is that it's not over yet, no matter how much he tries to wish it away.

403 Forbidden 403 Forbidden

Tom Moran may be reached at tmoran@starledger.com or call (973) 836-4909. Follow him on Twitter @tomamoran. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.