Mitt Romney 'had a bad week,' Gov. Christie says in wake of 'victims' comments
LONG BRANCH — Anyone can have a bad week.

Gov. Chris Christie paid Mitt Romney a backhanded compliment today, saying the Republican candidate was bound to trip up, considering he’s been running for president since 2006.

"He had a bad week," Christie said, referring to Romney’s comments that 47 percent of Americans believe they are victims. "The guy’s been campaigning for president for six years, he had a bad week, O.K. I mean, I think all of us sitting around, we’ve had bad weeks. Do we want our entire life judged on one bad week? I don’t think so."

With a week to go before Romney and President Barack Obama have their first of three debates, Christie pointed to Ronald Reagan’s performance in 1980, which is credited with turning the tide against President Jimmy Carter.

The governor also blamed the media for largely ignoring what he considers troubling comments from Obama.



"I think the president said one of the most monumentally stupid things I ever heard an incumbent president say, that you can’t change Washington from the inside," Christie said at a news conference in Long Branch. "Well, I mean, for God’s sake, if you can’t change Washington from inside 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, then why are you asking for another four years."

The Republican governor said he spoke to Romney over the weekend and sometimes calls him to offer "unsolicited advice." He said plans by the presidential hopeful to campaign with Paul Ryan, his vice presidential running mate, this week could give him a boost.

"I think the congressman gets him fired up when he’s out there with him," Christie said. "Paul’s an inspirational speaker and a bright young guy and I think he’ll help give Governor Romney the energy that sometimes it’s tougher to get when you’re 42 days out. It’s a grind, and he’s been on it for a long time."

For instance, he said he appreciated help from two former Republican governors of New Jersey, Tom Kean and Christie Whitman, and former New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani during his 2009 gubernatorial campaign.

Follow @starledger





Related coverage:

• Romney says 'victims' comment was not 'elegantly stated'

• Mitt Romney in video: Almost half of Americans 'believe they are victims'

• More Chris Christie news