N.J. Democrats call for extended voting in wake of Sandy chaos
403 Forbidden

403 Forbidden

TRENTON — In response to widespread confusion from voters displaced by Hurricane Sandy, top state Democratic lawmakers today said they will push for early voting legislation to allow New Jerseyans to cast their ballots in-person before Election Day.

Assembly Speaker Sheila Oliver and the chairman of the state Democratic Party, John Wisniewski, said the steps taken by the Christie administration to help displaced residents vote were poorly thought out and rushed into place.

"The most obvious proposal may be to expand early voting," said Oliver (D-Essex). "It works without a problem in other states, so I don’t see why it would be a problem for New Jersey."

During the past week, Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno issued five directives intended to help people vote, including allowing people to request mail-in ballots by fax and e-mail. Gov. Chris Christie said Wednesday those measures worked well and the election went smoothly.

But many county clerks said they were overwhelmed by an unanticipated number of electronic ballot applications, causing some residents to receive busy signals or error messages.

The problems forced Guadagno to allow voters to receive and submit electronic ballots through 8 p.m. today. And today, a state Superior Court judge in Essex County ordered counties to send ballots to anyone who tried to apply by the deadline Tuesday but could not get through.

"The judge’s order attempts to protect the rights of displaced voters who tried in vain this Election Day to obtain a ballot," said Alexander Shalom, policy counsel for the American Civil Liberties Union of New Jersey, which sought the order from Judge Walter Koprowski.

Thirty-two states and the District of Columbia offer some sort of early voting, which allows residents to visit elections offices and cast a ballot without explaining why they cannot vote on Election Day, according to the National Conference of State Legislatures.

The option has become so popular — and such a focus of national get-out-the-vote campaigns — that even President Obama voted early this year in his hometown of Chicago.

"I don’t see why there would be any opposition to giving people as many options to vote as possible." said Wisniewski, an assemblyman from Middlesex County who will introduce legislation.

Mail-in voting in New Jersey requires residents to apply for a ballot through their county elections office and return that ballot to their county board of elections. After Hurricane Sandy, a record number of people in some counties took advantage of the program.

But full-fledged early voting would make casting a ballot far easier. Residents would simply show up at an elections office and vote: No applications. No mailing forms back and forth. And no risk a voter might make an error or forget to sign something and have their vote challenged.

"Voters make more mistakes with absentee ballots because you don’t have the immediate feedback of an election machine," said Paul Gronke, director of the Early Voting Information Center at Reed College in Portland, Ore. "This is why more states have gone for early, in-person voting."

Gronke said many states use the same voting machines they use on Election Day, but make them available for a period of time in advance.

More than 30 million people had already cast a ballot by Election Day this year. While national voter turnout figures are not yet available, nearly 119 million people cast ballots for the two major-party candidates for president.

With an early voting law, state officials wouldn’t have had to take so many emergency measures after the hurricane, said Penny Venetis, a law professor at Rutgers University-Newark.

"We don’t know when a disaster is going to strike," Venetis said. "But these last-minute attempts by the lieutenant governor, although well-intentioned, did turn out to be a total disaster."

Absent making Election Day a national holiday, voting rights advocates said early voting allows people with busy work schedules, long commutes on public transportation or children more flexibility.

"We’re at the point for most states in the country where Election Day is not the only day to vote, it’s simply the last day to vote," said Keesha Gaskins, senior counsel at the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University School of law.

Follow @starledger