GOP gov. candidate Chris Christie says he supports Sonia Sotomayor for U.S. Supreme Court
Republican gubernatorial candidate Chris Christie today announced he is supporting President Obama's nomination of Sonia Sotomayor to the U.S. Supreme Court, even though he says she "would not have been my choice."

The announcement came following the conclusion of Senate confirmation hearings on Sotomayor, who would be the first Latina justice on the nation's highest court. It also came days after Democratic State Committee chairman blistered Christie for "engaging in a partisan attack" for saying he would not have chosen Sotomayor during a radio interview in May.

In a statement issued today, Christie said he would not have chosen Sotomayor, but that "I support her appointment to the Supreme Court and urge the Senate to keep politics out of the process and confirm her nomination."

"After watching and listening to Judge Sotomayor's performance at the confirmation hearings this week, I am confident that she is qualified for the position of Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court," Christie said. "Elections have consequences. One of those consequences are judicial appointments. While Judge Sotomayor would not have been my choice, President Obama has used his opportunity to fill a seat on the Supreme Court by choosing a nominee who has more than proven her capability, competence and ability."

Christie added: "This is a historic moment and her inspiring success story should not only make the Latino community proud, but all Americans."

Democratic Gov. Jon Corzine supported Sotomayor's nomination when Obama announced it in May. Before the hearings began, Cryan called Christie a "right wing conservative" for saying she is "not my kind of judge" in a radio interview during the Republican Primary.

"What Christie said today about Judge Sotomayor is a direct contradiction of what he said when she was nominated, which was that she was unacceptable, and someone he would not have chosen," said Sean Darcy, Corzine's campaign spokesman.

Sotomayor is expected to gain approval in the Senate after four days of hearings. The Senate's senior Republican member, Richard Lugar of Indiana, announced today that he would vote for Sotomayor, calling her "clearly qualified to serve on the Supreme Court."