I was in charge in N.J. on 9/11 and Trump's claims never happened | Opinion
By John Farmer Jr.

From my vantage point at New Jersey's Command Center in Liberty State Park, I looked directly across the Hudson and saw the 22-story-high flames and the black and white smoke billowing from where the World Trade Center had collapsed.

I smelled the toxic confection of steel, wood, glass and flesh from across the river. Mostly, though, I recall the afternoon and evening of 9/11 as a chaos of conflicting and frequently false reports.

The Department of Law and Public Safety -- which was responsible for coordinating the state emergency management, law enforcement and victims' assistance response -- was flying blind for much of the day. The New Jersey State Police radio antenna had sat atop one of the collapsed towers.

As the state's attorney general, I was forced to rely on runners for intelligence about what was happening across the river and in New Jersey.

Among hundreds of scattered reports from that day, I recall hearing that people were wearing suicide vests in Times Square; that suspicious activity was occurring near critical power plants and refineries; that as many as 20,000 people were dead or trapped inside the twenty stories or so of burning ruins; that New York Mayor Rudy Giuliani was missing; that vigilante activity was beginning throughout the state, with vandalism of mosques and synagogues; and, notoriously, that Muslims were dancing on the rooftops and in the streets of Jersey City and Paterson.

Post-9/11, we found no evidence N.J. Muslims celebrated terror attacks

Of the various usually false reports of that day, the last was perhaps the most disturbing.

The first World Trade Center bombing had been staged from Jersey City, and Omar Abdel-Rahman, "The Blind Sheikh," preached there at one time. If true, the report of widespread celebrating signaled at best a collapse of civic order that could easily have resulted in rioting, and at worst the likelihood of further attacks. If true, we would have had to mobilize the State Police and National Guard and locked the place down. We followed up on that report instantly because of its implications if true.

The word came back quickly from Jersey City, later from Paterson.

False report. Never happened.

Nonetheless, given the tense state of affairs, I asked for a meeting with Muslim community leaders in Jersey City the next day. A Jersey City policeman who was Egyptian arranged the meeting, which I attended with Jersey City Mayor Glen Cunningham, whom I knew from his days as a U.S. Marshal and mine as a federal prosecutor.

The meeting occurred on a typical street in a nondescript attached home, much like the ones my immigrant grandparents had lived in when they came to Jersey City in the 1920s. The street where the meeting would occur sloped downward toward Lower Manhattan, offering a panoramic view of the Trade Center ruins burning. I saw both American and Palestinian flags in the town home windows.

We entered the brownstone and walked essentially into a foreign world. The room was beautifully appointed with Middle Eastern decor; we removed our shoes and sat in a circle on the intricate pattern of a Persian carpet. The 20 or so community leaders were clearly worried about reprisals; our host pointed to a photo of himself in his military uniform and spoke of his service to our country.

To a person, they condemned the attacks and confirmed what we had learned from the Jersey City Police: No dancing, no celebrating, had occurred.

Fact check: Trump's claims about cheering in Jersey City on 9/11 ring false

My message on behalf of the state was simple, and prefigured the message I would deliver in meetings and mosques across New Jersey, from Paterson to Fort Lee to Edison, in the coming days. First, New Jersey would not tolerate vigilante acts against any community of whatever faith. We would protect the innocent.

But second, we would need their assistance in dealing with the threat of Islamist terrorism. When all law enforcement knows about a threat is the broadest characteristics of a potential attacker, everyone who shares those broad characteristics comes to look suspicious. Come to law enforcement with specific information, I told them, and law enforcement will look for specific suspects.

John Farmer Jr.: Changing terrorism tactics as seen in Paris demand new vigilance measures

In the following weeks, taking our cue from President George W. Bush, we emphasized in meetings throughout the state that our response was not directed at Islam but against those who were perverting it for political purposes; I recorded a public service announcement emphasizing our zero tolerance for vigilante activity and encouraging civil conduct toward one's neighbors.

There is much to regret in the circumstances surrounding 9/11, from the failure to prevent the attacks to some of the government conduct that followed the attacks. I remain proud, however, of the efforts we made in its aftermath to restore and maintain civic order.

Those efforts persist. After the Paris attacks, Rutgers University hosted Muslim community leaders from across New Jersey who condemned the attacks and who have consistently condemned acts of terror despite scant media attention.

We in America have had fewer foreign fighters than Europe precisely because we have not isolated and stigmatized the Muslim community. To begin to do so now is a serious mistake. In the short term, it may, by playing on voters' apprehensions, be appealing politically. In the long-term, it will, by isolating an entire community, play into the hands of ISIS recruiters, who seek out the alienated and dispossessed among Muslim youth.

Whatever the message, it is just plain wrong to cite thousands of Muslims dancing in Jersey City or Paterson on 9/11 as support. That simply never happened.

John Farmer Jr., was New Jersey's attorney general on Sept. 11, 2001. A former senior counsel to the 9/11 Commission, he is a university professor and special counsel to the president of Rutgers University.