Democratic lawmakers say AshBritt has poor environmental track record
TRENTON — Democratic lawmakers opened up a new front today in their criticism of Gov. Chris Christie’s no-bid contract with a Florida debris-removal firm, saying the firm poses more than just a threat to taxpayers’ wallets.

The legislators warned that the work being done by the firm, AshBritt Inc. of Pompano Beach, may also pose a danger to the state’s environment.

Joining with Jeff Tittel, head of the New Jersey chapter of the Sierra Club, legislators called attention to a 2008 federal report that criticized AshBritt’s handling of debris after Hurricane Katrina.

The report by the General Accountability Office said the firm co-mingled toxins and chemicals with other non-poisonous debris, resulting in two new superfund sites in Louisiana.

"We don’t want that here, but there is no sign that the state is overseeing this process," Tittel said. "There’s been a failure of oversight and accountability."

Hurricane Sandy produced millions of tons of debris, some stacked as high as the length of a football field on makeshift disposal sites created to handle the mess. At one point, there were more than 260 sites scattered across the state, although that number has dwindled to 132, Tittel said.

"We’ve tried to get the inspection reports, but have had no luck," he said. "Where are the inspection reports?"

Tittel acknowledged, however, that he had no evidence AshBritt was doing the same things that were questioned in the federal report.

When pressed about the lack of evidence, he said: "We’ve tried to get the inspection reports, but have had no luck. Where are the inspection reports?"

Michael Drewniak, a spokesman for the governor, questioned the timing of the news conference, a day before Democrats have called a joint legislative hearing on the AshBritt contract.

"If the Democrats are holding hearings tomorrow — which they claim are not politically motivated — why are they teaming up the day before with a notorious partisan like Jeff Tittel to basically throw around unsubstantiated, speculative stuff like this?," Drewniak asked.

N.J. NEWS ON THE GO Our redesigned mobile site has quick page loads and app-style navigation, and lets you join the conversation with comments and social media. Visit NJ.com from any mobile browser.

AshBritt’s chief executive, Randall Perkins, is scheduled to testify Friday before the committee Friday. Assemblyman Ruben Ramos, (D-Hudson), chairman of the Assembly Oversight Committee that is taking part in the hearing, said he wants to hear from Perkins about how it handled the debris.

"These questions need to be answered and I look forward to hearing from AshBritt tomorrow," Ramos said at the news conference.

Christie’s decision to award a no-bid contract to AshBritt, described in a series of articles in The Star-Ledger, has come under fire from Democratic lawmakers.

Former Gov. Haley Barbour of Mississippi — a founding partner of AshBritt’s Washington lobbying firm — told The Star-Ledger he recommended that Christie use AshBritt. Christie took Barbour’s advice, and 43 towns also hired the firm without bidding.

Tittel said Christie did not do the due diligence on the contract, adding that does not mean "getting advice from AshBritt’s lobbyist."