Christie turns to N.J. attorney general Jeffrey Chiesa to fill Lautenberg's seat
TRENTON — Gov. Chris Christie named Jeffrey Chiesa — one of his best friends and the state’s attorney general for the past year and a half — as U.S. senator Thursday to replace the late Frank Lautenberg.

Chiesa, a 47-year-old former federal prosecutor, will serve on an interim basis for five months, effective Monday, until the special election Oct. 16, which he said he will not enter.

“To have this chance to continue to serve in public life is a wonderful opportunity for anybody,” Chiesa said during a Statehouse news conference attended by his wife and two young children. “I’ll use my best judgment and skill that I have to conduct myself in a way that I hope will make the people of New Jersey proud.”

Christie said Chiesa, a self-described “conservative Republican,” will be an independent voice in the Senate, despite long-standing loyalties to the governor.

“Anybody who knows Jeff knows he’s got a mind of his own,” said Christie, who has known Chiesa for more than 20 years. “You won’t find anyone who has a bad thing to say about Jeff. And I think that’s a reflection of his integrity and personality. I think it will be a good thing to have him down there.”

The announcement ended rampant speculation triggered by Christie’s plan to appoint a U.S. senator for a brief time before putting the seat before the voters. At least one Republican and several Democrats are collecting signatures needed to get on the Aug. 13 primary ballot.

Christie said he wanted a senator in place in time for a vote on the pending immigration bill. Chiesa avoided taking a position.

“I think the first thing we have to do is make sure the borders are secure,” Chiesa said, quickly adding: “These issues are new to me ... I’ll get down there and meet with my colleagues to discuss things I think make the most sense for the people I represent.”

SCRAMBLE FOR THE SENATE Republican and Democratic candidates have until Monday at 4 p.m. to declare themselves for the U.S. Senate. A look at how the scrap is shaping up, thus far: WHO'S ANNOUNCED

Democrats: U.S. Rep. Rush Holt (D-12th Dist.)

Republicans: Former Bogota Mayor Steve Lonegan



WHO'S EXPECTED TO RUN

Democrats: Newark Mayor Cory Booker, U.S. Rep. Frank Pallone (D-6th Dist.)



WHO'S CONSIDERING IT

Democrats: Assembly Speaker Shelia Oliver (D-Essex) ; former Hoboken mayoral candidate Beth Mason

Republicans: Businessman Joe Plumeri



WHO'S SAID NO

Republicans: Assemblyman Jon Bramnick (R-Union); State Sen. Michael Doherty (R-Warren), State Sen. Joseph Kyrillos (R-Monmouth), Sen. Tom Kean Jr. (R-Union) , U.S. Rep. Leonard Lance (R-7th Dist.); Attorney General Jeffrey Chiesa (who was appointed to the Senate by Christie but won't run in October)

Democrats: Senate President Stephen Sweeney (D-Gloucester)

Christie said he spoke to Chiesa and his wife, Virginia Sullivan, at their Branchburg home Monday evening for an hour and a half. The next morning, he had his answer.

“They both asked for the overnight to think about whether or not this was something they were willing to do,” Christie said. “Jeff called me on Tuesday morning. In fact, he didn’t call me, he texted me, and he said, ‘I’m in.’ ”

The selection of Chiesa drew cheers from leaders of both parties.

“Jeff Chiesa has a long history of protecting the people of New Jersey in the U.S. Attorney’s Office and as attorney general, making him an admirable choice to serve in the U.S. Senate until the special election,” U.S. Rep. Bill Pascrell (D-9th Dist.) said.

State Sen. Minority Leader Tom Kean Jr. (R-Union) said that as attorney general “Chiesa has served admirably and honorably to protect children and stop public corruption. He ... will be a dignified voice in Washington to serve the people of New Jersey.”

Senate President Stephen Sweeney (D-Gloucester) said Christie should have chosen a Democrat to replace Lautenberg, but believes Chiesa “is capable of filling the seat.”

But environmentalist Jeff Tittel, director of the New Jersey Sierra Club and a frequent critic of Christie, called Chiesa “a Christie loyalist” who “will be a rubber stamp” for his agenda. “With this appointment, Governor Christie will be both the governor and a senator,” he said.

Rider University political science professor Ben Dworkin said though Chiesa professes his independence, his career continues to be defined by Christie. “No matter who he picked, the Christie appointment was going to be viewed as a proxy for the governor,” he said. “However this person votes in Washington, it would be seen as that’s how Chris Christie would vote if he were in Washington. He goes out and picks one of his best friends to be that person.”

Dworkin also said by picking someone who will not run, Christie “avoided picking one person as his choice for Senate, and by doing that he doesn’t make one person happy by making 10 people unhappy.”

Christie said he will name an acting attorney general soon.

With the appointment — which gives the GOP 46 seats, while 54 lawmakers would caucus with the Senate Democrats — Christie continues to tap federal prosecutors with whom he worked during his seven-year stint as U.S. attorney for high-profile positions.

About a year after Chiesa got his law degree, Christie hired him at the law firm Dughi & Hewit. After about a decade in private practice, Chiesa followed Christie to the U.S. Attorney’s Office and then led the governor’s transition team with David Samson.

Samson and Chiesa famously arrived at Christie’s 2009 election night headquarters with attaché cases full of legal briefs in the event a close race sent them to court on the governor’s behalf. The briefs went in the trash, thanks to Christie’s decisive win.

RELATED COVERAGE

• Christie outlines special election for Lautenberg's U.S. Senate seat

• Complete coverage of the 2013 special U.S. Senate election