Buono criticizes Christie on unequal pay for women
ORANGE — State Sen. Barbara Buono, the likely Democratic gubernatorial candidate, today faulted Gov. Chris Christie for refusing to sign legislation intended to equalize pay for women in the workplace.

Saying New Jersey women earn 78 cents on the dollar compared to their male counterparts, Buono held a press conference at a woman-owned boutique to mark “Equal Pay Day” — a national public awareness campaign.

“When our governor got the chance to support New Jersey’s women, to make this state a little more equal with a bill to help end wage discrimination, he called it senseless bureaucracy,” Buono said.

Buono, from Middlesex County, was referring to Christie’s September veto of a bill (A2649) that would have required state contractors to submit information on employees’ gender, race and compensation, among other things.

In his veto message, Christie said the bill would “do nothing to tangibly improve pay disparity.”

“Instead, the bill will burden countless employers with onerous reporting requirements, thereby driving up the cost of public contracts, which are ultimately shouldered by the taxpayer,” he wrote.

Christie strategist Mike DuHaime Christie said the governor "strongly believes in equal pay for women."

"He proudly proposed legislation to ensure the same kind of equal pay enforcement here in New Jersey as the Lilly Ledbetter Act proposed on the federal level," DuHaime said. "Sen. Buono and her partisan colleagues in the legislature have refused, for 200 days, to act on this legislation to strengthen pay equality here in the Garden State, all so she can have a falsely-manufactured political issue."

CONNECT WITH US



On mobile or desktop: • Like Star-Ledger Politics on Facebook • Follow @MattFriedmanSL on Twitter And check out our redesigned mobile site by visiting NJ.com from any mobile browser.

Democrats last year sent the governor a package of four bills on the topic. He signed one (A2647) that requires employers to post information on state and federal gender discrimination laws. He conditionally vetoed the other two bills – one that would extend the period of time employees could sue for gender discrimination (A2650),and one that would bar employers from retaliating against employees who discuss job titles and pay (A2648). On the former, Christie said he was bringing the bill in line with the federal Lilly Ledbetter Act.

“Chris Christie might say he supports women, but as the saying goes actions speak louder than words,” Buono said. “And now he has the nerve to ask for the votes of 3 million women in the state of New Jersey”



Two years ago, polls showed a pronounced gender gap. The governor was popular with men but not with women. But while the governor is still more popular with men than women, more recent polls show both genders like him. A March 26 Quinnipiac poll showed that 75 percent of men and 65 percent of women approved of his performance.