Christie touts conservative fiscal philosophy in campaign-style speech to business group
EDISON — In an election-year speech that wove conservative fiscal policy with bare-knuckle politics, Gov. Chris Christie today said the state and federal response to Hurricane Sandy proved government is big enough already.

One million people were evacuated from the Shore, 10 million cubic yards of debris was removed from towns, and in two weeks, power was restored to 95 percent of homes, he said.

"I tell you all these things to destroy the myth that we don’t have enough government," Christie said in a 40-minute keynote address to the commercial real estate development association at the Sheraton Edison Hotel Raritan Center.

"Those who will argue to you in the coming months that government needs to be bigger and more expensive and involved in more parts of your life, you have to ask them, ‘Government really needs to be bigger and more expensive than it was to deal with the worst natural disaster this state has ever seen?’ Ridiculous."

Putting a Sandy spin on a familiar theme, the Republican governor who is seeking a second term said voters will choose between philosophies in November. Although he never mentioned his likely Democratic challenger, state Sen. Barbara Buono (D-Middlesex), an unabashed liberal, Christie criticized what he called "business-unfriendly practices" of former Gov. Jon Corzine.

Christie said the year before he took office, the state lost 119,000 private-sector jobs, labeling them "Corzine jobs losses of 2009," and oversaw a regulatory system "run amok."

While he was on the subject of the Corzine administration, he also took the opportunity to criticize Lisa Jackson, who recently stepped down as President Obama’s top environmental official. Jackson headed the state Department of Environmental Protection under Corzine and was briefly his chief of staff before heading the federal Environmental Protection Agency.

"If they had only listened to us before they put Lisa Jackson in charge of the EPA," he said.

Christie said his administration is on track to deliver $2.3 billion in business tax breaks, has created 103,000 private-sector jobs, and supports legislation reauthorizing corporate incentives.

He chose not to mention his administration’s $407 million anticipated shortfall, or 4.9 percent projected revenue growth starting July 1, which is a safer bet than last year’s nearly 8 percent growth goal.

But he did foreshadow good fiscal news.

"I believe over the course of the next four months that we’re going to meet our expectations," he said. "The fact of the matter is you have a lot of people calling the game in the third quarter."

Christie’s stewardship is not without its critics, however, including those who note that the state’s 9.6 percent unemployment rate is nearly unchanged from when he took office and that New Jersey is 47th on the economic growth scale.

"The fact that Governor Christie is going to applaud any sort of jobs gains in New Jersey demonstrates just how out of touch his economic policies are," Bill Holland, executive director of the New Jersey Working Families Alliance, said later in a telephone interview.