N.J.'s tax collections in December surpass Gov. Christie's target
TRENTON — December brought a small and unexpected gift for the state’s beleaguered $31.7 billion budget.

For the first time this fiscal year, New Jersey tax collections surpassed Gov. Chris Christie’s monthly target, the state Treasury Department reported today. Major tax revenue was $25.3 million, or 1.1 percent, above the governor’s forecast due to a surge in income tax collections last month.

State Treasurer Andrew Sidamon-Eristoff said it was “an encouraging sign” for New Jersey’s economy and that sales-tax revenue, $9.3 million under target, did not suffer as much as he feared in Hurricane Sandy’s wake.

STAY CONNECTED 24/7 Download our Download our free NJ.com mobile and tablet apps to keep up with the latest New Jersey news, sports and entertainment.

Still, the December windfall barely eased the pressure on the state budget, which faces a shortfall of

$425.9 million, or 4.1 percent, for the first six months of the fiscal year.

Combined with a $123 million shortfall left over from last year, the state needs to find $549 million somewhere to pay for all the services it is planning to provide.

Senate Budget Committee chairman Paul Sarlo (D-Bergen) said Christie “still refuses to acknowledge the problem or to present a responsible plan to address it.”

“The full revenue picture shows a continuing shortfall and the economic performance after six months gives little evidence that the governor’s deficit will be closed by itself,” said Sarlo. “We welcome any positive signs, but we must be realistic and responsible.”

To plug the budget hole, Christie and Democratic lawmakers have said they may need to make midyear cuts to the budget that would scale back a range of programs.

Those conversations have not yet begun, said Assemblyman Vincent Prieto (D-Hudson), chairman of the Assembly Budget Committee.

He said some departments have been careful with their spending this year and may have excess funds the state can claw back.

“I imagine that most of these departments have been tightening their belt,” Prieto said. “(But) we have a very, very small margin for error.”

Despite a series of warnings, Christie built this year’s budget expecting fast-paced revenue growth of more than 8 percent. Yet for the first six months, “total major revenues are up 1.5 percent over the same six-month period last year,” nonpartisan budget analysts in the Office of Legislative Services wrote today.

New Jersey now needs revenue to grow 12.7 percent in the second half of the fiscal year to meet Christie’s projections, the OLS added.

Some New Jerseyans may have gotten their yearly bonuses in December — earlier than usual — in order to avoid higher federal income taxes, which kicked in for top earners at the start of 2013. As a result, the OLS said, December’s gain in income-tax collections may turn out to be artificial.

“A corresponding reduction may show up in January or February,” the OLS analysts warned. “(But) the magnitude of that jump will not be discernible until next month.”



Follow @rizzoSL

RELATED COVERAGE

• Treasury audit: N.J. finished fiscal year with $123M budget gap

• More Politics