Christie vs. Paul: Feud between popular Republicans heightens over spending
TRENTON — Republicans Chris Christie and Rand Paul — politicians famous for not backing down from fights — were at each other again Tuesday, this time over which of their states is more laden with federal pork.

Taking new shots in a spat that began last week over national security, the New Jersey governor accused Paul of "pork barrel spending" while the Senator from Kentucky struck back with his own moniker for Christie: "the king of bacon."

Christie seemed prepared for his latest tangle with Paul, his possible foe in the 2016 Republican presidential primary, at an event in Little Ferry. And Paul was happy to respond hours later in a CNN interview.

When asked about their public quarrel over national security, Christie launched a new offensive over Paul’s criticism of him for fighting for federal aid for New Jersey following Hurricane Sandy.

He slammed Paul for Kentucky’s dependence on federal dollars and dismissing him as another "Washington politician."

"… New Jersey is a donor state, we get 61 cents back on every dollar we send to Washington, and interestingly Kentucky gets $1.51 on every dollar they send to Washington," Christie said. "So if Senator Paul wants to start looking at where he’s going to start to cut spending ... maybe he should start cutting the pork barrel spending that he brings home to Kentucky."

Ironically, Christie made the comments during a news conference held to announce the disbursement of federal funds to help Sandy victims stay in their home counties.

In response, Paul, a libertarian who twice voted against billions of dollars in disaster relief for New Jersey, New York and Connecticut, ratcheted up the rhetoric.

"This is the king of bacon talking about bacon," Paul told CNN’s Wolf Blitzer in a segment the network dubbed "Republican Family Feud."

"You know, we have two military bases in Kentucky." said Paul. "And is Governor Christie recommending that we shut down our military bases? He wants to be this great champion of national defense."

The squabble has captured constant national attention as a possible preview of the GOP’s 2016 presidential contest and reboot of the party’s internal struggle between tough-on-terrorism hawks and libertarians concerned for privacy.

It started last Thursday evening when Christie criticized Paul and others for what he called a "strain of libertarianism" coursing through both parties as a "very dangerous thought" more than a decade after the Sept. 11 attacks.

"You can name any number of people and he’s one of them," Christie said, stealing the spotlight from three other Republican governors who joined him on an Aspen, Colo., panel. "These esoteric, intellectual debates — I want them to come to New Jersey and sit across from the widows and the orphans and have that conversation. And they won’t, because that’s a much tougher conversation to have."

The next day, Paul defended his opposition to warrantless federal surveillance programs and said Christie provoked him.

"They’re precisely the same people who are unwilling to cut the spending, and their ‘Gimme, gimme, gimme — give me all my Sandy money now,’ " Paul told reporters, after a fundraiser outside Nashville on Sunday.

Tuesday on CNN, Paul suggested that he embodies the future of party, whereas Republicans like Christie represent a GOP "all for blowing up stuff" and "for getting involved in wars."

"He’s making a big mistake picking a fight with other Republicans," Paul said. "I’m the one trying to grow the party by talking about liberation ideas of privacy and the internet. And attacking me isn’t helping the party. He’s hurting the party."

Christie spokesman Michael Drewniak said he had nothing to add to Christie’s remarks, but the governor’s political strategist chimed in on Twitter.

"What a joke," Mike DuHaime tweeted in response to Paul’s CNN interview. "New Jersey’s budget is smaller today than in FY ‘08. Too bad the federal government can’t say that."

Watching from the sidelines, Christie’s Democratic challenger in the governor’s race, state Sen. Barbara Buono, issued a statement pointing to the state’s economy.

"If Governor Christie put half as much effort into creating jobs for the 400,000 unemployed as he does thinking about his national ambitions, maybe New Jersey wouldn’t have such an abysmal economy," Buono said.

RELATED COVERAGE

• Paul calls Christie 'the king of bacon' on government spending

• Chris Christie calls Rand Paul another 'Washington politician'

• Rand Paul blasts Christie as national security spat continues

• Chris Christie, Rand Paul trade words over national security

• More Politics