Milly Silva says Christie responsible for property tax increases
LITTLE FERRY — Milly Silva, the labor union leader turned Democratic candidate for lieutenant governor, suggested today that Gov. Chris Christie was responsible for property tax increases in New Jersey.

“We need to address the fact that property taxes have increased 20 percent under four years of Chris Christie,” she told a group of retired UAW 210 workers meeting an American Legion here in Little Ferry. “Take a look at your home owner’s tax bill.”

Silva, the running mate to gubernatorial candidate and state Sen. Barbara Buono (D-Middlesex), was attacking Christie on a topic dear to his heart.

The Republican governor has made stabilizing property taxes one of his top priorities, pushing though an agenda that included a 2-percent cap on spending and tax increases for municipalities. He also signed into law “tools” to help local government control spending. Indeed, the statewide increase in property taxes from 2011 to 2012 was 1.4 percent, the lowest in 21 years, according to Star-Ledger analysis earlier this year.

But Silva was not dissuaded by those points. She pointed out there are many exceptions to the 2 percent rule that have allowed tax bills to climb higher, and that most homeowners feel the pinch.

“I met a firefighter in Hoboken who said to me that his property tax bill had been about $8,800 and had hone up to close to $12,000,” she said in an interview as she left the meeting hall. “Homeowners have to take a look at their tax bills. And what they’re seeing is that year after year after year after year under Chris Christie's administration, their property tax bill have gone up.”

Silva said Buono would pursue three things to bring property taxes down: Restore state aid to schools that was cut under Christie, “make sure millionaires are paying their fair share” and restore property tax relief for seniors and middle-class families.

The last part is a reference to the Homestead rebates program. Under Christie, the program had a net decrease of $660 million. Buono and Silva have seized onto that.

“Gov. Christie, when he ran in 2009, one of the promises that he made is that he would not touch property tax relief. How many of you remember that? Right? Yeah,” Silva told the union members today. “One of the first promises he broke to the state of New Jersey. So, he turned around and he took away property tax relief, directly affecting seniors and middle class families.”

The Christie campaign pointed to an e-mail it sent today that said property taxes doubled during Buono's time in the state Legislature.

"Rather than continuing to take action to bring relief to families and control costs, Buono has stood in the way of a 10 percent, bipartisan tax relief plan and voted against pension and health benefits reforms that are delivering cost-controlling relief to local governments and property taxpayers," the e-mail said. "Yet, today Buono continues to rail about the problem she helped create, did nothing to fix, and that the Governor has taken significant and meaningful steps to finally address."