UPDATED: Timeline of Port Authority's George Washington Bridge controversy
TRENTON — The controversy over the closing of lanes on the George Washington Bridge in September continues to unfold with new subpoenas. Here's a blow-by-blow account of the bridge scandal:

Sept. 6: The Port Authority's director of interstate capital projects, David Wildstein, orders the bridge's general manager to carry out the closures.

Sept. 9: The Port Authority closes two of three local access lanes from Fort Lee to the George Washington Bridge, the nation's busiest crossing, bringing traffic to a halt and turning borough streets into a parking lot.

Sept. 12: Fort Lee Mayor Mark Sokolich writes to Gov. Chris Christie appointee Bill Baroni, the deputy executive director of the Port Authority, and expresses the belief that the closures were "punitive" and asks they be lifted. Some suspect they were put in place because Sokolich, a Democrat, did not endorse Christie for re-election.

Sept. 13: Port Authority Executive Director Patrick Foye, an appointee of Gov. Andrew Cuomo of New York, directs bridge managers to lift the closures, saying they violated agency policy and jeopardized public safety as well as the agency’s "credibility."

Sept. 16: The Port Authority claims the closures were due to a traffic safety study.

Oct. 2: Assemblyman John Wisniewski (D-Middlesex), chairman of the Assembly Transportation, Public Works and Independent Authorities Committee, says he will convene a hearing to determine who ordered the lane closures and if they were politically motivated.

Oct. 16: The Port Authority announces it will undertake an internal review to determine why the lanes were closed and whether proper procedures were followed.

Nov. 5: Christie is re-elected governor in a landslide victory over Democratic challenger Barbara Buono, a state senator from Middlesex County.

Nov. 13: The Port Authority remains mum on the lane closures despite mounting criticism and a barrage of questions from reporters at its board meeting in Jersey City. Sen. Loretta Weinberg (D-Bergen) files a public records request seeking information and documents related to the lane closings.

Nov. 20: With the threat of subpoenas, Wisniewski requests that top Port Authority officials including Baroni, Foye and Wildstein testify before the transportation panel about the closures.

Nov. 25: At a hearing held by the Assembly transportation committee, Baroni says the closures were ordered by his direct subordinate, Wildstein, as part of a traffic study and acknowledges making a mistake by not notifying Foye, police or the public.

Nov. 27: Wisniewski subpoenas Foye to testify before the Assembly committee, and Sen. Richard Codey (D-Essex) writes a letter to Port Authority Inspector General Robert Van Etten requesting an investigation into the lane closures.

Dec. 2: Christie brushes aside speculation that the bridge closures were politically motivated, joking at a new conference, “I worked the cones. Unbeknownst to anyone, I was working the cones." The governor said he had nothing to do with situation.

Dec. 6: Wildstein announces his resignation, saying that the controversy over the lane closures has "become a distraction, and I’m going to move on."

Dec. 9: Foye testifies before the transportation committee that he was unaware of any traffic safety study being conducted on the bridge in September, despite the testimony of Baroni two weeks earlier. After the hearing, Wisniewski calls for Baroni's resignation.

Dec 10: The Port Authority's inspector general launches an investigation.

Dec. 11: A Democratic group connected to Hillary Clinton attacks Gov. Chris Christie over the Port Authority's closure of lanes leading to the nation’s busiest bridge.

Dec. 12: Wisniewski issues seven more subpoenas as his investigation into the closures widens. The requests seek documents and communications from Port Authority officials to determine what they knew about the traffic-snarling lane closures.

Dec. 13: Christie announces the resignation of Baroni and appoints his trusted staffer, Deborah Gramiccioni, to the post. The governor says the change was planned regardless of the controversy, and reiterates he had nothing to do with the lane closures.

Dec. 17: U.S. Sen. Jay Rockefeller, chairman of the Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee, asks the federal transportation secretary to investigate and determine what oversight the government has over the Port Authority.

Dec. 18: Baroni and Wildstein hire prominent lawyers and request more time to respond to Wisniewski's subpoenas. The assemblyman grants to the two men an extension until Dec. 23, but subpoenas for five other officials still due Dec. 19.

Dec. 19: Wisniewski announces he has received documents subpoenaed from five Port Authority officials. Christie again dismisses questions about the bridge scandal as nothing more than political gamesmanship. Weinberg and Wisniewski introduce a resolution in state Legislature calling on Congress to do a top-to-bottom review of the authority.

Dec. 20 Sokolich, the Fort Lee mayor, refutes Christie's assertion that no one called to complain about the traffic tie-ups caused by the lane closures. He says local officials reached out to the Port Authority multiple times for help.

Dec. 23: Baroni and Wildstein submit documentation requested by Wisniewski.

Dec. 26: Weinberg says the Port Authority has delayed its response to her request for more information about the closures made through a Freedom of Information Act request.

Dec. 29: Port Authority e-mails show the traffic jams caused by the lane closures delayed emergency responders.

Today: Wisniewski issues another subpoena ordering Wildstein to testify before the Assembly transportation committee Jan. 9.