Chris Christie argues with public school teacher during Somers Point campaign stop
SOMERS POINT — Gov. Chris Christie ended a campaign stop in Somers Point on Saturday with an argument with a public school teacher who showed up to protest his education policies.

Melissa Tomlinson, a teacher at Buena Regional Middle School, said she asked the governor, “Why are you portraying our schools as failure factories?” He responded, “What do you want? I’m tired of you people,” according to Tomlinson. They had a brief argument over public school funding before she said, “He told me to do my job and turned around and got on the bus.”

Christie's spokeswoman, Maria Comella, disagrees with Tomlinson's characterization of the conversation. The governor did not say that he is "tired of you people," Comella said.

"They were having a discussion about the (education) funding levels and the governor said that no matter how much money we spend, it will never be enough for you people," she said.

The exchange was witnessed by a crowd of Christie supporters who had just listened to him give a campaign speech inside the VFW. The Republican governor faces Democrat Barbara Buono in Tuesday’s election.

“I wanted to have a conversation with him,” Melissa Tomlinson, a teacher at Buena Regional Middle School, said in a phone interview today. “I want people to be aware of the truth of what’s going on in education.”

Tomlinson is part of the New Jersey chapter of the Badass Teachers Association, whose Facebook page says: “This page was created to help us further our cause in the fight against the 'deform' of public education in the state of New Jersey.”

Christie cut more than $1 billion in state aid to schools in his first year in office. He has since touted his administration’s attention to public schools. He supports expanding charter schools and instituting a voucher program called the Opportunity Scholarship Act, which would give students in low-performing money for tuition in private schools.

“I would be happy to take as many dollars as possible away from failure factories that send children on a no-stop route to prison and to failed dreams, if we could take that money and put it into a place where those families have hope," Christie said last month during a speech to the Orthodox Union in Teaneck.

Christie recently asked Education Commissioner Christopher Cerf to look into how taxpayer dollars are spent at New Jersey’s private schools for disabled students, responding to a recent Star-Ledger investigation.

The newspaper’s review showed the schools — together a more than $600 million industry — are paid for by the public but can spend in ways public schools cannot, sometimes fueling nepotism, high salaries, fancy cars, generous pensions and questionable business deals.