Stephen Colbert pokes fun at Chris Christie's Sunday morning talk show appearances
TRENTON — Yet another television host discussed Gov. Chris Christie's possible 2016 presidential bid Monday night.

But this time, it was Stephen Colbert poking fun at all the speculation.

Comedy Central's faux news anchor fired off jokes about Christie's mini-marathon of talk show appearances Sunday morning — in which the governor deflected questions about running for the White House but also laid out a strategy for the Republican party to win more voters.

"The last presidential election was only a year ago," the comedian said on "The Colbert Report." "I can't believe the media is wasting its time speculating on 2016 frontrunners. And neither can the 2016 frontrunner. Chris Christie appeared on all four Sunday shows to talk about how much he didn't want to talk about the presidential race."

Colbert — a resident of Montclair — showed a series of clips of Christie dodging questions about 2016, saying he's focused on being "the governor of New Jersey."

"Yes, he's just the governor of New Jersey," Colbert said. "That's why he went on 'Meet the Jersey,' 'Fox News Jersey Sunday,' 'Face the Turnpike,' and 'This New Jersey with New Jersey New Jerseyopoulos."

The host then joked about how he admired how "Christie stays humble about his future by bragging only about his past." Colbert showed clips of the governor touting his record in New Jersey — including how he said the state has created 143,000 private sector jobs during his tenure.

"Wow, 143,000 plus seven mentions on TV equals ... not running for president," Colbert quipped, typing the numbers into a calculator.

"Frankly, I don't know why these Sunday shows won't just leave Christie alone. The man has got to focus on governing New Jersey with Michael J. Fox and Jimmy Fallon," he said, joking about two of Christie's other recent media appearances.

"I just hope he has time to record his not-running-for-president robocalls," the host added.

That was followed by what one of those robocalls may sound like:

"Hi. This is Chris Christie. I'm not running for anything. I am focused on being Governor of New Jersey. Stop calling me! I don't want to play these sorts of Beltway games. Speaking of which, boy, somebody needs to change the culture of D.C. Christie. 2016. Two completely unrelated words. 143,000 jobs!"

The segment came on the same night Colbert's fellow Comedy Central host, Jon Stewart of "The Daily Show," criticized Time magazine for the cover of its current edition, featuring Christie's picture and the headline "The Elephant in the Room."

RELATED COVERAGE

• Jon Stewart slams Time magazine for Christie cover on 'Daily Show'

• More Politics