Christie on Trump saying 'thousands' in N.J. cheered on 9/11: 'I don't recall that'
MANCHESTER, N.H. -- Gov. Chris Christie on Sunday said Donald Trump's claim that "thousands and thousands of people" cheered in Jersey City as the Twin Towers fell on 9/11 is not what he remembers about that day.

"I don't recall that. I don't," Christie -- who is running against Trump for the 2016 Republican presidential nomination -- told reporters while on the campaign trail in New Hampshire.

RELATED: Critics say Trump is wrong about cheering in Jersey City on 9/11

"It was a pretty emotional time for me because, as I've mentioned before, there's family involved, there were, you know, friends involved and so it was a pretty harrowing time," he said. "I do not remember that, and so it's not something that was part of my recollection. I think if it had happened, I would remember it, but, you know, there could be things I forget, too."

He added: "But I don't remember that, no."

Christie often recalls for people at his campaign stops how he feared for his wife's safety on 9/11 when he lost contact with her for about five hours during the terrorist attacks. First Lady Mary Pat was at work in lower Manhattan the day of the attacks.

The governor offered his response to the billionaire businessman's recent comments at a rally Saturday night in Birmingham, Ala.

"Hey, I watched when the World Trade Center came tumbling down ... and I watched in Jersey City, N.J., where thousands and thousands of people were cheering as that building was coming down. Thousands of people were cheering," Trump said.

"So something's going on," he continued. "We've got to find out what it is."

But there were no confirmed reports of mass cheering in Jersey City -- which is located directly across the Hudson River from Manhattan.

The Star-Ledger reported that while there were widespread rumors of celebrations by Muslims in Newark and Paterson -- a city with an estimated 25,000 Muslim residents, the second-most of any U.S. town -- police and local leaders denied they ever took place.

Critics from New Jersey and beyond sharply rebuked Trump on Sunday. But Trump stood by his story Sunday morning, saying during an appearance on ABC's "This Week" that there "were people that were cheering on the other side of New Jersey, where you have large Arab populations."

NJ Advance Media staff writer Brent Johnson contributed to this report.

Matt Arco may be reached at marco@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MatthewArco or on Facebook. Follow NJ.com Politics on Facebook.