N.J. taxpayers paid record amount for Christie's security during presidential run
TRENTON -- Gov. Chris Christie's record amount of time out of state last year left taxpayers on the hook for at least $614,000 to pay for his State Police security detail, records show.

New Jerseyans have paid at least $1.769 million since Christie took office to cover out-of-state travel for the governor's Executive Protection Unit.

The out-of-state travel costs for last year, which is likely much higher since it doesn't include overtime costs for members of the State Police unit charged with providing gubernatorial security, jumped more than $121,000 over the 2014 EPU costs.

Christie launched his bid for the Republican presidential nomination in June. The out-of-state campaigning, coupled with travel related to his time as chairman of the Republican Governors Association, meant Christie spent 261 partial or full days traveling outside of New Jersey in 2015 -- representing 72 percent of the year.

Key Christie aide cuts officials ties

The governor has criticized media outlets for reporting "partial" days he spent out of state last year, which included short trips he took to neighboring Pennsylvania and New York, where Christie often traveled to appear on news programs or speak at events before returning home. The administration argues Christie spent 190 days out of state last year if you exclude those trips.

That's still 52 percent spent outside New Jersey.

The EPU bills totaled $613,693 for 2015. The costliest period of the year were the final three months 2015, when Christie spent much of his time on the road.

That broke the previous record for EPU costs under Christie, which was in 2014, when taxpayers footed $492,420 for out-of-state travel. The bills totaled $220,355 in 2013; $248,277 in 2012; $129,842 in 2011 and $64,975 in 2010.

None of those figures include the cost of overtime for the State Police troopers in EPU, which is kept confidential according to state regulations.

Christie told reporters at the onset of his presidential bid that he had no intention to have his campaign reimburse the state for the EPU costs.

"In the end, anywhere I go, the troopers need to go -- whether I want them to go or not," he said in early July. "We're going to continue to conduct this in the same way I've always conducted it."

But the troopers acted as more than security for the governor on the campaign trail.

They were often Christie's mode of transportation while traveling on the ground in places like Iowa and New Hampshire, where Christie and his campaign staff rode in taxpayer-funded SUVs from one campaign event to the next.

None of those costs were reimbursed by the campaign, according to records.

Taxpayers continue to foot the bill for EPU travel as Christie continues on the 2016 campaign trail, this time for Republican front-runner Donald Trump.

"The Trump campaign doesn't benefit from my state troopers being there," Christie said at a Statehouse press conference earlier this month. "They don't benefit from it especially now when he's got 50 times the Secret Service detail that I would (have) riding in the back seat."

Being ushered from one campaign event to another wasn't the only time state resources helped Christie on the campaign trail.

The governor benefited from at least 15 flights on State Police helicopters while in New Jersey last year to help usher him to public events around the state and TV appearances in New York City. However, the campaign reimbursed the state for those costs.

The campaign was billed about $27,300 for the 15 flights.

The governor agreed during his first term to reimburse the state for personal and political travel on the taxpayer-funded helicopters. It costs about $2,500 an hour to operate the helicopters.

Matt Arco may be reached at marco@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @MatthewArco or on Facebook. Follow NJ.com Politics on Facebook.