Trump: 'Thousands' in Jersey City cheered on 9/11 (VIDEO)
TRENTON -- Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump on Saturday continued his call for surveillance of "certain" U.S. mosques -- and at one point supported his case by claiming he witnessed "thousands and thousands of people" cheering in Jersey City as the Twin Towers fell on Sept. 11, 2001.

"Hey, I watched when the World Trade Center came tumbling down," the billionaire businessman and former Atlantic City casino tycoon said during a rally Saturday night in Birmingham, Ala., according to video of his speech. "And I watched in Jersey City, N.J., where thousands and thousands of people were cheering as that building was coming down. Thousands of people were cheering.

"So something's going on," Trump continued. "We've got to find out what it is."

But there were no confirmed reports of mass cheering in Jersey City -- which is located directly across the Hudson River from Manhattan -- during the terrorist attack.

The Star-Ledger reported that while the were widespread rumors of celebrations by Muslims in Newark and Paterson -- a city with an estimated 25,000 Muslim residents, the second-most of any U.S. town -- police and local leaders denied they ever took place.

UPDATE: Critics say Trump is wrong about cheering in Jersey City on 9/11

It is unclear from the speech if Trump -- a New York real estate mogul -- was actually in Jersey City during the attacks or if he's claiming he saw footage of cheering there.

Though there were television broadcasts showing celebrating in some Middle Eastern countries, there does not appear to be known footage of celebrations in New Jersey.

A spokeswoman for Trump's campaign did not immediately return a message seeking comment.

Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop, a likely Democratic candidate for governor in 2017, wrote on Twitter on Sunday morning that Trump's account was "absurd."

Clearly @realDonaldTrump comment is absurd on #JerseyCity . good thing is his campaign 100% leads to dem pres https://t.co/zZ63xMgub2 -- Steven Fulop (@StevenFulop) November 22, 2015

Either @realDonaldTrump has memory issues or willfully distorts the truth, either of which should be concerning for the Republican Party -- Steven Fulop (@StevenFulop) November 22, 2015

1 thing for certain is #JerseyCity doesn't want to be part of the @realDonaldTrump hate campaign - we aren't about that -- Steven Fulop (@StevenFulop) November 22, 2015

Questions over how to fight terrorism have become a focus of the 2016 presidential race in the wake of the Nov. 13 Paris attacks -- which the Islamic State, or ISIS, have claimed credit for carrying out.

Trump -- who leads his 13 GOP rivals, including New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, in the Real Clear Politics average of national polls -- has taken one of the most aggressive stances. He said during an interview with MSNBS last week that the U.S. should at least monitor and possibly close some mosques in the country -- a view he repeated at Saturday's rally.

"I want surveillance of these people," Trump said. "I want surveillance if we have to. And I don't care. Are you ready for this, folks? Are you ready? Oh, they're gonna make such a big deal. They're going to make it so big. 'He said something so politically incorrect.'That's why we're going to hell -- because we're so politically correct.

"I want surveillance of certain mosques, OK? If that's OK," he continued. "And you know what? We've had it before, and we'll have it again."

New Jersey is home to the second-largest Muslim population in the U.S., after Michigan, and is tied with Illinois for having the second-most mosques, with 109 as of 2011.

The state also witnessed controversy over a secret surveillance program launched by the New York City Police Department in the wake of 9/11 to monitor mosques and Muslim communities in the New York and New Jersey area -- a program that led to a civil rights lawsuit and was later shut down.

RELATED: Trump says he wants a database for Syrian refugees, not all Muslims

In 2012, Muslim leaders in New Jersey filed a lawsuit against the NYPD for its surveillance in the Garden State. A judge dismissed the suit last year, but a federal appeals court reversed the decision last month, saying the department could not target a group solely on the basis of religion or ethnic background.

Trump's remarks Saturday came two days after he drew heat for appearing to support the idea of forcing Muslims in the U.S. to register in a database -- a concept denounced by Republican opponents, Democrats, and advocacy groups.

Some critics said the idea is similar to a tactic used by the Nazis on Jewish residents in Germany during the Holocaust, and that it would violate religious freedom protected under the U.S. Constitution.

Christie said a Muslim database "will do nothing to keep us safer and shows a lack of understanding on how to effectively prevent terrorist attacks," according to a report by the Associated Press.

But Trump has said that a reporter was the one who broached the idea and suggested that his comments were taken out of context.

The issue began early Thursday, when Yahoo Politics published an interview in which Trump was asked if he would consider Muslims being tracked via some sort of database or identification system. According to the report, Trump responded: "We're going to have to look at a lot of things very closely."

Then, after a rally in Iowa later in the day, an NBC News reporter asked Trump to confirm if he would back a Muslim database.

"There should be a lot of systems, beyond databases," Trump replied. "We should have a lot of systems, and today you could do it. But right now, we have to have a border, we have to have a wall. And we cannot let what's happening to this country happen anymore."

Asked if "that's something your White House would like to implement," Trump replied: "I would certainly implement that. Absolutely."

At Saturday's rally, Trump called the NBC News reporter who pressed him about the database "some little wise guy."

"He looked like he was 12 years old, he's got a camera, I'm signing autographs, and I'm going like, he's asking me questions, talking about the wall, we're gonna build a wall, we're gonna build this, we're gonna," he said. "And I'm signing autographs and there's music playing in the background and I'm leaving -- bing bing bing, signing -- and this little wise guy's sitting there, and he's asking me questions."

"So what happens is: They write false stories," Trump continued. "And in this case, they got called on it by a lot of people -- because, you know, you can only go so much, OK?"

The businessman has said in recent days that what he does support is a database keeping track of Syrian refugees coming into the U.S.

Many Republicans have warned against President Obama's plan to accept thousands of Syrians fleeing violence in their country, fearing members of ISIS could sneak in.

"I want surveillance of these people that are coming in -- the Trojan horse," Trump said. "I want to know who the hell they are."

NJ Advance Media staff writer Ted Sherman contributed to this report.

Five memorable Donald Trump quotes 6 Gallery: Five memorable Donald Trump quotes

Brent Johnson may be reached at bjohnson@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @johnsb01. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.