Times of Trenton Letters to the Editor - Feb. 27
Supreme Court has a chance to fix the mess it made

The U.S. Supreme Court has a chance now to fix the enormous mistake it made in the Citizens United decision. A Montana case challenging that Supreme Court decision has just been appealed back to the court (American Tradition Partnership vs. Bullock).

Justice Antonin Scalia recently said, “If the system seems crazy to you, don’t blame it on the court.”

Well, I do blame it on the Supreme Court. Its decision in the Citizens United case of two years ago is destroying our democracy.

Corporations, with virtually limitless money at their disposal, will always be able to outspend real people. It’s the end of democracy, unless we undo the damage done by Citizens United. Polls show 80 percent of Americans want Citizens United overturned.

The Supreme Court has just been handed an opportunity to fix the mess. It should take it.

-- Harry Chapman,

Trenton

Homegrown greed gnaws at U.S.

The article “Gas prices go boom — East especially hard-hit as production cuts send pump prices ever higher” (Feb. 21), contained one sentence that really surprised me. It stated that the U.S. had just begun to export more oil than it imports. Have we been lied to again? We have always been told by the government that the U.S. was energy-dependent on foreign oil. It blames the high price of gasoline on the greedy Arab countries.

It appears that the greed of the large U.S. oil companies are the real culprits behind the high cost of gasoline, diesel fuel and home heating oil. Of course, this comes with our government’s stamp of approval.

We shouldn’t fear China, Russia, the Muslim world and terrorists. The big oil companies, large banks, Wall Street, the medical establishment, lawyers and the federal government are the real enemies of the United States. This country will be destroyed from within.

-- Ron Dockter,

Ewing

Redundant programs waste tax money

I appreciate the letter “Why feel sorry for the haves?” (Feb. 20), a response to my letter “Politicians’ fuzzy math doesn’t leave me warm” (Jan. 25), and further thank the writer for better defining my simplistic presentation of tax obligations for a $1 million earner versus a $50,000 earner. In reality, I don’t feel sorry or envious of someone who is willing to make life choices in order to pursue a million-dollar income. By contrast, the $50,000 earner is a nine-to-five employee who has chosen his own lifestyle and income level. I even agree with the “taxes are what we pay for civilized society” sentiment, but that is where the writer and I part company.

Government spending today continues to be inefficient and wasteful. In the wake of the 2008 financial collapse, we have the new Consumer Protection Agency. Its mission is to protect members of the public from themselves in a similar manner as the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). The SEC was established in 1934 in the wake of the Great Depression, but its members were asleep at their desks while Bernie Madoff was bilking billions from greedy investors who were all to willing to plunk down their money for returns that were too good to be true. Mr. Madoff’s scams operated from the early 1990s under the watchful eyes of SEC auditors through 2008 — my tax dollars at work.

My point in my letter was to highlight how government wastes tax money on programs and new agencies, which overlap existing programs and agencies that fail to perform. At the state level, New Jersey taxpayers will be providing funds to the city of Trenton for needed repairs to its high school building, which has been neglected for many years, while the current mayor requests a raise in salary — more of my tax dollars at work.

-- Dan DiLeo,

Bordentown City

Autism responds best to early treatment

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta estimates that as many as half a million children in the U.S. alone have some form of autism.

Autism is a neurological condition that may come with many challenges but also imparts great gifts. The co-author of the book I am now reading was diagnosed as having autistic tendencies at age 2½, but he states that, with help from his parents, teachers and other professionals, he has gone on to the finishing stages for his doctoral dissertation and he teaches college courses.

Some signs of autism are: delay or lack of spoken language, marked impairment in conversational skills and social interactions and inflexible adherence to nonfunctional routines or rituals, such as head-banging.

Early diagnosis and intervention, ideally before the age of three, are very important because research shows that many features of autism respond better when dealt with early. If any readers have concerns about their child, it is important that they consult with a medical professional experienced in the diagnosis of autism. They will need the diagnosis to access services from government agencies. They can, if needed, secure intensive treatment — the earlier the better.

-- Adele Vexler, MSW,

Pennington

Raising minimum wage the right thing to do

As a member of the Assembly labor committee, I am proud to support bill A2162 to boost our minimum wage to help everyone in our state who is struggling to make ends meet during these tenuous times.

An increase in the minimum wage is, quite simply, critical to families who are counting their pennies in order to survive in this economy. Working families have been the hardest hit in recent years, since middle-class jobs in manufacturing, construction and building trades have dried up and have been slow to return. These working men and women have moved toward jobs that pay minimum wage in order to keep food on their table until the industries in which they are trained rebound. Since the economy is slow to grow, these jobs have become permanent, thereby cementing the reality that the minimum wage simply is not a sustainable salary for New Jerseyans.

At the current New Jersey minimum wage, a full-time employee earns only $15,080. In comparison, the federal poverty level for a two-person household is $15,130.

If we keep the minimum wage at the current level, then single-parent families earning the minimum wage at a full-time job will live in poverty in New Jersey. We can’t sit idly by while parents raising their children cannot financially support themselves or pay the bare minimum of daily expenses while earning the minimum wage.

-- Wayne DeAngelo,

Hamilton

The writer, a Democrat, represents the 14th District in the New Jersey General Assembly.

Appropriate attire always de rigueur

In reading “The star treatment — Capital Health-Hopewell offers full-service spa as an oasis from medical anxieties” (Feb. 23), I was distracted by the photo of a licensed massage therapist showing cleavage as she bends forward to work on a client. What kind of image and impression does this evoke in persons not familiar with the most excellent and effective practice of massage therapy — that sex sells?

In this day and age, one would think that health professionals who must receive a license to practice would at least dress modestly for a photo. As a physical therapist, I want my profession to always be shown in the best light possible. I think the hospital and the newspaper could have done better by showing a practitioner (massage therapist) appropriately attired.

Massage therapy is an excellent modality and its practitioners strive to be as professional as possible. The one in the photo on Page One could have done better.

-- Sara Rose,

Lambertville

Follow the Times of Trenton on Twitter.