Opinion: Search for POWs/MIAs must not be forgotten
By Jack Conners

Almost 88,000 United States service members are still missing and unaccounted for, dating back to World War II.

For the families of these soldiers, closure has never come. With the latest move by the U.S. Department of Defense (DOD), closure may never come. As a former U.S. Army reservist, I know firsthand the toll this can exact on grieving loved ones. This makes the DOD’s recent actions all the more unnerving.

For nearly 20 years, the U.S. has been part of the Joint POW/MIA Accounting Command, also known as JPAC, a presidential commission created jointly by President George H.W. Bush and Russian President Boris Yeltsin to help ascertain the fates of countless Americans who disappeared behind the Iron Curtain. The commission has been supported by every president since, including President Obama. Even Russia’s current President Dmitry Medvedev has demonstrated his support by appointing a slate of new commissioners to the Russian side of the delegation.

Ranking officials within the DOD, however, are attempting to abandon this commission and divert funding to other missions. Additionally, valuable resources such as researchers and linguists are being transferred to other missions, further eroding the chance of any success in locating our missing brothers and sisters.

JPAC has been tasked with a worldwide mission of recovering and identifying America’s fallen soldiers — almost 78,000 still unaccounted for from World War II; 8,000 from Korea; 1,680 from Vietnam and two more from Iraq and Afghanistan.

The DOD continues to raid JPAC’s budget and resources, despite the fact that Congress has mandated that JPAC double its recovery and identification rate by the year 2015. Without the proper resources, this goal will be all but impossible, forcing countless families to continue indefinitely without knowing the fate of their loved ones.

I know we are dealing with extraordinary fiscal times, but this mission, if abandoned now, would essentially render meaningless years of work and force us to start from scratch should we attempt to restart these efforts at a later date.

Over the last 19 years, steady progress has enabled U.S. investigators to build valuable relationships with potential eyewitnesses and gain access to Russia’s central military archives. To abandon these efforts now would be like erecting the foundation and frame of a house, then letting the hands of time lay waste to the progress we had made.

There is a reason our military is considered perhaps the finest history has ever seen. It is because of the men and women who faced unknown, harrowing circumstances and refused to renege on their commitment to our country. For this commitment, they likely paid with their life.

During the Memorial Day services at Arlington National Cemetery this year, President Obama reinforced his commitment to the legions of Americans still searching for the whereabouts of a son, daughter, brother, sister, father or mother. As the president said, “Our nation owes a debt to its fallen heroes that we can never fully repay. But we can honor their sacrifice, and we must. … And we must honor it as a nation by keeping our sacred trust with all who wear America's uniform, and the families who love them; by never giving up the search for those who've gone missing under our country's flag or are held as prisoners of war.”

The president needs to make good on this promise by forcing his administration to do what is right.

Anyone who agrees with this sentiment should contact the president and members of Congress to demand that the United States follow through on its commitment. Our service men and women deserve it. They did not abandon their country, even until what was likely their last breath. We should show our gratitude by doing the same.

-- Assemblyman Jack Conners is chairman of the Assembly Military and Veterans’ Affairs Committee. A Democrat, he represents the 7th Legislative District.



Follow the Times of Trenton on Twitter.