'Open season on N.J.': With Trump backing, House GOP votes to cut your property tax break
WASHINGTON -- With the help of one New Jersey Republican, the U.S. House on Thursday passed sweeping tax legislation that would end tax breaks used by many Garden State residents and could harm the health of business and real estate in the state.

Rep. Tom MacArthur, R-3rd Dist., was the only New Jersey lawmaker to support the legislation, which would eliminate the ability of taxpayers to deduct their state and local income or sales taxes, and cap the property tax deduction at $10,000.

House Republican leaders, who drafted the bill in secret without any public hearings, also prevented lawmakers from seeking to amend the bill on the floor in order to restore the full state and local tax deduction.

N.J. faces tax hike under GOP bill

The vote was 227-205, with four of the five New Jersey House Republicans, including Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen, R-11th Dist., joining all seven House Democrats in voting no. Frelinghuysen was the only lawmaker who didn't announce his position in advance of the vote.

Only 13 Republicans, nine of them from New Jersey and New York, opposed the bill. No Democrats supported it.

"Every New Jersey taxpayer should be furious that this bill passed," said Rep. Josh Gottheimer, D-5th Dist. "When you look at the deductions lost for state and local taxpayers, for seniors with medical expenses, for homeowners with mortgages, and small businesses, it's undeniable that this tax hike bill is another nail in the coffin for New Jersey."

The legislation reduced tax rates for individuals and corporations; capped the mortgage deduction at the first $500,000 price of a home; created a special rate for companies that "pass through" their profits to their owners, who report them on their individual tax returns; and eliminates the tax on estates of at least $11 million for a married couple, which ensnares just two of every 1,000 taxpayers, less than 1 percent of them family farms or small businesses.

It eliminated deductions for property damage after major storms, for medical expenses, for student loan interest and for teachers who buy equipment for their classrooms. The bill would increase the federal deficit by as much as $1.5 trillion over 10 years.

President Donald Trump praised the House action.

"We are working together to allow hardworking, middle-class families to keep more of their money, and to empower our companies and workers to dominate their global competition," White House spokeswoman Sarah Huckabee Sanders said after the vote. "A simple, fair, and competitive tax code will be rocket fuel for our economy, and it's within our reach. Now is the time to deliver."

For New Jersey, the major focus was the loss of the state and local tax deduction. The state's business community came out against the House bill because of the provision, as did municipal officials and the state's real estate industry. Gov.-elect Phil Murphy called it "a tax sham."

By gutting the state and local tax break, House Republicans will make New Jersey less competitive in the effort to woo businesses, said John Boyd, principal with the Princeton-based Boyd Co., which advises companies on where to locate.

"We call economic development the second war between the states," Boyd said. "It's open season on New Jersey now. States like Florida and Texas and Georgia and the Carolinas will actively be targeting New Jersey businesses and make the property tax issue a big part of that pitch."

The biggest beneficiaries of the state and local tax deduction also are the high-tax states that subsidize those that therefore can keep their taxes lower. New Jersey taxpayers, for example, sent $31 million more to Washington than they received in services in 2015, second only to New York, according to a report by the State University of New York's Rockefeller Institute of Government.

MacArthur said the overall lower tax rates, the preservation of some of the property tax break, and the elimination of the alternative minimum tax that doesn't allow the state and local tax deduction in its calculations made the bill a net positive for the state.

"We built consensus, got results, and working families will reap the benefits, while enjoying significant rate cuts on their income taxes," MacArthur said.

Frelinghuysen, a member of the House Republican leadership as chairman of the Appropriations Committee, broke with his party on the bill.

"It will hurt New Jersey families who already pay some of the highest income and property taxes in the nation," he said.

So did Rep. Leonard Lance, R-7th Dist. who noted that New Jersey business groups opposed the bill.

"The House-passed proposal would negatively affect too many hard-working constituents and small businesses," Lance said.

One study said that New Jerseyans actually would pay more, not less. Residents of only four states, New Jersey, New York, California and Maryland, could expect their taxes to rise under the House bill, according to the Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy, a progressive research group in Washington.

That's because more than 41 percent of New Jersey's taxpayers take advantage of the state and local tax break, a greater percentage than all but two other states.

The remaining property tax break would be worthless to most New Jerseyans as they no longer would have enough other deductions to exceed the higher $24,000 standard deduction, according to New Jersey Policy Perspective, a progressive research group.

For those who could still deduct it, the property tax cap would fall short of the actual amount paid in areas of the state; the average property tax in four counties already exceeds $10,000.

The action now moves to the Senate, where Republicans there have proposed to eliminate the entire deduction for state and local taxes. As they did with the budget resolution that targeted the state and local tax deduction, House Republican leaders could decide to bring up the unchanged Senate bill should it pass the other chamber.

The budget resolution prevented a Senate filibuster and allowed Republicans to pass tax cuts without working with Democratic lawmakers.

The Tax Foundation, a research group that believes that tax cuts spur economic growth, predicted that New Jersey would gain 27,481 jobs and the average middle-class family there would earn $3,013 more over 10 years.

The foundation's board includes Douglas Holtz-Eakin, president of the American Action Forum. The forum's affiliated American Action Network has spent millions of dollars in ads urging lawmakers to pass the tax bill.

Before the vote, Trump delivered a pep talk to members of the House GOP conference. And later in the afternoon, state Senate Republican Leader Tom Kean Jr., R-Union; and state Sens. Michael Doherty, R-Warren, who chaired Trump's New Jersey campaign; and Samuel Thompson (R-Middlesex) were among the local lawmakers who discussed taxes at the White House with administration officials, incliuding Vice President Mike Pence.

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant or on Facebook. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.