Opinion: Obama's health-care reform -- A big swing and a miss
By Amy H. Handlin

Reggie Jackson once compared his fellow Hall of Famer Nolan Ryan’s fastball to ice cream. “Every hitter likes fastballs just like everybody likes ice cream. But you don’t like it when someone’s stuffing it into you by the gallon,” is how Jackson described the fastball that struck out more hitters than any other in baseball history.

Health care is obviously more important than ice cream. The federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, commonly known as “Obamacare,” was stuffed into law two years ago and has been serving up tax increases by the gallon and overwhelming taxpayers and jobs-creating businesses. Affordable health care is now even further out of reach.

Instead of encouraging states to improve health care at reduced costs for taxpayers, the Obama administration has decided to force states to enroll more patients in Medicaid without concern for costs. In New Jersey, these mandates entailed a 40 percent increase of enrollees at an estimated cost of more than $900 million from 2014 to 2020, when all of the act’s increases are implemented.

The federal government is supposed to match what states spend on new enrollees. I have serious concerns about Washington’s ability to keep a promise, especially because it has already indicated New Jersey’s new enrollees aren’t entitled to federal funds.

As usual, New Jersey was a leader on this issue and expanded coverage for needy families. With reform that could save taxpayers $300 million, the state was able to increase coverage without placing the burden on taxpayers or cutting services. What was our reward for doing the right thing? These new enrollees won’t qualify for the matching federal funds simply because we added them onto the rolls before 2014. According to the Obama administration, doing what’s right only counts when it’s done on its schedule.

In New Jersey, we strive to provide better health care with less cost. President Obama’s plan does the reverse and cuts $3,700 worth of benefits for certain senior citizens, according to the Heritage Foundation, which estimated that lower-income earners and minorities would be hit hardest.That’s as responsible as sending up a hitter to face a 100 mph fastball without a helmet.Obamacare also places new taxes on health devices such as hearing aids, imaging machines, replacement hips and even the common tongue depressor. These costs will be passed on to consumers and have a chilling effect on the industry’s research and development budgets, meaning less innovation in this very important field. The billions of dollars’ worth of taxes added to insurers, prescriptions and medical devices will mean higher prices and fewer choices for patients. Some taxes will come right out of their pockets.

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act requires every American to buy government-approved health insurance or face fines of up to $695 or 2.5 percent of his or her income. For younger senior citizens between retirement and Medicaid eligibility, this could mean a $1,400 penalty for a couple earning less than $56,000. Happy retirement!

Similarly, disastrous fines are applied to employers, who will face fines up to a $3,000 penalty for every employee who doesn’t receive sufficient coverage. Already, it’s estimated by the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office that more than 3 million people annually will lose their health coverage through their employer because of the health act’s mandates. With the ever-increasing costs of health care, it’s not hard to conceive employers doing cost/benefit analysis between paying a fine of $2,000-$3,000 and a $10,000 health plan.

That same office has already debunked President Obama’s claim that his “reform” will cost “around” $900 billion over 10 years. In reality, the plan will cost taxpayers $1.762 trillion over the next decade.

That was about as big of a swing and a miss as you can get. The Supreme Court last week listened to arguments about whether the plan is legal. Although it would be prudent to wait for its ruling, some of my colleagues have rushed to the plate with a bureaucratic plan to implement Obamacare in New Jersey with even more taxes, fees and assessments on health insurers.

Our best approach at the state and federal level would be to take a step back and find ways to deliver better health care at less cost to patients and taxpayers. The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act implements a massive and expensive bureaucracy. It changes the system and preserves inefficient health care.

We need to reduce health-care costs by encouraging free competition and innovation, listening to doctors who know how to eliminate needless expenses in health care and aggressively manage chronic conditions to prevent expensive treatments. These types of approaches will truly reform the care people receive and what it costs them.

President Obama has struck out in his attempt to reform health care. Senior citizens and families struggling to afford health care are no better off than they were two years ago. They’re down to their final strike, and President Obama is not going to ease up on them.

Amy Handlin (R-Belford) represents the 13th District in the New Jersey General Assembly.

Follow the Times of Trenton on Twitter.