Why Democrats keep refusing to pass Zika funding
WASHINGTON -- The U.S. Senate returned to work after a seven-week recess and immediately deadlocked Tuesday over funding to combat the Zika virus.

As they did before Congress left for the summer, Senate Democrats refused to pass Zika legislation that banned funding for Planned Parenthood, and Republicans refused to consider a bill that didn't cut off money for the women's health care provider.

The measure would provide $1.1 billion in funding, some of it going to funding for contraception because the virus can be transmitted sexually.

The stalemate has legislative leaders considering adding the money to whatever massive spending bill is required to keep the government running after the fiscal year ends Sept. 30.

Zika cases reported in N.J.

Through the end of August, 16,832 Zika cases had been reported in the U.S. and its territories, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. In New Jersey, 91 cases were reported, brought back by travelers from areas where the disease is prevalent. The disease is spread by mosquitos.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is spending down the $222 million that had been diverted from other programs to combat the Zika virus.

Senate Republicans on Tuesday again failed to get the 60 votes they needed for legislation that prevented any federal money from going to Planned Parenthood as the price for funding efforts to combat Zika.

The vote was 52-46, with both New Jersey senators, Democrats Robert Menendez and Cory Booker, voting no.

"It's hard to explain why -- despite their own calls for funding -- Senate Democrats decided to block a bill that could help keep pregnant women and babies safer from Zika," said Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.).

The Zika legislation measure would provide $1.1 billion in funding, some of it for contraception because the virus can be transmitted sexually.

Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid of Nevada accused Republicans of being "more interested in attacking Planned Parenthood" than "protecting women and babies from this awful virus."

Without the anti-Planned Parenthood provision, the Senate passed a Zika funding bill in May, 89-8. The dissenters were eight Republican senators.

But in negotiations with the House, the ban on Planned Parenthood funding was added to the final bill. The House passed the measure largely along party lines, 239-171, with all six New Jersey Republicans supporting the legislation and five Democrats voting no. The sixth, Rep. Frank Pallone Jr. (D-6th Dist.), did not vote.

According to Planned Parenthood's annual report, abortion services account for 3 percent of its medical procedures.

Nevertheless, the group is a favorite target of anti-abortion Republicans, who in the House formed a subcommittee to investigate discredited allegations that the group sold parts from aborted fetuses for use in medical research. Rep. Bonnie Watson Coleman (R-12th Dist.) is a member of the panel, whose investigation is continuing.

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.



.