SCR210
A Concurrent Resolution overriding a line-item veto eliminating an appropriation for Family Planning Services grants and a related language provision in the Department of Health and Senior Services.

Be It Resolved by the Senate of the State of New Jersey (the General Assembly concurring):

1. That the following appropriation, on page 82, and the following related language provision on page 85, of Senate Bill No. 4000 of 2011 (P.L.2011, c.85) which were the subject of objection by the Governor in the Governor's veto statement of June 30, 2011, be restored to law as follows, the objections thereto of the Governor notwithstanding:

46 DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SENIOR SERVICES

20 Physical and Mental Health

21 Health Services

GRANTS-IN-AID

02-4220 Family Health Services .............................................. $7,500,000

(From General Fund .............................. $7,500,000)

Grants-in-Aid:

02 Family Planning Services ……. . ($7,500,000)

Of the amount hereinabove appropriated for Family Planning Services, $1,000,000 shall be transferred to the Department of Human Services to provide a match for family planning services under the Medicaid program; provided however, none of the transferred monies shall be expended on abortion procedures. The Department of Human Services shall apply to the federal government for any necessary waiver or State plan amendment to provide family planning services under Medicaid.

2. BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that copies of this resolution be delivered to the Governor, the State Treasurer and Commissioner of the Department of Health and Senior Services.

STATEMENT

This resolution overrides a line-item veto of an appropriation and a related language provision in the annual appropriations act for Fiscal Year 2012 that were eliminated by the Governor's line-item veto. The Grants-In-Aid appropriation for the Family Planning Services program in the Department of Health and Senior Services of $7,500,000 was eliminated by the Governor's line-item veto. The related language provision concerning a transfer of $1 million of that appropriation to provide a match for federal funds under the Medicaid program and the filing of a waiver or State plan amendment is also restored.

In fiscal year 2010, the State appropriated $7,590,000 for grants to organizations providing family planning services. The appropriations act for State FY2011 as proposed by the Governor, and enacted over objections, irresponsibly eliminated that funding, thereby severely impairing New Jerseyans’ access to vital health care services. The restoration of this appropriation for Fiscal Year 2012 will ensure that the State makes adequate resources available to individuals looking for services related to family planning, such as information and counseling on reproductive choices and birth control methods; comprehensive physicals and health screenings; pelvic and breast exams; pregnancy testing; the diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted diseases; AIDS testing and counseling; prenatal substance abuse programs; colposcopy, cryotherapy, and loop electrosurgical excision procedures; and adolescent risk reduction counseling.