New Jersey Senate Democrats :: Home
Top Story - 7/2/2013 Senate Democrats Call On Minority Leader Kean To Allow Members To Override Governor’s Veto Of Marriage Equality TRENTON – Joined by members of Garden State Equality and various advocates from around the state, Senate Democrats today called on Minority Leader Kean to allow members of his caucus to vote their conscience on an override of Governor Christie's misguided veto of marriage equality legislation. "This should not be a partisan issue. In fact, rarely are issues so clear and void of middle ground: you either believe everyone should be treated the same or you don't. The governor's veto was wrong and the Minority Leader should set the example his father set three decades ago when he told legislators to vote their conscience," said Senate President Steve Sweeney (D-Gloucester, Salem, Cumberland). Released on 7/2/2013 | Read More

Madden Bill To Reduce Unemployment Tax Payments By Employers Signed Into Law TRENTON – Legislation sponsored by Senate Labor Committee Chairman Fred Madden to cut the unemployment insurance tax rates that will be imposed on employers during the upcoming fiscal year, which would help businesses in New Jersey work through the difficult economy and save or add jobs, was signed into law today. “As New Jersey comes back from the recession with new jobs and consumer confidence, we have an obligation to do all that we can to help small businesses stay afloat,” said Senator Madden (D-Gloucester and Camden). “These savings will have a significant effect in reducing operational expenses, which in turn, will allow employers to retain and hire more workers. This legislation is a sound solution that will help employers and employees alike.”

Landmark Gun Safety Measure Goes To The Governor TRENTON – The Senate on Thursday approved and sent to the governor three bills from the comprehensive plan for gun safety, including the centerpiece that will overhaul the state’s firearms permitting process by creating a modern, electronic system for universal background checks that will include mental health records and cover private transactions. “This will be a model for the nation,” said Senate President Steve Sweeney (D-Salem/Gloucester/Cumberland), the lead sponsor of the legislation that will overhaul the permitting process. “It will create a modern, electronic system of instant background checks for all gun sales that will include instant access to criminal and mental health records and by covering private transactions. It will make existing gun laws more effective and help keep weapons out of the hands of those who shouldn’t have them.”

Senate Approves Bill To Protect Children From Harm Of ‘Conversion Therapy’ TRENTON – Acting to protect children from the potentially harmful effects of so-called “conversion therapy,” the Senate on Thursday approved legislation that would ban the use of therapeutic practices intended to change the sexual orientation of minors. The bill, S-2278, sponsored by Senator Raymond Lesniak, Senate President Steve Sweeney and Senate Majority Leader Loretta Weinberg, was sent to the governor with a vote of 28 to 9. “Conversion therapy not only has no basis in science, it has proven to be harmful to young people,” said Senator Lesniak, the bill’s prime sponsor. “Most of the major psychiatric, psychological and counseling organizations have warned of dangers of this practice. I believe it is a type of child abuse that should be prevented.”

Madden Bill To Prevent Sudden Cardiac Arrest Among Young Athletes Signed Into Law TRENTON – Legislation sponsored by Senator Fred Madden (D – Gloucester/Camden) that would help prevent sudden cardiac arrest among student athletes was signed into law today. The bill, S-1912, entitled the “Scholastic Student Athlete Safety Act,” would establish advance screening methods for students in grades six to 12 who participate in interscholastic or intramural sports to identify heart conditions that could cause sudden death. “In this day and age, it is simply irresponsible to have students engaging in physical activity without knowing about underlying medical conditions that may put them at heightened risk of heart failure,” said Senator Madden. “When the health of our children is at stake, we must strive to use the most comprehensive screening measures possible. We have an obligation to protect the safety of our student athletes, and this law will help save lives throughout the state of New Jersey.”