New Jersey State School Nurses Association
**** NEW ADDRESS ****

NJSSNA

1479 Pennington Rd

Trenton, NJ 08618

Phone: 609-233-2466

Email: njssnaexecutivedirector@gmail.com

Mission

The New Jersey State School Nurses Association seeks to improve health and educational outcomes for children and youth by building the capacity of school nurses to promote school and community wellness and deliver high-quality healthcare in the school setting.

Vision

A school nurse in every school, leading the way to wellness for the entire school community.

The New Jersey State School Nurses Association (NJSSNA) is a professional organization dedicated to advancing the practice of school nursing. Organized in 1937 and incorporated in 1938, NJSSNA serves as the voice for New Jersey’s school nurses. In 2010, NJSSNA proudly affiliated with the National Association of School Nurses (NASN), enabling New Jersey’s school nurses a new level of professional support and advocacy. The NJSSNA is governed by Bylaws (last updated 2013-06-18). NJSSNA BYLAWS

According to NASN, school nursing is defined as a specialized practice of professional nursing that advances the well-being, academic success and life-long achievement and health of students. To that end, school nurses facilitate positive student responses to normal development; promote health and safety including a healthy environment; intervene with actual and potential health problems; provide case management services; and actively collaborate with others to build student and family capacity for adaptation, self-management, self-advocacy, and learning.

Members of NJSSNA include certified school nurses working in the state’s public school districts and charter schools, nursing faculty charged with preparing school nurses, and registered nurses working in healthcare facilities, early childhood programs, or in New Jersey’s private and parochial schools. Others interested in the delivery of school health services may also join the association.

The NJSSNA is governed by an executive board elected by the membership. In addition to the officers, committee chairs or co-chairs serve on the board and address the following activities:

The County Liaison serves to foster timely and effective communicates with county presidents and representatives.

serves to foster timely and effective communicates with county presidents and representatives. The Education Chair plans professional development opportunities to advance the practice of school nursing in New Jersey.

plans professional development opportunities to advance the practice of school nursing in New Jersey. The Communications Chair disseminates information to members and interested stakeholders through the Association’s website, newsletter, and other means.

disseminates information to members and interested stakeholders through the Association’s website, newsletter, and other means. The Legislation Chair monitors proposed state and federal legislation and regulations that may impact children’s health and the practice of school nursing and works with the executive Board to develop appropriate comments and responses.

monitors proposed state and federal legislation and regulations that may impact children’s health and the practice of school nursing and works with the executive Board to develop appropriate comments and responses. The Marketing Chair promotes the NJSSNA through merchandising and public relations.

promotes the NJSSNA through merchandising and public relations. The Membership Chair works with NASN to recruit new members and maximize membership in NJSSNA.

works with NASN to recruit new members and maximize membership in NJSSNA. The Standards and Practices Chair develops position papers and provide guidance to members regarding school nursing practice.

develops position papers and provide guidance to members regarding school nursing practice. The Research Advisers assist the Board to identify emrgeing issues and effective practices in the profession.

The NJSSNA also employs a part-time executive director who serves as a non-voting member of the board. The executive director maintains association records and serves as the initial point of contact for routine association business such as mail, phone inquiries, and email.

Judith Woop, MEd, RN, NJ-CSN, Executive Director

njssnaexecutivedirector@gmail.com

Phone contact 609-233-2466.