Eastern Gulf of Mexico lease sale to open 465,000 acres for drilling
The federal government will open areas off the coasts of eastern Alabama and western Florida for new oil and gas drilling in March, the first lease sale in that area in five years.

The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management said Tuesday (Dec. 3) that it will put more than 465,000 acres in the eastern Gulf of Mexico up for lease at the Mercedes-Benz Superdome in New Orleans on March 19. The leasing area covers waters more than three miles off the coast of eastern Alabama up to an eastern borderline that falls around Pensacola, Fla.

The sale will immediately follow the planned central Gulf lease sale announced in October, which will open 39 million acres offshore Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama for oil and gas exploration and development.

"This proposed sale is another important step to promote responsible domestic energy production through the safe, environmentally sound exploration and development of the Nation's offshore energy resources," BOEM Director Tommy Beaudreau said in a statement.

While the eastern Gulf sale will be markedly smaller, it marks the first time the Obama administration has approved lease sales as far east as the Florida panhandle under its five-year lease program rolled out in 2012. The administration unveiled the plan for future leasing after the BP oil spill in 2010 and a months-long deepwater drilling moratorium.



The administration has held four sales under the program, including a blockbuster June 2012 sale that drew a record $1.7 billion in high bids from oil and gas companies seeking to stake out acreage in the central Gulf.

The last time oil and gas companies had the chance to bid in the eastern Gulf was in March 2008. Many of the 134 leasing blocks to be included in next year's sale were offered but passed up by companies in the 2008 sale.

Companies might show more interest this time around given higher oil prices, new oil and gas mapping technology, and the announcement of major discoveries farther west. For example, Anadarko Petroleum Corp. hit a massive find of 1,000 feet of oil-bearing rock more than 100 miles off the Louisiana coast earlier this year.

BOEM estimates the 465,200 acres that will go up for lease hold 71 million barrels of oil and 162 billion cubic feet of natural gas. The majority of that will be subject to a revenue-sharing agreement under the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act of 2006. Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana and Texas share in 37.5 percent of the lease payments to the federal government.



In addition, 12.5 percent of revenues from those leases are allocated to the Land and Water Conservation Fund, a federal fund that provides money for state and local government to acquire land and water for preservation.

This story was updated Dec. 4 to reflect a correction issued by BOEM on the oil reserve estimates for available leases in the eastern Gulf.