Entergy Louisiana proposes raising residential electric rates by $8 per month
Entergy Louisiana residential customers could see their monthly utility bills jump nearly $8 starting next year, the company said in a filing late Friday with the state Public Service Commission. The proposal, which sets the stage for what may become a contentious political issue with utility regulators, offers two scenarios depending on differing regulatory paths Entergy could take in the year ahead.

Entergy Louisiana, a subsidiary of New Orleans utility giant Entergy Corp., hopes to turn over control of its vast electric grid to a regional transmission organization, the Midwest Independent Transmission System Operator. In New Orleans, the move is projected to save customers up to $46 million over a 10-year period, in part because of MISO's organized power markets, which dispatch power more efficiently.

The company also plans to spin off and merge its electric transmission business with ITC Holdings Corp., a Michigan-based transmission company. Officials say the $1.78 billion deal will improve the electric grid's efficiency and help it avoid substantial capital costs.

Entergy says the bulk of the proposed increase will cover depreciation costs on its aging infrastructure, making capital improvements and establishing a reserve to cover repairs incurred during future storms. The rate filing isn't predicated solely on either scenario, both of which have been discussed extensively by state regulators for more than a year.



If both plans are approved by regulators, along with the other increases in the rate case, Entergy Louisiana has asked to raise electric rates for its customers -- in Algiers and suburban areas south of Lake Pontchartrain -- by $168 million. The average customer using 1,000 kilowatt hours of electricity would see their monthly bill rise by $7.56, a 7.7 percent jump, according to figures released Friday by the utility.

The average commercial electricity user -- those purchasing 12,500 kilowatt hours of power -- would face almost a $77 monthly increase; heavy industrial users using 500,000 kilowatt hours could expect to pay about $1,918 more per month.

In the other scenario, Entergy Louisiana would join MISO but not spin-off its transmission business, raising electric rates by a collective $144 million. That would break down a $6.80 monthly increase for average residential customers using 1,000 kilowatt hours of power; almost $87 for the average commercial electric customer using 12,500 kilowatt hours; and about a $2,028 monthly jump for heavy industrial users.

The rate filing is what is used to determine the utility's revenue, which is regulated by the PSC. Entergy Louisiana last made a rate case filing with the PSC in 2004. The PSC will soon set a schedule for deciding the fate of the proposal, including collecting testimony from Entergy and other interested parties.



If a decision is not made in a year, the new rates will go into effect, and customers will be given any potential refund that could result from a settlement with regulators.



The rate plan is based on a variety of factors, including what it costs Entergy to deliver power under a restructured transmission system, and establishing the rate of return the utility is allowed to collect from customers on its capital investments.

Entergy officials said Friday that the increase is necessary because of substantial capital investment costs facing the utility -- as well as the industry as a whole -- in the years ahead, coupled with uncertain credit markets and investor expectations.



Joining MISO is part of that solution, Entergy says, since it would provide $1.4 billion in savings to Entergy customers across its four-state territory in the first decade, including up to $575 million in Louisiana.

Molly Jahncke, an Entergy Louisiana spokeswoman, said increasing the utility's revenue was necessary given the amount its investment in recent years.

"We need to realign right now to ensure that we're able to deliver reliable, affordable power going forward," Jahncke said.