Gov. Bobby Jindal says he's 'beginning to turn this state around'
Armed with an imposing campaign war chest, approval ratings higher than almost any of his fellow governors and a slate of nine opponents with little name recognition or money, Gov. Bobby Jindal's re-election campaign appears to be on cruise control heading toward the Oct. 22 primary. Eight years removed from losing an unlikely bid for his current job, the 40-year-old governor is now a seasoned political veteran with a term and a half in the U.S. House and four years of executive experience dominated by natural disasters and speculation about his political future beyond Louisiana.

403 Forbidden

403 Forbidden

Having watched Gov. Kathleen Blanco, the Democrat who defeated him in 2003, lose control of her political career after Hurricanes Katrina and Rita, the Republican has used his own response to a string of lesser storms and the largest oil spill in American history to project competence and command. He titled his 2010 campaign-style memoir "Leadership and Crisis."

A rising star in the GOP, Jindal was tapped to deliver the Republican response to President Barack Obama's first address to Congress in 2009. His delivery was widely panned, dimming his national prospects for 2012, but his popularity has remained solid in Louisiana, never dipping below 55 percent in independent polls. Democrats were unable to find an elected official or deep-pocketed opponent to challenge him.

In a recent interview, as in his standard stump speech, Jindal offers a long list of recognition, rankings and statistics -- from population increases and a per capita income jump of $1,200 during his term to economic development publications that place Louisiana near the top of state business climate assessments -- to make his case for re-election.

The state boasts of $10 billion in new private sector capital investment, lead by Nucor Corp.'s $3.4 billion for a steel plant in St. James Parish. Louisiana's median home price has climbed 0.6 percent during a span in which the national median has dropped 14 percent. Employment figures "outpace the regional and national economy," Jindal notes.

But, Jindal said plainly, "We've got so much more work to do. We're beginning to turn this state around." He adds, "Our government is still too big," and "incremental progress is not enough." In a second term, he said, "Our top priority will be to continue to create that positive environment so our kids don't have to leave this state."

Education agenda

The father of three young children, Jindal said he is working on legislation for the 2012 session and meeting with sitting legislators and favored candidates from around the state to focus on education. "Giving parents more choice" in K-12, building on changes to teacher evaluation and tenure laws and continuing to push reorganization and streamlining a fractured system of colleges and universities will be the anchor of that effort, Jindal said.

As he promised in his 2007 campaign, Jindal won passage of ethics law changes that drastically improved Louisiana's rankings in state comparisons by national nonpartisan watchdogs. Jindal calls the laws "the gold standard." Critics say the new laws raised the burden of proof on many violations, but Jindal aides answer that the new rankings -- whatever the actual impact of the law -- have helped attract private sector investment.

On the education front, Jindal backed measures to give colleges and universities more control over their tuition, power that had rested exclusively in the Legislature. In exchange, schools must meet performance measures.

In K-12, Jindal signed a law, still the subject of a court fight, that would let local public schools behave like charters, free from certain rules and regulations, and he won changes that link teacher evaluations to student performance. He has pushed tax breaks for research and development, yet he's angered part of the scientific community by backing K-12 curriculum changes sought by social conservatives who advocate creation science.

He lost a high-profile effort to merge of the University of New Orleans and Southern University at New Orleans, and House Speaker Jim Tucker, a fellow Republican, has chided him for being slow to push for a single statewide board to govern four-year universities.

Health care and economy

Jindal is steering $2.2 billion in state Medicaid business -- about 70 percent of those insured by the program -- to private insurers who will run managed-care networks. He's also pushing to privatize the benefits office for state employees. And he tried unsuccessfully to sell three state prisons, some of which already are run by private firms.

But on health care, Jindal is a full-throated supporter of a planned public teaching hospital to succeed Charity Hospital in New Orleans. Jindal aides say that University Medical Center is not "public," but it will be constructed using almost $900 million in taxpayer dollars, require legislative appropriations and compete with established hospitals, including private sector facilities whose executives criticize the project.

Alongside many economic development successes, unemployment has climbed from 3.8 percent when Jindal took office to 7.2 percent in August, after peaking at 8.2 percent in May, still below the national average. Per capita income is up, but Louisiana still lags in poverty rates and other quality of life measures. Jindal maintains that government does not create jobs, but Louisiana, like other states, has dived head-first into the national competition of subsidizing industry through direct inducements and tax breaks.

The governor is an absolutist in opposing tax increases, famously vetoing an extension of a 4-cent tax on packs of cigarettes earlier this year. In 2008, after the measure gained steam among lawmakers, Jindal signed the largest tax cut in state history, restoring income tax breaks that voters curtailed in 2002. At the same time, his administration has authorized fee increases and backed several college tuition increases.

Pledge to finish a 2nd term

Nationally, Jindal is a reliable GOP stalwart, though he has promised to serve all of a second term rather than make a play for Washington, D.C. A regular on the party speaking and fundraising circuit, he also joined several of his fellow Republican governors in lambasting Obama's fiscal policies, even as Louisiana, like every other state, used federal stimulus spending to balance its operating budget without widespread layoffs of public employees and cuts to Medicaid services and higher education.

While he travels extensively out of state -- the thing that brings him the most criticism in the state -- he's also a constant traveler within Louisiana. "Go to some of those small towns" on his itinerary, he said in January. "They'll tell you they haven't seen a governor since Earl Long."

Jindal boasts of "cutting state spending 26 percent" and routinely hammers federal deficit spending, though he supported such budgets when serving in Congress. As governor, he has pared the number of authorized state civil service employees, but much of the state budget drop he touts is explained by waning hurricane recovery appropriations and the end of federal stimulus aid. And on those trips to small towns, Jindal sometimes presents ceremonial checks for local projects, with the money actually coming from Congress.

Bill Barrow can be reached at bbarrow@timespicayune.com or 504.826.3452.