House decision on transportation bill means detour for Restore Act
WASHINGTON -- A decision Tuesday by House Republican leaders not to bring up a Senate-passed transportation bill is a setback for Louisiana officials pushing to allocate 80 percent of fines from any 2010 BP oil spill to the five Gulf States.

The fines, which would be imposed under the Clean Water Act, are expected to be in the billions of dollars.

The Restore Act, which would channel a share of the fines to Louisiana and the four other Gulf States, was added to the $109 billion bipartisan Senate bill approved last week, and some officials were hoping the House would concur and send the measure to President Barack Obama for his signature.

Instead, House GOP leaders said they would move a measure to temporarily extend transportation funding at current levels. It would be the ninth such extension.

"This is an abject failure of Republican leadership and they don't deserve to lead Congress," said Rep. Cedric Richmond, D-New Orleans. "House Republicans continue to show that they value ideology instead of job creation and coastal restoration."

House Transportation Committee Chairman John Mica, R-Fla., said the Senate bill, through approved 76-22, couldn't pass the House, even with most Democrats saying they would support it.

House Republican leaders have been unable to get enough votes for their own transportation bill. It had little Democratic support because of controversial provisions to expand areas open to off-shore and onshore oil and gas drilling and to reduce, in some cases zeroing out, funding for mass transportation projects.

The bill also was opposed by some GOP conservatives because it would spend more money on highways than produced by the current federal gasoline tax.

Mica said the plan is for the GOP to craft a brief extension of highway spending at current levels and then draft another bill that could pass the House. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid said Tuesday that he's inclined not to support a temporary extension.

Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., who led efforts to add the Restore Act to the Senate bill, expressed disappointment with the House GOP decision.

"There is no need for a short-term transportation bill extension," Landrieu said. "The Senate has already passed a strong, bipartisan transportation bill that is also a jobs bill, which is why it has the support of both business and labor."

Though the House also added a provision with many elements of the Restore Act to its now doomed transportation bill, there's no assurance the measure can survive future negotiations.

Rep. Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, said majority votes in the both the House and Senate for the Restore Act give reason for continued optimism.



"A short term extension of the highway bill does not derail our efforts or our resolve to pass the full RESTORE Act, and I continue to have regular discussions with House leadership who remain supportive of our efforts to pass RESTORE," Scalise said.

Louisiana has promised to use the vast majority of Clean Water Act fines generated by the Restore Act for coastal restoration projects.