Hurricane Katrina was a bonanza for local landfills, and River Birch fought to get every scrap of debris
Back in the summer of 2005, the Highway 90 Landfill was practically an afterthought in the Waggaman garbage empire of Fred Heebe and his stepfather, Jim Ward. Their prize was River Birch landfill, by then taking in most of southeastern Louisiana's municipal waste. Such household garbage not only brought a higher price than the construction debris Highway 90 accepted, there was lots more of it. River Birch took in more than a million tons of trash in the year preceding Hurricane Katrina, 17 times as much as Highway 90, which opened in late 2004.

ONE MAN'S TRASH The third article in a series on the River Birch landfill Previous stories River Birch owners turn a troublesome property into a landfill empire

Jim Ward and Fred Heebe try to block a competitor's plan to expand in Livingston Parish, but they are outflanked

River Birch campaign database Coming Up FRIDAY: A new threat materializes in the form of a proposed recycling facility in New Orleans that would reduce the region's waste stream.

SATURDAY: Would-be competitors in Assumption Parish blame their permit struggles on the invisible hand of River Birch.

SUNDAY: Fred Heebe and Jim Ward finally achieve a long-sought monopoly, only to find themselves targets of a sprawling federal probe.

But Katrina radically changed the equation. Nearly all of the storm's wreckage -- everything from downed trees to demolished houses -- was eligible for dumping at Highway 90. A bonanza was at hand.

A week after the storm, Heebe met with Chuck Carr Brown, then a deputy secretary at the state Department of Environmental Quality. Heebe's message: You don't need more landfills.

"He said, 'I've got the capacity. I can take it all,' " Brown recalled.

Business took off. In the year after the storm, dumping at Highway 90 increased by an eye-popping 2,400 percent. Heebe and Ward's little landfill was suddenly outperforming their big one.

But they weren't satisfied. They were still getting only about a third of the storm debris. Worse, they were being outgunned by a landfill that wasn't even open when Katrina struck. The Old Gentilly Landfill, atop an old city dump in eastern New Orleans, was ideally located in the middle of the devastation. And it was winning.

A few months later, yet another rival emerged, also in the east. River Birch's old sparring partner, Waste Management, got permission from the state in early 2006 to open a landfill next to Bayou Sauvage National Wildlife Refuge, not far from the largely Vietnamese community of Village de l'Est. Like Old Gentilly, the new Chef Menteur Landfill was closer to much of the destruction than River Birch.

Regulators intended to put the new dumps to work. "When you have two or three landfills working in concert, you're going to be able to process and remove the waste quickly," DEQ's Brown said in a recent interview. "I didn't want people to say DEQ dragged its feet and slowed down the cleanup."

Heebe and Ward, who spent years getting their landfills permitted, were steamed as they watched their rivals elbow their way into the gold rush. They would do everything in their power to keep them on the outside looking in.

Unlikely coalition

Environmentalists saw the new landfills -- given emergency permits despite not having fulfilled every state regulation -- as ecological disasters in the making. They had a handy precedent: The Agriculture Street dump, reopened in 1965 after Hurricane Betsy, was later declared a Superfund site.

Seizing an opportunity, Heebe took up the green mantle.

And he won a pair of unlikely early converts: U.S. Sens. David Vitter, R-La., and James Inhofe, R-Okla., members of the Senate Environmental and Public Works Committee.

Neither was known for environmental advocacy. But a month after Katrina, they sent a joint letter to DEQ questioning whether Old Gentilly was suited for Katrina refuse.

Vitter had always received generous campaign contributions from Heebe, who also, with his wife, ponied up $20,000 for Vitter's legal defense fund in 2008 after the senator's name appeared on the phone list of a Washington escort service. Inhofe also got a $2,000 contribution from Heebe that year.

The Louisiana Environmental Action Network, or LEAN, soon joined the fray, filing a lawsuit challenging Old Gentilly's permit within weeks of its reopening. The group would eventually get DEQ to scale back the pace of dumping at Old Gentilly and to require the landfill to make some upgrades.

LEAN soon took on Chef Menteur as well.

In that fight, the environmental group was joined by leaders of the largely Vietnamese community of Village de l'Est, led by the Rev. Vien Nguyen, pastor of Mary Queen of Vietnam Catholic Church. Nguyen and others were concerned that the landfill would pollute the nearby Maxent Canal, which is used as a water source by gardeners.

Several politicians embraced the uprising. The most unlikely, on its face, was then-state Sen. Derrick Shepherd, D-Marrero, who emerged as a vocal opponent of the new dumps, though they were nowhere near his West Bank district -- which did, however, include River Birch.

Shepherd would later go to federal prison on unrelated money-laundering charges. Just after he pleaded guilty and before he was sentenced in 2008, he showed up at Ward's house and asked for money. Ward's attorney -- perhaps sensing a trap -- immediately reported the unusual encounter to U.S. Attorney Jim Letten's office.

Ann Duplessis, then a state senator representing eastern New Orleans and now a deputy chief administrative officer for Mayor Mitch Landrieu, also was a consistent voice of opposition to both the Chef Menteur and Gentilly landfills. In 2007, she received a total of $7,500 in donations from three companies associated with River Birch, though it's worth noting she also got $2,500 from the company that ran the Gentilly landfill.

Then-Councilwoman Cynthia Willard-Lewis, perhaps eastern New Orleans' other leading politician, initially expressed support for both of the new landfills in her district, saying that getting debris off the streets was her primary concern.

But she soon reversed herself on the Chef landfill, after the Vietnamese community began protesting. Willard-Lewis remained a consistent supporter of Old Gentilly, which attracted less neighborhood opposition -- and whose co-operator gave her a $5,000 campaign donation in 2007.

The most surprising about-face came from Mayor Ray Nagin, who had been a staunch advocate of both landfills and took a fair bit of political heat for standing his ground as opposition mounted. He stunned state regulators and at least one federal judge by abruptly closing the Chef landfill shortly after his re-election in 2006.

Nagin's startling reversal came less than two months after he received $20,000 in donations from four companies linked to River Birch. The contributions arrived four days before the election, in which the mayor -- who had struggled mightily to raise money -- beat Lt. Gov. Mitch Landrieu by a 52-48 margin.

Racketeering alleged

A civil racketeering suit filed by Waste Management last year alleges that Ward and Heebe sought to "kneecap" rivals after Katrina by bribing public officials and supporting frivolous lawsuits. The suit is on ice while the federal criminal probe into River Birch is pending.

One of the suits they referenced was filed in 2006 on behalf of Sister Jane Remson and Ted Quant of Loyola University's Twomey Center along with Marjorie T. Brown, a purported resident of eastern New Orleans, and former state Rep. Sherman Copelin. The suit questioned whether Nagin had abused his executive authority by granting a zoning waiver to Chef Menteur.

The suit was filed by Kyle Schonekas, a lawyer for River Birch. While never stating River Birch's interest plainly, the suit argues directly that the landfills owned by Heebe and Ward would be the best place to put Katrina debris. It notes that seven local dumps were permitted at the time of the storm and then singles out Highway 90 and River Birch, saying they can handle about seven times the debris Katrina generated.

A few months after the suit was filed, Schonekas entered an exhibit into the record called the Orleans Parish Disaster Debris Demolition Plan, prepared on behalf of an ostensibly independent group called the Citizens Coalition.

The plan, like the lawsuit, makes the case that Highway 90 and River Birch can handle all the waste Katrina created.

The report's author, Fairfax, Va., consultant Bob Brickner, said he wasn't told what his report should say. But he's never heard of the Citizens Coalition. The only person he dealt with in preparing the report was Schonekas, who also paid him, he said. The fee was somewhere south of $100,000, Brickner said.

There is a bit of intrigue regarding the plaintiffs as well. Copelin, a noted wheeler-dealer during his long tenure in the Legislature, said he had no knowledge his name was being used in the suit. Likewise for Brown.

Quant said he was recruited as a plaintiff by Remson, his colleague at the Twomey Center. Remson, in turn, said she had been working with representatives of the Vietnamese community near the landfill, and Willard-Lewis asked her if she'd be a plaintiff in the case. Remson agreed.

Her few dealings with the case, as it happened, were with Walter Willard, Willard-Lewis' brother, brought on as co-counsel by Schonekas. Waste Management, in its RICO claim, calls the hiring of Willard a naked attempt to "curry favor" with the councilwoman, who initially supported the landfill but then pushed for its closure.

Willard-Lewis has called Waste Management's claim "blatantly false," saying her evolving position on Chef shows she was simply listening to her constituents.

Her brother has likewise denied any political motive behind his legal work, and said he worked with Schonekas' father for years. Willard said he billed at roughly $300 per hour for his work on the case but does not remember how many hours he invoiced. He said did not even realize Schonekas worked for River Birch until years after the fact.

The Waste Management suit also claims, without citing facts, that River Birch "helped finance" a LEAN lawsuit that sought to close the Chef Menteur dump.

But Marylee Orr, executive director of LEAN, has denied that her organization ever took any money from Heebe or his associates. Orr said she even declined an invitation to meet with Heebe -- who apparently was interested in making a contribution -- because she wanted to ensure her group's independence was not compromised.

While the extent of River Birch's involvement in those court cases is murky, it's clear that the landfill's owners tried to make a case in the court of public opinion. One way they did so was to offer helicopter rides over their rival landfills, during which River Birch consultant Rick Michaels would highlight their shortcomings.

Those who went on rides included the local leader of the Sierra Club, Nguyen, and a reporter for The Times-Picayune. Nguyen, who has said he never accepted any gratuities from anyone associated with River Birch, was transferred in 2010 from his post at Mary Queen of Vietnam to an office position at the archdiocese. Law enforcement sources told The Times-Picayune that Nguyen has been under investigation by the Internal Revenue Service for possibly failing to report a significant amount of income, but no charges have been filed.

Sarah McDonald, a spokeswoman for the archdiocese, said in 2010 that Nguyen's transfer did not stem from any scandal. "We needed his expertise" in the office, she said, adding that the church tries not to keep pastors in a single parish for too long. "If there is or was an investigation, that would have to be confirmed by the federal government," Archbishop Gregory Aymond said through the diocese spokeswoman.

Heebe offered much more than a helicopter ride to one influential member of the local media. In late 2007, he gave WWL-AM radio host Garland Robinette -- a vociferous on-air critic of Old Gentilly and Chef Menteur -- an interest-free $250,000 loan, secured by a piece of property Robinette owned on the north shore.

Robinette has said he and Heebe are close friends; friendship, not the positions Robinette took on the landfills, was the reason for the loan, he said. Robinette has also said that he ended his landfill commentaries after accepting the loan.

Stoking the rumor mill

Another of Heebe's tactics during the landfill wars was to allege favoritism and corruption, on the part of FEMA officials directing the debris-removal effort and on the part of rival landfill owners.

Heebe had some grist for his rumor mill. The contract to run Old Gentilly, for instance, had been let during former Mayor Marc Morial's waning days in office to a joint venture of two politically active businessmen: Stephen Stumpf, a veteran of the landfill industry and owner of Durr Heavy Construction, and Jimmie Woods, owner of Metro Disposal, a major garbage collector.

In early 2007, federal authorities unveiled a secret agreement that seemed to show Morial pals Stan "Pampy" Barre and Roy Rodney shared a hidden one-third stake in the landfill.

That drew the ire of Vitter, who publicly called for an investigation into the landfill's ownership and expressed skepticism about Stumpf's claims that Barre and Rodney had been cut out.

Months later, Inhofe's staff took the unusual step of passing along internal FEMA documents to a Times-Picayune reporter that purported to show that FEMA officials had grave reservations about dumping at Old Gentilly.

The story had already been pitched by Heebe. The newspaper examined the documents but did not write a story about them.

Heebe also bent reporters' ears about FEMA officials, in particular Lee Champagne, who headed FEMA's removal mission starting in early 2006. Heebe's view was that Champagne was overlooking obvious problems at Old Gentilly.

Heebe's smoking gun was a scathing draft report on Old Gentilly, written by a FEMA consultant. The report enumerated a host of problems at the landfill and recommended dumping be curtailed. Somehow, Shepherd, the state senator and River Birch champion, got his hands on the draft report and disseminated it before it became public.

Champagne smelled a rat.

"I remember the report recommended that we stop putting stuff in Gentilly," he said in a recent interview. "I had people on my own staff wanting me to stop. But I had the task of dumping this crap somewhere, and one site (River Birch) couldn't take it all."

So Champagne ordered more investigation.

"We could not substantiate it," he said. "And history proved out that it basically wasn't right."

While Heebe was whispering tales of corruption, a man on his payroll was putting them in writing.

Henry Mouton, at the time a commissioner on the Wildlife and Fisheries board, sent a series of intemperate letters, including at least one alleging that both Morial and Terry Ryder -- Gov. Kathleen Blanco's executive counsel -- were somehow benefiting from Old Gentilly.

Ryder called the letter "one of the most vicious packs of lies I've seen in my life" and he sent it to U.S. Attorney Jim Letten.

That may have been a fateful turn of events.

Not long afterward, FBI agents and federal prosecutors went to Mouton's house to talk with him, according to a letter Mouton sent to DEQ. Whether Mouton's gambit to turn whistleblower backfired is unclear, but last year, he admitted taking $460,000 in bribes from River Birch's owners in exchange for denigrated their rivals.

Heebe and Ward have denied paying any bribes.

*******

Gordon Russell can be reached at grussell@timespicayune.com or 504.826.3347.