'Don't Mess With Texas,' starring Reese Witherspoon and Sofia Vergara, starts filming this week in New Orleans
"Don't Mess With Texas," an action-comedy starring Reese Witherspoon and Sofia Vergara, starts principal photography Monday (May 12), a production spokeswoman said -- but in Louisiana rather than its namesake state. Directed by choreographer-turned-helmer Anne Fletcher ("The Proposal," "The Guilt Trip"), production is expected to continue in New Orleans for two months.

The film, which was put on the production fast track to take advantage of Vergara's "Modern Family" summer hiatus, is described as a buddy comedy about a police officer (Witherspoon) who goes on the run in Texas with the wife of drug boss (Vergara). In pursuit: a legion of lawmen -- and lawless men.

The project had been set up at Universal, but MGM picked it up when it went into turnaround last year. Last week, Warner Bros. joined MGM as a production partner on Fletcher's film.

In addition to starring, Witherspoon is producing along with Dana Fox and Bruna Papandrea through their Pacific Standard production shingle. The production marks a return to New Orleans for the Oscar-winning actress: She was born at Southern Baptist Hospital in 1976 while her father was a med-school student at Tulane University.

Technically, the film is untitled, so a new title is likely at some point, although it has been operating as "Don't Mess With Texas" throughout pre-production. Fletcher's film is reportedly due for release on May 8, 2015 -- Mother's Day weekend next year.

It is one of a number of feature-film productions set to shoot this summer in Louisiana, including Paramount's "Terminator: Genesis" and the Kristen Stewart / Jesse Eisenberg action comedy "American Ultra," both of which are currently shooting in New Orleans. The Universal-backed "Jurassic World" is set to start shooting in town in June.

Up the road in Baton Rouge, Twentieth Century Fox's "Fantastic Four" reboot started shooting this week, and Universal's "Pitch Perfect 2" is set to start shooting later this month.