2016 Louisiana Senate race: Who's in? Who can win?
From two dozen candidates -- lawyers, doctors, veterans, executives, business owners, officer holders, a farmer, a preacher, a comedian and a white supremacist -- Louisiana will choose a new U.S. senator this fall.

That record-setting roster is ripe for intrigue, mudslinging and oddball behavior, if it could only grab a little attention. That's tough these days. South-central Louisiana still reels from devastating floods. Storms swirl in the Gulf and the Atlantic. Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump hoard the spotlight.

Oh, and football.

But Labor Day in an election year, especially a presidential election year, is a traditional point when heads turn to political contests. Seven weeks until early voting starts. Nine weeks until Election Day on Nov. 8. Thirteen weeks until the Senate race's almost-inevitable runoff Dec. 10, when Louisiana will know who will take GOP Sen. David Vitter's place when he retires in January.

For now, however, everything is still rather quiet.

"Most people don't get paid to pay attention to politics, but I do," Tulane University political scientist Brian Brox said with a healthy dose of ironic self-awareness. "And I know virtually nothing about this race."

THE CAST

A handful of Republicans are paces ahead of the crowded pack in the early going. The only candidate holding a statewide office and a largely recognizable name, state Treasurer John Kennedy leads the way. Reps. Charles Boustany and John Fleming have sizable war chests and the political acumen to compete. Retired Air Force Col. Rob Maness is trying again after losing the 2014 Senate race.

The race's two major Democrats each want to rekindle the lightning that shot then-state Rep. John Bel Edwards, D-Amite, to an unlikely victory over Vitter in last year's gubernatorial race: Public Service Commissioner Foster Campbell -- Edwards' personal pick -- and New Orleans lawyer Caroline Fayard.

In the wings are several candidates who could make some noise. Former Alcohol and Tobacco Control Commissioner Troy Hebert, running without party affiliation. Joseph Cao, a one-term Republican congressman from New Orleans. Lafayette Democrat Josh Pellerin. Even first-time GOP candidate Abhay Patel has raised some cash.

Then there's David Duke. The former state representative, klansman and convicted felon has lashed his chances to the more incendiary aspects of Trump's rhetoric. The proposed wall on the Mexican border. The travel ban on Muslims. Promises of mass deportation for immigrants in the United States illegally. Duke hasn't won a race in 27 years, but he knows how to play contempt of his racist, xenophobic views for maximum publicity.

FIRST, IT'S GEOGRAPHY

The top campaigns have been building their infrastructure for months. Raising money, hiring staff, plotting tours. Boustany and Fleming declared they were running shortly after Vitter announced he wouldn't last fall.

Among the Republicans, few share much territorial overlap. Boustany, a cardiologist, hails from Lafayette. Fleming is a physician from Minden, outside Shreveport. Kennedy, making his third bid for the Senate, is a north shore Republican, where he has scooped up endorsements across St. Tammany Parish. Like Kennedy, Maness is from Madisonville, but his appeal is more ideological than the hey-we're-neighbors variety.

None of those top contenders, however, is from Louisiana's GOP heartland, where they are most likely to find the most donors and votes.

"If you drew a triangle between Old Metairie, the North Shore and the eastern suburbs of Baton Rouge, I think that's where a lot of Republicans should spend their time after they secure their geographic base," Brox said.

A similar calculus holds true for the top Democrats. Campbell is a farmer in Bossier Parish to whom Edwards bequeathed the gears of his winning gubernatorial team. Fayard is from New Orleans, or more specifically, Uptown. Their support likely will be found in the urban centers, particularly New Orleans, Baton Rouge and Shreveport.

The character sketch of an average Louisiana voter hasn't changed much in the last few election cycles. UNO political scientist Ed Chervenak found 54,000 more voters had registered this year as Republicans, a trend he attributed to the closed presidential primaries this spring. While a common practice in most other states, limiting primary voters to political party members is alien in Louisiana. The Pelican State employs an open primary, where everyone can vote for anyone regardless of party affiliation. Should no candidate win more than 50 percent in that contest, the top two vote-getters compete in a runoff a month later.

THEN IT'S FUNDRAISING

Money has flowed into the campaigns, but more like a faucet than the firehose of the 2014 Senate race. Incumbent Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., and eventual winner Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, raised $35.6 million combined, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

There are two reasons for this, said pollster John Couvillon of JMC Analytics.

One: "There is not the perception that this seat would flip hands from the Republicans to a Democrat, so there's not that seriousness nationwide that was there in 2014," he said. Rather than chasing vulnerable Democratic seats as they did in 2014, Republicans find themselves defending the least among their own. Races in Ohio and Pennsylvania and other swing states are going to garner more attention than decidedly red and pro-Trump Louisiana, he said.

While highly unlikely, interest in Louisiana could gather steam quickly if the parties split the Senate on Nov. 8 and the December runoff decides who will control the upper chamber.

Couvillon's other reason is more straightforward: 24 candidates means "you really have less money to go around overall."

An examination of federal campaign finance records and research by the Center for Responsive Politics revealed some patterns among the top candidates' fundraising habits.

Boustany, who had the most cash to spend -- $2.5 million -- at the start of July, attracted donors from the medical field and the oil and gas industry. Contributions mainly came from Lafayette, Houston, and Washington, D.C.

Campbell, who wrote himself a $500,000 loan check, collected contributions mostly from Shreveport, Baton Rouge and New Orleans.

Fayard, who lent her campaign $650,000, raised money mostly from fellow lawyers and contributors in New Orleans, New York, and Denham Springs.

After transferring $1.6 million from his House campaign account, Fleming drew contributions mostly from Shreveport and New Orleans. While he lent himself $693,000, he also has the influential conservative Club for Growth PAC behind him.

Kennedy's donors were centered in New Orleans, Baton Rouge, and Shreveport.

Maness raised contributions mainly from Shreveport, New Orleans, and Dallas. As a Tea Party favorite, Maness got $10,000 from Sarah Palin's PAC.

A competitive campaign would need to raise at least $1 million, Couvillon said. Counting their loans, Fayard and Campbell have done that. So has Boustany, Kennedy and Fleming.

Other political analysts speculated a winning bid could cost between $5 million and $10 million.

"I think there's a point when you spend too much money to be effective. Voters are only going to give you so much attention," Couvillon said. Landrieu, for example, outspent Cassidy by a wide margin in her 2014 loss. "While money is important, it's not the end-all-be-all."

EARLY STRATEGIES

Trump's defeat of Clinton in Louisiana on Nov. 8 is inevitable, but that contest still shades the Senate race. In a word, it's about turnout.

"Trump is going to win Louisiana," said Joshua Stockley, a political scientist with the University of Louisiana at Monroe. "Knowing that there's going to be this sort of Trump surge, if you will, the smart Republican is going to tap into what is going to motivate that (voter)."

Fleming, Maness and, to a smaller extent, Kennedy are jostling to align their campaigns with Trump. Fleming has praised the GOP nominee's promise to revoke Obamacare, and Maness has echoed Trump's distaste for present trade deals. Kennedy has said he supports Trump.

For Fayard, the opposite is true. Her family and the Clintons are longtime friends. Former President Bill Clinton spoke at a fundraiser for her when she ran for lieutenant governor in 2010.

"I really expect Caroline to really strongly reject the message of Trump," Stockley said. "She will be more likely to sync with the Clintons."

Boustany is already running two television ads. In one, he accuses Hillary Clinton and President Barack Obama of refusing to declare war on the terrorist group ISIS and of banning oil exports. Neither are true. In another, he portrays himself as being able to cut through the partisan shouting in Washington. But the messages are less revealing than the timing.

"In my observation, it seems Boustany is striking first," Stockley said. "You just don't start throwing money out on television pre-Labor Day if you, A, don't have a stable financial base or, B, don't expect one down the road because TV is such a quick burn."

Boustany will have to overcome Kennedy's name recognition if he hopes to make the December runoff.

Fleming launched his "Faith, Freedom and Fair Market" tour last month, beginning in Mandeville. He also opened an office in Metairie and plastered New Orleans billboards with ads. Anticipating the race will go to a runoff, he is taking aim at Boustany, hoping to chip away enough support to ensure he faces Kennedy or a Democrat in December.

"You don't need a lot of points to be in a runoff," Fleming said in a recent interview. "Nobody is going to get a lot of points."

As the only competitor with a statewide post, Kennedy has stuck to criticizing the governor's fiscal policies and raising money.

"This is a very difficult race to handicap," Chervenak said. "I think the only thing we can really say with certainty is John Kennedy is the favorite. He has almost universal name recognition."

Maness continues to barnstorm the state. Political analysts say he and Fleming, a founding member of the boisterous House Freedom Caucus, will compete for the voters farthest to the right, although still left of Duke.

Campbell was an early endorser of Edwards, and the governor has returned the favor. But to repeat Edwards' win against a field of well-known Republicans and to ultimately capitalize in the runoff, his team recognizes that other Democrats hurt his chances. So Campbell has targeted Fayard.

"John Bel complicated it by basically giving (Campbell) his entire operation," Stockley said. "And a lot of the more progressive Democrats line up behind Caroline.

"There might be some bruises on the Democratic side."

Fayard launched her campaign with a strategy that mirrored Campbell, but quickly pivoted when Duke got in the race. Now she is using animus toward the white nationalist to raise money and to gain national media attention. She appeared on the Rachel Maddow show in August to denounce Duke.

Others are left to more creative strategies. Hebert took to suing a pollster who misidentified him as a Republican. Kaitlin Marone, a New Orleans comedian, made a mild spoof of President Lyndon Johnson's famous 1964 "Daisy" ad.

"I'm honestly not running for Senate because I think I'll win," Marone wrote on her website. "I'm running because I'm worried people have no idea this election is even happening."