Mayor Landrieu fires back at AG Jeff Landry for 'sanctuary city' remarks after fatal party bus crash
New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu is taking issue with Louisiana Attorney General Jeff Landry for injecting the "sanctuary city" controversy into the aftermath of a fatal bus accident Sunday morning (Aug. 28) in St. John the Baptist Parish.

Denis Yasmir Amaya-Rodriguez was driving a party bus involved in a crash on Interstate 10 that killed two people and injured more than 30 others. Authorities say Amaya-Rodriguez, 37, is an illegal immigrant from Honduras. He did not have a driver's license, an offense for which he had been cited multiple times in Jefferson Parish.

Policy took effect in New Orleans at the end of February that forbids police from inquiring about an individual's immigration status. Landrieu has stayed away from calling it a "sanctuary city" law, saying it instead encourages immigrants to work with police to address crime.

Landry said he supported an effort in the Louisiana Legislature earlier this year to block state funding for sanctuary cities. The bill the attorney general shaped with state Rep. Valarie Hodges, R-Denham Springs, cleared the House of Representatives but failed in the Senate. Gov. John Bel Edwards opposed it, saying it gave too much discretion to the attorney general to declare what is a sanctuary city. Landry said Tuesday lawmakers should bring up Hodges' proposal again.

"It comes as no surprise that Amaya-Rodriguez was living in metropolitan New Orleans, our State's only sanctuary city," Landry said in a statement Tuesday. "Sanctuary policies encourage the further migration of illegals into communities and coast a grave toll in money and safety, as was show in the tragic deaths of St. John Fire Chief Spencer Chauvin and Jermaine Starr on Sunday."

Chauvin was among the emergency personnel responding to an earlier accident on the elevated portion of I-10 west of LaPlace. He and two other firefighters were knocked off the bridge into the Reserve Canal below. William Mack Bea and Nicholas Saale were rescued and are recovering from their injuries.

Starr was in the backseat of a Toyota Camry that Amaya-Rodriguez rear-ended, Louisiana State Police said. The driver and two others in the car were also injured, along with several passengers on the party bus who were heading to Baton Rouge to work on a flood cleanup project.

In his statement, Landry also mentioned Amaya-Rodriguez's arrest for second-degree battery and domestic abuse. The charges in Jefferson Parish were eventually dropped.

"Sunday's tragedy highlights the need for a sound immigration policy, including the ban of sanctuary cities. Amaya-Rodriguez has been encountered by law enforcement over a half a dozen times in the last five years, yet he continued to roam the streets until he took two lives."

In a response Tuesday afternoon, Landrieu called it "shameful" that Landry "would politicize the fatal traffic accident for his own personal gain."

"It makes no sense why he would attack our city - the driver of the bus does not live in New Orleans and the company that employs him is not even permitted to operate here," Landrieu said. "The old adage of never letting a good crisis go to waste is on full display."

State and federal authorities are investigating Kristina's Transportation LLC/AM Party Bus, the Jefferson Parish-based business that owns the bus Amaya-Rodriguez was driving. State records show the company is headquartered at a house on Canton Street in Old Jefferson.

Amaya-Rodriguez is one of three men leasing a three-bedroom apartment in Metairie, a complex manager confirmed.

An attorney for the company that was going to hire the workers on the bus said an independent "headhunter" arranged their transportation and hired the bus from Kristina's Transportation.

U.S. Customs and Immigration Enforcement said Monday they have asked local law enforcement to notify the agency before they release Amaya-Rodriguez, who is being held in the St. John Parish jail on $1.1 million bond