Jindal joins Trump in urging end to birthright citizenship
WASHINGTON -- Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal has joined front-running GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump in calling for an end to automatic citizenship for children born in the United States to illegal immigrants.

"We need to end birthright citizenship for illegal immigrants," Jindal tweeted Monday night, a day after Trump offered a tough plan to combat what he calls the negative economic consequences of illegal immigration. Jindal is also running for president, though he remains near the bottom of the 17-person GOP field.

Trump's plan calls for Mexico to fund a protective wall across the U.S.-Mexican border, deportation of all "criminal aliens," and tripling the force of U.S. immigration officers.

But Trump's proposal to end birthright citizenship is one of the most contentious, requiring a constitutional amendment to repeal or modify the 14th amendment to the Constitution, adopted in 1868.

The amendment invalidated the Supreme Court's Dred Scott decision of 1857, which held that neither freed slaves nor their descendants could become citizens. The amendment was intended to address laws in former Confederate states that barred non-citizens, and therefore former salves and their families, from entering professions, owning land, serving on juries or voting.

In 1898, the Supreme Court ruled that the amendment meant that a child born in the United States to parents from China is an American citizen.

To change or repeal the 14th amendment, supporters would need votes from two-thirds of both the U.S. House and Senate, and three quarters of the state Legislatures.

Sen. David Vitter, R-La., has proposed a constitutional amendment to end birthright citizenship. He's also proposed cutting some federal criminal justice funding for so-called sanctuary cities that refuse to inform the Immigration and Customs Enforcement when they release inmates who entered the United States illegally.

Trump, in his immigration proposal, said that sanctuary cities must be ended. Previously, he, like Vitter, condemned San Francisco's sanctuary city law, which led to that city's Sheriff's Department from not informing the federal government of the release of a man deported five times before he is alleged to have shot and killed Kathryn Steinle, 32, as she walked along a popular toursm spot with her father.

"Sanctuary cities and birthright citizenship are definitely major problems, and I'm encouraged more people are talking about them," Vitter said. "As dangerous as they both are, they're only a few of the illegal immigration problems I'm working on to end and prevent amnesty."

Trump also called for deporting all 11 million estimated illegal immigrants, saying the "good ones" could return with their families. Trump would also impose a moratorium on new green cards that allow some people to enter and work in the United States. His website said that the influx of foreign workers "holds down salaries, keeps unemployment high and makes it difficult for poor and working class Americans -- including immigrants themselves and their children -- to earn a middle class wage."

Immigration advocacy groups denounced the Trump proposal.

"When Trump makes extreme suggestions like deporting millions of undocumented immigrants (and potentially their citizen children), he overlooks the huge economic cost of such a proposal, which could range from $300 billion to $600 billion, according to various estimates," wrote Maribel Hastings, senior advisor at America's Voice. "That's a logistical nightmare that could take up to 20 years. Its humanitarian cost: the separation of families and a huge blow to the image of a nation of immigrants, not to mention the blight of our economy, which relies on undocumented labor in many industries. As a businessman, Trump should know that."

Share your views on a constitutional amendment to end birthright citizens and Trump's other immigration proposals in the comments section below.