Schools need more assistance with Common Core, education official says
Louisiana's Department of Education has not provided adequate assistance to schools and teachers struggling to implement a controversial new set of educational standards known as Common Core, and the testing system that goes with it, said Scott Richard, executive director of the Louisiana School Boards Association.

"I don't think any other state is implementing them in the manner that Louisiana is doing it," said Richard, speaking at the Baton Rouge Press Club on Monday (Oct. 8).

Richard joins a long line of people, including several political figures, who during the past couple of weeks have been criticizing Louisiana's rollout of Common Core. Most states, including Louisiana, have adopted the new educational guidelines, which emphasize critical thinking skills.



The Louisiana Department of Education has provided teachers with some sample Common Core lesson plans and instructional videos, but no specific curricula that align with the new standards. Richard said it is difficult for instructors to know exactly what areas to emphasize without more of a framework in place.

Yet some see that absence of curricula as a strength, not a weakness, of the program.



"I think we just have different philosophies. Scott seems to believe the state should continue to prescribe for teachers and tell them how to plan their lessons. We think teachers should be able to make those choices themselves," said state Education Superintendent John White.



Still, Richard also echoed others' concerns about the new online tests that students will start taking in the spring of 2014.



Students must take the tests on computers, which may be a challenge for some schools' limited electrical capacities. Other schools can handle the power load, but are worried their buildings' technology won't be compatible with the new tests, Richard said. "We don't think anybody really has an idea of what this initiative will cost," he said.



The concern about technical capacity is overblown, according to White. Eighty-six percent of Louisiana students attend school in a facility that is equipped to administer the test. With more than a year until the exam has to be administered, the state will be able to bring the rest of the schools online, White said. "I have every confidence that we will be ready by that time," he said.



For Richard, the transition to Common Core and online testing has come too quickly. Last year, the state education department scrapped a transition plan that would have eased school systems into Common Core, he said. School districts and teachers would have had more time to adjust to new standards if that plan was still in place, he said.



That transition plan was thrown out at the request of teachers, according to White. Teachers were unhappy about having to teach both the old standards and Common Core at the same time, and wanted to move forward with just one framework, he said.



"The transition plan would have them teach all of both sets of standards. They asked us to simplify it," White said.