New Interstate 10 twin spans are 'built to last for 100 years'
Shortly after Gov. Bobby Jindal on Thursday snipped the bright-red ribbon symbolizing the end of major construction on the new Interstate 10 twin spans over Lake Pontchartrain, a motorcade's engines rumbled to life on the southbound structure.

The cars hailed from Slidell, and besides a 1940 Ford Tudor Deluxe, a 1971 Buick Regal and antique Chevrolets owned by local residents, they included a vintage fire truck and a Textron Marine & Land Systems armored car. With the help of a police escort, their drivers became the first to ever completely cross the bridge leading to New Orleans from end to end.

"We're improving what was here before," Jindal had said earlier in the day about the twin spans, which some believe have come to symbolize the region's efforts to recover from Hurricane Katrina's devastation. "We're rebuilding ... stronger and smarter than we did before."

By Friday's morning rush hour, three lanes of traffic in each direction should carry motorists off the bridges, which connects eastern New Orleans to the southern Slidell area. The old pair of structures they replaced, which were wrecked by Hurricane Katrina's storm surge in 2005, boasted only two traffic lanes, and they were 21 feet shorter.

The new $803 million structures stand 30 feet above the lake's surface. Products of the largest public works project in state history, they are 5.5 miles long and 60 feet wide, with 12-foot-wide lanes flanked by 12-foot-wide shoulders. Crews say it is the first bridge in Louisiana made entirely from high-performance concrete, which should help the structure better withstand storm surge.

Some "punch list" tasks such as electrical work still remain that require intermittent lane closures, but the most strenuous labor is done.

At least Jindal, joined by St. Tammany Parish President Kevin Davis as well as federal and state transportation officials, declared it so Thursday both at a news conference hosted by the Tammany Yacht Club and an accompanying ribbon-cutting ceremony that followed on a section of the twin spans.

"This ... is built to last for 100 years," Jindal said to an audience of more than 50 people at the yacht club. "We knew we couldn't just rebuild what we had before. It had to be better."

Davis, meanwhile, congratulated general contractor Boh Bros. and other partners credited with erecting the bridges.

"You got this job done on time," the parish president told them, alluding to estimates that the project's heaviest demands would be met this month. "I want to thank you for that."

The new twin spans started rising shortly after waves pushed by Katrina decimated the old bridges opened in 1965. The decks were knocked crooked or into the waters below.

For the next several years, as replacements materialized nearby, traffic moved across the old bridges, which crews repaired for the short term with temporary panels. Then, officials phased the old spans out of service by rerouting motorists onto the new spans.

First, during the summer of 2009, eastbound commuters out of New Orleans zigzagged onto the new spans. Westbound commuters out of the north shore followed suit the following spring.

But all lanes of traffic could not be opened on the new spans right away. The dismantling of the old structures did not allow immediate completion of the approaches on each end of the New Orleans-bound bridge, so drivers had to share the approaches of the northshore-bound bridge, limiting motorists to two lanes at the end in each direction.

The commute during the morning and evening rush hours would bottleneck, slowing travelers down, project spokesman Mike Sasser has said.

Relief, though, has arrived. Workers allowed drivers to stop sharing the approaches on the New Orleans end of the bridges in August, and now they are doing the same on the St. Tammany end.

"It's a wonderful, wonderful day," said Sherri LeBas. state Department of Transportation and Development secretary.

Ramon Antonio Vargas can be reached at rvargas@timespicayune.com or 985.645.2848.