As Trump threatens 'sanctuary' cities, New Orleans waits, uneasy
Upon hearing President-elect Donald Trump wanted Sen. Jeff Sessions, R-Ala., as his attorney general, Audrey Stewart said she immediately began to worry about her clients.

The managing director of the New Orleans Workers' Center for Racial Justice, Stewart spends the bulk of her time working cases of undocumented immigrants targeted by federal immigration officials. Her group was instrumental in pushing New Orleans' criminal justice system to change how it approaches them.

"It's just really disappointing to see Trump lifting someone up like Jeff Sessions," she said Friday (Nov. 18).

But for advocates who want to reduce immigration, Sessions' presence promises an end to so-called "sanctuary city" policies. The Alabama senator is considered one of the toughest in Congress when it comes to enforcing immigration laws.

"As America's top attorney, Sen. Sessions would put an end to the flagrant violation of federal immigration law by the more than 300 sanctuary cities and jurisdictions across the nation," Dan Stein, president of the Federation of American Immigration Reform, said in a written statement Friday (Nov. 18). "Their continued presence is a clear threat to national security, public safety, and the rule of law."

After a campaign sparked by anti-immigration rhetoric, Trump's presidency could bring a reckoning to cities like New Orleans, which have taken steps to separate local policing from immigration issues.

"This kind of moment calls on our city to decide what kind of community we are going to be," Stewart said.

The definition of a sanctuary city is nebulous, but it's often used to describe various public policies perceived to be welcoming to immigrants living in the country illegally.

Many city leaders embrace the term. But unlike mayors of New York, Chicago, Seattle, Denver, San Francisco, Los Angeles and others, New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu avoids the label "sanctuary city" to describe New Orleans. He relies on the unique nuances of the city's legal situation to bolster his reasoning for doing so.

The police department and the city jail are under separate federal consent decrees, agreements overseen by a judge that require each agency to improve their operations to meet constitutional standards.

Under those agreements, Landrieu and Orleans Parish Sheriff Marlin Gusman implemented practices that their critics equate to "sanctuary city policies."

Gusman declared jail officials would no longer detain arrested suspects thought to be in the country illegally solely at the request of the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency, or ICE. With a federal judge's approval, that change was added to the jail's consent decree in 2013.

Working with immigration rights groups, Landrieu's administration crafted changes to the NOPD's consent decree that counsels officers not to ask the immigration status of victims or witnesses of crimes, not to stop people solely because they are presumed to be in the country illegally, nor to cooperate with ICE when that agency relies on civil warrants to conduct sweeps for undocumented immigrants.

The NOPD policy does not prevent officers from helping ICE agents on criminal raids that target undocumented immigrants, nor does it stop officers from sharing information with ICE. Landrieu has repeatedly highlighted those exceptions to argue that New Orleans is not a sanctuary city.

Landrieu ran the new policy by ICE last year and said he received no objections before implementing it in February. An attorney for the Justice Department testified to Congress in September that the policy does not run afoul of federal immigration law, nor did it prevent ICE and city police from sharing information.

But eschewing a label and cooperating with President Barack Obama's Justice Department doesn't let New Orleans off the hook, Sen. David Vitter, R-La., said Thursday. That the sheriff's ban on ICE holds and the NOPD's policy are enshrined in two federal consent decrees shouldn't deter Trump or Sessions from financially punishing the city, he said.

"The notion that any of their sanctuary city policies is constitutionally protected is ridiculous," Vitter said.

Vitter, who is leaving office in January, may have had a direct impact on the groundwork for Trump's anti-sanctuary city policy. He is close to Sessions and Session's former chief of staff, Stephen Miller, who is now Trump's congressional liaison. Miller was integral in helping Sessions kill comprehensive immigration reform efforts two years ago, Politico reports.

Vitter said he hoped the president-elect would turn to a sanctuary city ban he tried to pass last year as a template. Vitter's bill would have blocked federal funding from three grant programs -- the State Criminal Alien Assistance Program, Community Oriented Policing Services, Community Development Block Grants -- to cities that restrict sharing information with ICE or do not comply with requests that suspected undocumented immigrants who were arrested be further detained. The bill died in the Senate in October on a procedural vote.

Vitter said he chose those grant programs as starting points but wasn't wedded to them. Others could be added or substituted, he said.

"The point is you clearly need to put something of consequence in the law," he said.

Zach Butterworth, Landrieu's executive counsel and the city's lobbyist on Capitol Hill, said the administration would take a wait-and-see approach to the Trump administration's immigration policies. Whether the jail would continue to ban ICE holds was less certain. Neither Gusman nor the jail's appointed compliance director, Gary Maynard, responded to requests for interviews this week.

To what extent Trump can impact New Orleans' budget is unclear. After all, his policy toward sanctuary cities is just seven words in his 100-day plan.

A doomsday scenario where all federal funding to the city is cut would spell disaster. At stake would not only be the $2.1 billion that FEMA recently awarded the city for infrastructure work, but also the millions of dollars spent on law enforcement, public health, housing, education and, of course, the region's massive, rebuilt levee system.

"The city would come crashing to a halt," Butterworth said.

The Supreme Court, however, has put some restrictions on how far Congress can go to stop federal tax dollars from flowing to cities or states. In 1987, South Dakota had sued Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Dole for withholding federal highway funds because the state refused to raise its legal drinking age to 21.

In its 7-2 decision, the high court made several conditions that Congress would have to meet in order to ban federal funds. Two of them, said Bill Rich, a constitutional law professor at the University of Akron School of Law, could likely be applied in the sanctuary city fight.

First, Congress would have to demonstrate that the ban wasn't "coercive." In other words, that it wouldn't hinder a city or state so much that it would have trouble operating. And secondly, the ban must target federal funds related in some way to the policy in question.

In that 1987 case, the court ruled that withholding 5 percent of its highway funds and the safety provided by a higher drinking age were close enough to qualify, and not enough to hurt South Dakota.

But there is still a lot of room between those two conditions for a Trump administration to apply pressure on sanctuary cities.

"There's sort of a sweet spot in there, I guess," Rich said. "A little hard to tell where it is."

If Trump followed Vitter's approach to the letter, a $1.8 million grant under the COPS program in 2015 and more than $11.3 million in community development block grants in 2016 would be in jeopardy.

"Withholding federal funding from our local law enforcement agencies will undoubtedly make us less safe," Rep. Cedric Richmond, D-New Orleans, said in a statement. "It's difficult for me to understand how Mr. Trump would fulfill his promise to make cities like New Orleans safer by taking resources away from the men and women who patrol our streets every day."

There could be an unexpected silver lining for sanctuary city advocates, Rich said. Trump has promised to appoint a conservative justice to the Supreme Court to replace the late Justice Antonin Scalia. And conservatives tend to abhor granting more power to the federal government.

"It's almost always the conservatives that are protective of the state's autonomy," Rich said.