Assembly plan for middle-class tax relief : page all
Assembly plan for middle-class tax relief

BY LOUIS GREENWALD

The Record

Louis Greenwald, a Democrat, is Assembly majority leader. He represents the 6th District.

High property taxes are the cancer that is killing our state; it is the tax without a conscience.

GOVERNOR Christie's proposed income tax cut makes for nice headlines and a hefty payday for millionaires but fails to provide meaningful relief to middle-class families.

Assembly Democrats, however, have a plan to help struggling middle-class families — a 20 percent property tax relief credit to homeowners of the first $10,000 in property taxes paid for all homeowners earning up to $250,000 per year. Our plan would be phased in over four years, with significant relief to begin immediately, and it would be funded by asking New Jersey's millionaires to pay their fair share.

The contrast between our plan and the governor's plan couldn't be clearer.

Governor Christie's plan would save a family earning $100,000 per year just $275, while millionaires get a tax break of $7,265.75.

Under our plan, a family earning $100,000 per year and paying $8,000 in property taxes would receive $1,600 in tax relief. Our plan provides real property tax relief to 95 percent of New Jersey homeowners, with the average family slated to receive a credit of $1,552 against their property taxes. And our plan strengthens relief for tenants, while maintaining the Senior Freeze program that so many of our elderly and disabled residents rely on.

Recent data show just how critical it is for us to attack the problem of our property taxes, believed to be the highest in the nation. According to an analysis, Christie's cuts to property tax rebates mean net property taxes are 20 percent higher under his administration than they were before he assumed office. That's simply unacceptable.

Democrats know that high property taxes are the cancer that is killing our state. It is the tax without a conscience. It is the tax that drives families to leave our state and stifles economic growth. It is the tax with the heaviest burden on middle-class families and senior citizens living on fixed incomes. And that is precisely why New Jersey needs the real property tax relief we have proposed.

Simply put, now is not the time to give up on immediate property tax relief, as the governor has done.

In the coming days and months, we will undoubtedly have a robust debate on this important issue. Throughout the process, Democrats will remain focused on providing relief to New Jersey's middle-class and working families; they truly need the help.

Let's give them this 20 percent property tax relief credit.