Opinion: Ban high-capacity ammunition clips

The Record

IN RECENT DAYS I’ve repeatedly asked myself: When will we wake up? How many of our sons and daughters must die — how many lives must be taken — before we act to slow the bloodshed in America?

LANCE THEROUX / THE RECORD

For the last several days, I’ve joined Americans in mourning the 12 innocent people murdered in Aurora, Colo. And my thoughts and prayers have been with the dozens more still recovering from their wounds.

But while Congress mourns, we must remember that tears alone will not prevent future tragedies. Rather, we have an obligation to turn our grief into change, for this is the type of massacre our nation has grown to know all too well.

It’s time we sound the alarm on gun violence in America and begin a real national conversation on common-sense solutions. We need to acknowledge that our lax gun laws make it far too easy for murderers to commit acts of violence. We owe the victims and their families more than our solidarity and condolences; we owe them our action.

When the gunman arrived at the movie theater in Aurora, he showed up with an assault rifle with a 100-round magazine, a shotgun and two handguns. And although police responded in 90 seconds, his arsenal gave him more than enough time to kill 12 people and injure 58 more.

Mother, fathers, children

Among those who lost their lives were mothers and fathers, servicemen and a veteran, a recent high school graduate and college student. And of course, 24-year-old New Jersey native Alex Teves and 6-year-old Veronica Moser-Sullivan, whose tragic death reminds us all too well of 9-year-old Christina Taylor-Green’s in Tucson.

As we consider what we can do to prevent future massacres, one similarity between the shootings in Colorado and Arizona stands out: Both killers were armed with magazines capable of shooting dozens of rounds without having to reload — and they bought them legally.

The Colorado shooter carried a firearm loaded with a magazine capable of shooting 100 rounds in less than two minutes, and the Arizona shooter had one that shot 30 rounds. If they didn’t have those magazines, maybe more husbands, wives and children would be alive today. Maybe fewer people would be suffering from bullet wounds. If they’d had to stop sooner, maybe more precious lives could have been saved.

These magazines are the tools of mass murderers. No matter what the gun lobby might have us believe, nobody needs one to go duck hunting.