Opinion: Health Care Act: - Guilty as charged

The Record



ON JAN. 1, 2014 — the date on which the Health Care Act’s individual mandate, federally subsidized state health exchanges and an unprecedented Medicaid expansion each take effect — the outstretched and cradling arms of big government will lure millions of new Americans into his embrace, putting our nation firmly on the path to insolvency.

LANCE THEROUX / THE RECORD

The left’s heavy-handed approach to health reform will not make health insurance more affordable, improve the quality of care or increase coverage. Rather, the Health Care Act will do the exact opposite, and very likely bring the economy down with it.

With our nation on the brink of slipping back into recession and unemployment at record levels, this package represents a full assault against economic recovery and should be held guilty as such.

While I recognize that a law cannot be indicted under our criminal justice system, the courts of public opinion and political discourse provide an appropriate forum for the Health Care Act to stand trial.

The following is a simple and straightforward three-count indictment against the president’s health care law — an indictment that proves the law is guilty as charged and must face the only sentence that fits the crime: full repeal.

Count One: The act is strangling job creation.

According to a National Federation of Independent Business index that tracks business confidence, optimism among small-business owners in June dropped to its lowest level since October 2011. If small-business owners are feeling uncertain about the costs of health care or the massive tax increases under this Health Care Act, they are unlikely to expand and hire additional workers. Under the law’s slew of mandates and taxes, many employers will face higher health insurance costs.

An NFIB report estimates that the law’s health-insurance-premium tax could raise employer-sponsored premiums by as much as 3 percent, and impose a cumulative cost of nearly $5,000 per family by 2020.

Further, the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office estimates that the employer mandate under the Health Care Act — which requires firms with 50 or more employees to offer mandated coverage or face a tax — will cost businesses $52 billion in tax penalties between 2014 and 2019.

In these tight economic times, with business owners laser-focused on their bottom lines, the Health Care Act’s numerous mandates and taxes are nothing more than certified job killers.