N.J.’s incentives to Mercedes couldn’t offset cost of doing business
New Jersey “worked tirelessly” for months to persuade Mercedes-Benz USA to stay in Montvale, the car company said Tuesday, including several meetings and calls between Governor Christie and company CEO Stephen Cannon and a last-ditch offer three days ago.

The state wielded an arsenal of incentive programs that were revamped just over a year ago to enable New Jersey to award more generous tax breaks that would counter the high cost of doing business in the state.

Yet the state’s effort fell short, rebuffed by the reality that even the heavily fortified programs – which enabled New Jersey in 2014 to award about $2 billion in breaks – couldn’t negate the high cost of doing business in the state, and the lure of Atlanta, where the company said Tuesday it will move its headquarters.

Michael Drewniak, a spokes­man for Christie, said the governor “took a direct role in trying to keep Mercedes-Benz USA in New Jersey.”

“In each conversation Mercedes USA made one thing very clear about its decision to leave – the cost of doing business and the tax environment is just too high here to be competitive with a state like Georgia,” he said.

State officials declined to comment on exactly what the state offered to try to keep the German car maker in New Jersey, saying they had agreed to a request by Mercedes-Benz not to talk about it.

Cannon said the company began thinking about building a new headquarters in August, and New Jersey was in the mix from the start, because the company was already there. The company said in its announcement that the move to metro Atlanta would bring its U.S. headquarters closer to its Southeast customer base, the port in Brunswick, Ga., and its Alabama manufacturing facility.

Christie had a face-to-face meeting on Dec. 23, Cannon said. “He brought his Economic Development head with him,” the CEO said. “He said, ‘What’s it going to take?’ And I said, ‘Look, this isn’t about us trying to chase the biggest pile of incentives, because that was not the driver.’ In fact, incentives, when you look at the whole picture, it’s just a small piece. We’re making a 50-year decision, and a pile of incentives in Year One, Two or Three over a 50-year decision doesn’t make a gigantic impact.”

Cannon said he had his final conversation with Christie on Saturday when the governor offered his best “package,” believed to be substantially more than a previous offer. Cannon declined to comment on what incentives the company has been offered in Georgia. A source has said the company could get incentives worth $40 million to $50 million to make the move to Atlanta.

On Tuesday morning, the Development Authority of Fulton County gave approval for the agency to “formalize negotiations” with Mercedes-Benz about a plan to move to a site in or around Sandy Springs, a community on the edge of Atlanta, said a report in the Atlanta Journal Constitution. Car company representatives told the agency, which provides tax-exempt bond financing, that Mercedes would create 800 jobs and bring a $93 million capital investment to the project, according to the company’s application, obtained by The Record.

New Jersey may have lost out because of demographics, and the shifting desires of the auto industry.

Mercedes-Benz’s potential tax breaks were clearly limited if it wanted to stay in Montvale, because the guidelines contained in the revamp of New Jersey’s incentive programs means that the most lucrative awards go to distressed or urban areas, or those with train connections – criteria that do not fit Montvale.

Those rules enabled Subaru of America to secure tax breaks of $118 million to build new offices for 500 workers in Camden. New Jersey also sought to persuade Mercedes-Benz to consider building in Camden, to no avail.

“He put an offer together that was compelling that related to Camden,” Cannon said of Christie. “Again, because incentives were a relatively smaller driver, it just didn’t move the needle, it didn’t make sense. He understood that.”

Mercedes is just the latest company to turn away from a large New Jersey suburban campus for a city location, in line with the desires of so-called millennials, who want to work in city offices with train or other mass transit links, restaurants and entertainment.

Jenna Garland, a spokesperson for Atlanta Mayor Kasim Reed, said Mercedes-Benz wanted a train station, which it found in Sandy Springs, part of the Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority train system. The company also is following a steady drift of carmakers toward the South.

Other recent Georgia projects in the auto industry include the construction of a U.S. headquarters for Porsche near Hartsfield-Jackson Airport, and Kia’s first U.S. manufacturing facility about 75 miles southwest of Atlanta. Last year, Toyota Motor Corp. said it would relocate its U.S. headquarters from Torrance, Calif., to Plano, Texas.

“I think that they may view that particular area as the next hub for the automotive industry,” said Assemblywoman Holly Schepisi, R-River Vale, who had worked to keep Mercedes-Benz in Montvale, and spoke to Cannon on Tuesday.

“This move to Atlanta was far bigger than any incentive program could counter,” said John Boyd, a principal at The Boyd Co. in Princeton, an adviser on corporate relocations. He said the “center of gravity of the North American auto industry has shifted from Michigan and Ontario, Canada” south for the last 20 years, since BMW opened a plant in South Carolina.

He said Mercedes-Benz could lower its operating costs by 20 percent a year, compared with what it would pay in Bergen County, by moving to the Atlanta area, due to the lower labor, property taxes, energy and other costs.