Ratings agencies add Christie policies to legacy issues as causes of credit downgrades

NorthJersey.com

Buy this photo AP Governor Chris Christie

From The Political State blog on NorthJersey.com

Between February and August of 2011, all three major Wall Street ratings agencies lowered New Jersey's credit rating by one step over concerns about how much debt the state was carrying and how much it owed the public employee pension system.

The downgrades came during Governor Christie's second year in office, and after he added more than $1 billion in new borrowing and skipped the full $3 billion pension contribution called for that year by actuaries.

Related: Standard & Poor’s lowers New Jersey credit rating

Democrats blamed Christie for the credit hit at the time, but in fairness, much of the state's debt load and unfunded pension liabilities were also created well before Christie came to Trenton in early 2010.

A faltering economy that was also cited as a factor was also largely out of Christie's control at the time.

Earlier this year, all three ratings agencies --- Fitch Ratings, Moody's Investors Service and Standard & Poor's -- lowered New Jersey's credit rating another step.

This time, in addition to debt and pension obligation concerns, they cited factors more directly tied to Christie's own budget management, including the use of overly optimistic revenue estimates and one-shot revenue measures to close budget gaps.

Now, both Fitch and Standard & Poor's have again lowered New Jersey's credit rating another step in recent days, citing as a factor Christie's decision earlier this year to go back on a promise to increase state pension contributions. Many expect Moody's will take a similar action soon.

Though some have portrayed the latest downgrades from Fitch and Standard & Poor's as the seventh and eighth of Christie's tenure, in reality New Jersey's credit rating has only been lowered three steps by two ratings agencies, and two steps by another ratings agency since Christie took office in 2010.

And though technically the first round of downgrades occurred on Christie's watch, a good deal of the blame for those ratings actions also goes to prior administrations.

Still, the ratings downgrades are not good news for a Republican governor who has tried to portray his fiscal policies and reforms as having rescued the state from years of mismanagement by his Democratic predecessors. Instead, the latest downgrades cite Christie's own budget management as factors. The downgrades will also provide an easy area of criticism if Christie decides to run for U.S. president in 2016.

But attacking Christie for eight downgrades does not take into account the role his predecessors played in creating the concerns credit analysts highlighted in 2011, and it could also give the false impression that the state's credit rating has been lowered eight full steps since 2010.