Christie backs off bold prediction for N.J. economic growth

STATE HOUSE BUREAU

The Record

TYSON TRISH/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER Governor Chris Christie gives the Fiscal Year 2014 Budget Address in the State House Assembly Chambers.

Governor Christie declared last year that the “New Jersey comeback has begun” when he rolled out his state budget for 2013, projecting greater economic growth than any other governor in the country.

But contained in the fine print of Christie’s latest budget documents is an admission that the administration’s bold prediction of a 7.2 percent rise in revenue for the current fiscal year will not come true. One consequence of that shortfall will be a delay in property tax relief for senior citizens, the disabled and residents earning up to $75,000.

The admission is a stark about-face after Christie stuck to his forecast for much of the year and strongly criticized those who disagreed with him — dismissing the work of a major Wall Street ratings agency as “slipshod” and calling a respected non-partisan legislative budget analyst “the Dr. Kevorkian of the numbers.”

To be sure, New Jersey has seen heightened economic activity during the fiscal year, and though the state still has some of the highest unemployment numbers in the nation, thousands of private-sector jobs have been added. But the growth hasn’t risen to the level Christie predicted when he proposed an income tax cut, more money for schools and several new programs.

Now Christie has moved on to a new budget cycle with his $32.9 billion “Recover, Rebuild, Restore” spending plan. He unveiled his plan for the 2014 fiscal year, which begins July 1, in a formal budget address to the state Legislature last week.

And though it was not mentioned by Christie in his speech, these budget documents contain another bet on sizable revenue growth as billions of federal dollars flow into New Jersey to boost the state’s recovery from superstorm Sandy.

This time Christie is banking on nearly 5 percent in new revenue, giving him more money for business tax cuts, education and payments into the public employee pension system. Although the Sandy aid doesn’t show up as an official line item in Christie’s new budget proposal, the state taxes expected to be collected off the rebuilding effort are reflected on the revenue side.

“In New Jersey, the rebuilding process from Sandy will bolster activity in sectors such as engineering and construction, while a renewed Shore will emerge as an even more valuable asset to the state,” the budget documents say.

So as many other states project modest growth this year, especially with the uncertainty surrounding the U.S. governments new “sequestration” spending cuts, Christie is again forecasting economic expansion — an unstated “Jersey Comeback 2.0” — even as he concedes his lofty targets for the current budget will not be fully met.

If the 5 percent growth spurt materialized, New Jersey would collect $32.8 billion in revenue, more than the $32 billion Democratic Gov. Jon Corzine brought in from taxpayers during the 2008 fiscal year at the peak of the state’s pre-recession spending binge, according to an analysis by The Record of budget documents.