Neighborhood in Paterson was once home to some 9/11 hijackers
The slightly rundown threestory building at 486 Union Ave. is typical for Paterson: There’s nothing special about the architecture; it’s in a transient neighborhood where no one seems to stay long.





Twelve years later, it seems like the perfect place to hide in plain sight. For a short time in the summer of 2001, it was a safe haven for many of the terrorists who plotted the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon.



Authorities believe that at one time or another during that summer, as many as 11 of the 19 hijackers who participated in the attacks spent time at this Paterson address. Federal agents swarmed the neighborhood in the frenzied aftermath, and for a time, 486 Union Ave. became notorious.



On Wednesday, only a few people along Union Avenue knew about the building’s chilling past. And those who did know about it, including the building’s former owner, didn’t want to talk about it.



One tenant who opened his door to a reporter, Indio Lopez, said he’s been living in the building for four months. He never knew that terrorists had once lived on the floor above his.



“It’s surprising. I knew nothing about it,” he said.



Berta Lopez has lived on the block for eight months but never knew.



“Around here, the problems are drugs and crime,” she said in Spanish. “But with respect to this, the truth is I did not know.”



Sometime in February of 2001, a Middle Eastern man claiming to be a student went to Jimi Nouri’s gift shop in Paterson and said he was looking for a one-bedroom apartment for himself and a friend. Nouri rented the apartment to the man for $650 a month. The man was later identified by authorities as Hani Hanjour, a 29-year-old citizen of Saudi Arabia who had trained to be a commercial pilot in the United States. The other man later was identified as Nawaq Alhazmi, another Saudi. They moved into the apartment in late May 2001 and stayed until Sept. 1, always paying in cash.



Both men were among the five hijackers armed with box cutters and knives who boarded American Airlines Flight 77. They seized the cockpit shortly after takeoff from Dulles International Airport in Washington, according to the report by the National Commission on Terrorists Attacks Upon the United States, known as the 9/11 Commission.



Hanjour is believed to have put the plane on automatic pilot and hurled it straight at the Pentagon, where it crashed, killing all 64 people onboard and another 125 people on the ground.



Nouri, who’s still doing business in Paterson and currently raising money to help Syrian children left orphaned by the ongoing civil war, said he didn’t know Hanjour or Alhamzi before they came to him. On Wednesday, he didn’t want to revisit that fateful business transaction.



“I really don’t want to talk about it,” he said when reached for comment. “It’s not a happy time for me. I’d really rather not go back to it.”



The report by the 9/11 Commission found that Hanjour and Alhamzi did a lot of business in North Jersey that summer. On five occasions from July 16 to Aug. 31, they rented cars from Borough Jeep/Chrysler in Wayne and told employees at the dealership that they had traveled to Washington, D.C. Hanjour also rented singleengine planes from Teterboro Airport and Caldwell Airport that summer to fly around New York and Washington.



Days before the attack, another hijacker, Marwan Shehhi, who was aboard one of the planes that hit the World Trade Center, bought a special high-tech cellphone at the Willowbrook Mall that could double as a walkietalkie. Two days after the attacks, FBI agents arrived at the Wayne Inn, a motel on Route 23, where several suspected hijackers are believed to have stayed. The agents searched the motel’s guest records and took copies of several receipts.



In February of 2002, federal authorities arrested a man from West Paterson — the town now known as Woodland Park. Eyad M. Alrababah, was charged with helping several of the 9/11 terrorists obtain fraudulent identification cards and licenses from the Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles.



Twelve years later, one longtime resident of Union Avenue, Maggie Hopper, lives with the memory of casually waving to some of the men who became terrorists. She told a neighbor Wednesday, “Oh, do you remember who lived down there? We didn’t even know.”



Hopper said people are less trusting when they hear that terrorists were in their neighborhood 12 years ago, but they’re far more concerned with street crime. “I haven’t heard about Paterson being a terrorist place,” she said. “I hear more about gangs and drug-related stuff.”



But for Paterson, with an estimated 60,000 Muslims, it’s a hard image to shake. One of the myths that spun out of 9/11 was that some Arabs in South Paterson were dancing in the streets after the planes hit the World Trade Center. City police said they never found any evidence to support the rumors.



“That never happened,” said Paterson Councilman Andre Sayegh, who months later, remembers marching in the Arab Unity parade down Main Street in an attempt to dispel negative stereotypes.



For Raed Odeh, owner of the Palestine Hair Salon on Main Street, that’s the hope that people will move past the fact that terrorists once, briefly, lived in the city. He said Muslims have struggled to shake the negativity and to assert their place as an American community like any other. People have shied away from the South Paterson business area, he said, because of the reputation.



Odeh said that since 9/11 many Muslims have established better communication with city officials and community leaders to quell suspicions or concerns.



“We are people living here, born here and raised here,” he said. “Whatever harms this country, it harms everybody.”





Some of the 9/11 hijackers briefly lived in this building in Paterson in the months before the attacks.