Mother charged with trading sex with daughter, 11, for heroin
CINCINNATI (Deborah Dixon) -- A local mother is accused of trading sex with her 11-year-old daughter to her dealer for heroin.

That was according to a new indictment against April Corcoran from Pleasant Plain. Corcoran was indicted on 27 counts. The charges include complicity to rape, trafficking in persons, corrupting another with drugs and endangering children.

The man the prosecutor identifies as her heroin dealer, Shandell Willingham, faces 25 counts. His charges include rape, trafficking in persons, endangering children and pandering sexually oriented material involving a minor. Prosecutor Joe Deters said Cororan would drop her daughter off at Willingham's Colerain Avenue apartment so he could have sex with her. Sometimes, Deters said he would videotape the encounter. Deters said Corcoran would then come back and get heroin and her daughter.

Corcoran is also accused of giving her daughter heroin. The sex acts are detailed in the indictment against Corcoran and Willingham. "This case demonstrates how powerful heroin is. That heroin results in this horrible, horrible tragedy, this little child having to endure what she had to endure. Heroin destroys families. Heroin causes people to care about nothing else but getting heroin and feeding their habit," said Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine. The allegations came to light when girl went to live with father and stepmother out of town. She eventually told her stepmother what happened.

Attorney General DeWine said the state was attacking heroin with a task force to help communities with enforcement, prevention, and education. He and Prosecutor Deters back a proposed law that would allow a manslaughter charge when a dealer sells heroin that leads to an overdose death.

This will be the first Hamilton County prosecution in state court for human trafficking. If convicted of all charges, Corcoran and Willingham could face up to life in prison.

Follow Deborah Dixon on Twitter @crimestopperdeb, and LIKE her on Facebook.

VIDEO HERE