Democrats Could Learn From LBJ's Medicare Push

One of the big fears among those crowding town hall meetings this summer is that their coverage under Medicare will be cut back. The debate was just as passionate 45 years ago, when Congress was considering creating Medicare during the Lyndon Johnson administration.

James Morone, co-author of The Heart of Power: Health and Politics in the Oval Office, tell's Renee Montagne that Johnson's Medicare push is "one of the great untold stories."

In his research for the book, Morone listened to phone conversations that Johnson secretly taped in the White House — including a discussion Johnson had with a young senator from Massachusetts: Ted Kennedy.

I've looked at some of the stuff that's being considered from the press and other people, and it looks like to me that you are approaching it right and that you're getting it in shape — and I just say this, that there's not anything that's happened in my six months, or that will happen in the whole term, in my judgment, that will mean more to us as a party or me or you as individuals than this piece of legislation.

Renee Montagne: What happened in the middle 1960s — was [Medicare] an idea whose time had come?

James Morone: Several things happened. One thing, the Democratic landslide of 1964, LBJ running against [Barry] Goldwater, and the Democrats swept into office. But a second thing happened, and that's Lyndon Baines Johnson in the White House. He was brilliant at maneuvering Medicare through [Congress], and that's one of the great untold stories. It was a president who was very adept in the White House, who managed to make it happen.

Give us an example of Lyndon Johnson in action.

When Lyndon Johnson is elected, the first thing he decides is he wants Medicare, and he knows he needs Congressman Wilbur Mills (D-AR), chairman of the Ways and Means Committee. Mills has single-handedly fought Medicare and kept it bottled up in his committee. Johnson calls him and tries to get Medicare out of it, and Wilbur says, "I can't, I've been fighting this thing, I'll look like a fool." And Johnson has the idea to triple the size of Medicare, to take the Republican proposals and add them on. And the two of them — these veteran, brilliant legislators — they concoct this whole new proposal that's the administration proposal plus the Republican proposals.

There are tapes of Johnson showing a different side of how he worked [Medicare's passage].

Johnson maneuvered every step of the way getting this bill through Congress, and one of the things he did — and this is a little dicey in today's climate — was suppress the costs. So this young kid gets elected from Massachusetts, Ted Kennedy, in 1962, and Johnson is explaining to him [over the phone] how you get a health bill through. And what he tells him is don't let them get the costs projected too far out because it will scare other people:

"A health program yesterday runs $300 million, but the fools had to go to projecting it down the road five or six years, and when you project it the first year, it runs $900 million. Now I don't know whether I would approve $900 million second year or not. I might approve 450 or 500. But the first thing Dick Russell comes running in saying, 'My God, you've got a billion-dollar program for next year on health, therefore I'm against any of it now.' Do you follow me?"