High unemployment rate, reduced state resources tough on veterans
Veterans returning home from their battles in the streets of Iraq and Afghanistan are being faced with a new challenge — finding a job and staying off the streets at home.

Veterans returning home from their battles in the streets of Iraq and Afghanistan are being faced with a new challenge — finding a job and staying off the streets at home.

But high unemployment rates, fierce competition for a sparse selection of jobs and cuts to the programs keeping many veterans off the streets are cause for concern for veterans advocates in the private and public sectors.

“Times have been difficult and, unfortunately, the veteran population is getting hit,” said Ericka Walmsley, a veterans employment representative with the Texas Veterans Commission in Lubbock. “When their term is up and they get out, there’s almost nothing for them now.”

Walmsley, an Army veteran of the Persian Gulf War who now makes a living helping other veterans find work, is one of many advocates for veterans who say they’re concerned with the continuing trend of homelessness among the men and women who fought for the nation.

The problem

One out of three homeless men in the United States are veterans, Walmsley said, citing data from the Veterans Administration.

With Lubbock’s homeless population ranging in estimates from 200 to about 800, that could mean dozens or even more than 100 homeless veterans are living in the city.

But the unemployment rate for all veterans is actually lower than the national average, with only an 8.6 percent jobless rate for veterans compared with the national average of 9.1 percent in November, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

The troubling news, however, comes for recently returning veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan, who have a considerably higher unemployment rate — 10 percent as of November, said Lisa Waddell, a spokeswoman for the veterans commission in Austin.

The number of unemployed Iraq and Afghanistan veterans increased by about 27,000 in one year, from 162,000 in November 2009 to 189,000 in November 2010.

She attributed the higher unemployment rate for recently returning veterans to their arriving on the job market during a period of recession and all-around high unemployment.

Other recent veterans are finding difficulty working due to the physical and mental tolls of serving in war zones, Waddell said.

Advances in battlefield medicine are keeping soldiers alive even after receiving debilitating injuries from such threats as roadside bombs.

“They’re surviving, but they’re surviving with more serious injuries,” Waddell said.

Others who experience severe physical and mental trauma are left with Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, though this disease can sometimes go unnoticed for years but still have the ability to affect a veteran’s ability to function in a job.

Even veterans who have a job, like others in the community, often experience underemployment — working in a job that doesn’t pay the bills, Walmsley said.

“The problem is there’s just so many people vying for minimum-wage jobs,” she said. “But honestly, right now, they need to take whatever they can get until they can get better.”

Wavering support

Walmsley’s agency alone is facing cuts of at least 5 percent a year over the next two years as the state of Texas faces a nearly $18 billion, two-year projected budget deficit in the 2011 Legislature, Waddell said.

Those cuts — amounting to more than $700,000 per year — have forced the commission to eliminate 21 jobs across the state, she said.

Most of those put out of work were caseworkers who help connect veterans with state and federal resources, such as the $3 billion the federal Veterans Administration annually awards to Texas veterans.

That money is divvied out between veterans pensions — up to $15,000 for those below the poverty level — as well as other needs such as medical claims for disabled or wounded veterans.

With the loss of those commission jobs, Waddell argued, the state’s veterans, and therefore the state, could lose a portion of that federal money.

The Texas Veterans Commission estimates the state collects 3.4 cents in sales tax revenue for each dollar the Veterans Administration pays Texas veterans. Therefore, every dollar in veterans benefits losses costs the state 3.4 cents.

“So the state actually loses money whenever we can’t file a claim,” Waddell said.

Just how much money the state could lose in unfilled claims is unclear, she said. Before the commission’s budget cuts, veterans’ claims through the state were up about 10 percent in fiscal year 2010 over 2009, she said.

Through the federal government, veterans will see an increase in aid in 2011 due in part to the Veterans Administration’s initiative to reduce homelessness, Waddell said.

The 2011 federal budget includes an investment of $800 million to expand the VA’s services for homeless veterans and those at risk of becoming homeless, according to the White House Office of Management and Budget.

But Texas veterans’ access to that increase in federal money could be jeopardized simply by a lack of access due to the decrease in state veterans commission caseworkers, Waddell said.

Help is out there

To help protect veterans from homelessness, private organizations are stepping in to provide resources where the government cannot.

The Veterans of Foreign Wars is assisting struggling veterans through its privately funded veterans relief fund, said Al White, commander at Lubbock’s Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 2466.

The fund is maintained through private donations as well as the VFW’s annual poppy flower sales drive around Veterans Day, White said.

He said the Lubbock-area VFW’s relief fund has raised and distributed thousands of dollars to dozens of area veterans struggling to keep a roof over their heads.

He said he’s concerned with what he called an increasing number of veterans in Lubbock who are homeless or just a paycheck away from being so.

“And we’re getting such a large influx of our young people struggling just to find jobs,” he said.

The Lubbock office of the Texas Veterans Commission as of this fall is assisting about 1,400 area veterans struggling to find work, Walmsley said.

Working with a staff of less than a dozen people to help those veterans find work is a challenge, she said.

“I concentrate on whatever I can do for the veteran in front of me and then move on to the next case,” she said.

Among tools she uses to help veterans find work are online state and private databases listing available jobs, many with preferences for veterans.

But there often just aren’t enough jobs to meet the demand, she said.

Walmsley said she also gives veterans tips for landing a job:

• Maintaining an address — even if it’s a friend’s house — for use on resumes.

• Using an e-mail account.

• Keeping a phone line, even if it’s just a cell phone.

“You know how they have cell phones for soldiers — well I wish they had cell phones for veterans,” she said, alluding to the national program to provide cell phones for soldiers serving overseas.

To comment on this story:

adam.young@lubbockonline.com • 766-8725

shelly.gonzales@lubbockonline.com • 766-8747

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics