About the National Safety Council About Us Page Content About the National Safety Council The National Safety Council is a nonprofit organization whose mission is to save lives by preventing injuries and deaths at work, in homes and communities and on the road through leadership, research, education and advocacy. NSC advances this mission by partnering with businesses, government agencies, elected officials and the public to make an impact where the most preventable injuries and deaths occur, in areas such as distracted driving, teen driving, workplace safety and beyond the workplace, particularly in and near our homes. Celebrating 100 years of safety Founded in 1913 and chartered by Congress, the National Safety Council relies on research to determine optimal solutions to safety issues. Its educational efforts aim to change behaviors by building awareness, providing training and sharing best practices. The Council recognizes organizations that have focused on safety as a critical part of their operational excellence with the Robert W. Campbell Award®, safety’s most prestigious honor. NSC Congress & Expo is the world’s largest annual event dedicated to safety and Safety+Health® magazine is a leading source of occupational safety information. Offering a variety of learning options, NSC is a leader in First Aid and Workplace Safety training and created the defensive driving course concept where it remains the chief innovator. Each year the Green Cross for Safety® medal from NSC salutes a company with an outstanding safety record for its leadership in responsible citizenship and community service. NSC is the International Certifying Center for the U.S. through the Safe Communities America® program, guiding community stakeholders to reduce injuries and promote safety for the residents of their communities. The National Safety Council is committed to helping its members and the public prevent unintentional injuries and deaths by providing knowledge and resources that enable them to reduce risks, engage employees, measure progress and continuously improve their safety management systems. With local Chapters and global networks, NSC is the leading advocate for safety and promotes June as National Safety Month. Page Image This page is available exclusively to NSC Organization members. Please register or login to the NSC website using your Membership ID number. Don't know your Membership ID Number? Contact Customer Service at 1-800-621-7619. Not a member? Click here to join. This page is available exclusively to NSC Organization members. Please register or login to the NSC website using your Membership ID number. Don't know your Membership ID Number? Contact Customer Service at 1-800-621-7619. Not a member? Click here to join. This page is available exclusively to NSC Organization members. Please register or login to the NSC website using your Membership ID number. Don't know your Membership ID Number? Contact Customer Service at 1-800-621-7619. Not a member? Click here to join. This page is available exclusively as a resource to National Safety Council's First Aid Instructors. Please register or login to the NSC website using your Instructor ID number. If you have questions or concerns regarding the registration process, please contact Customer Service at 1-800-621-7619. This page is available exclusively as a resource to National Safety Council's Defensive Driving Instructors. Please register or login to the NSC website using your Instructor ID number. If you have questions or concerns regarding the registration process, please contact Customer Service at 1-800-621-7619. This page is available exclusively as a resource to Training Centers. Please register or login to the NSC website using your Training Center ID number. If you have questions or concerns regarding the registration process, please contact Customer Service at 1-800-621-7619. This page is available exclusively as a resource to NSC Chapter Members. Please register or login to the NSC website using your NSC Chapter ID number. If you have questions or concerns regarding the registration process, please contact Jackie DeCicco at 1-630-775-2206. This page is available exclusively to NSC Organization members. Please register or login to the NSC website using your Membership ID number. Don't know your Membership ID Number? Contact Customer Service at 1-800-621-7619. Not a member? Click here to join. This page is available exclusively to NSC Organization members. Please register or login to the NSC website using your Membership ID number. Don't know your Membership ID Number? Contact Customer Service at 1-800-621-7619. Not a member? Click here to join. This page is available exclusively to NSC Organization members. Please register or login to the NSC website using your Membership ID number. Don't know your Membership ID Number? Contact Customer Service at 1-800-621-7619. Not a member? Click here to join.