NSC releases latest injury and fatality statistics and trends
NSC HOME Page Image Page Content ​ NSC releases latest injury and fatality statistics and trends 2014 edition of Injury Facts® reveals largest safety threats facing Americans today Itasca, IL – The National Safety Council today released the 2014 edition of Injury Facts® , which details safety statistics and trends across the U.S. and worldwide. Injury Facts has been the Council’s go-to resource for all safety statistics for more than 90 years. Among the more surprising statistics in the 2014 edition: Poisonings, including those from unintentional opioid prescription painkiller overdoses, were the leading cause of death in 18 states and Washington, D.C. The increase in fatalities corresponds with the national increase in deaths from drug poisonings, including those involving prescription painkillers. Cell phone use is now estimated to be involved in 26 percent of all motor vehicle crashes – up from the previous year An estimated 5 percent of crashes involve texting, while 21 percent involve drivers talking on handheld or hands-free cell phones In 2012, the number of teen motor vehicle occupant deaths decreased, but motor vehicle crashes remain the No. 1 cause of death for teens Unintentional injuries cost more than $790 billion annually The most costly lost-time workers’ compensation claims are those involving injuries to the head or central nervous system The number of elder adult falls has risen 112 percent since 1999 M otor vehicle deaths in 2012 were at their lowest level in February and at their highest in July The three-day period around New Year’s Day was the holiday period with the highest percentage of alcohol-impaired driving deaths “For almost a century, Injury Facts has been a watchdog publication, warning Americans about the incidents that can cause the most harm,” said John Ulczycki, vice president of strategic initiatives at NSC. “Injury Facts is a valuable tool to help leaders in business, government, public health, safety, and the media understand that injury data are a necessary step to reducing injuries and fatalities and making our world safer for all.” A free recording of a webinar addressing highlights from the 2014 edition of Injury Facts® is available, and the entire book and CD can be purchased at shop.nsc.org . Media may request a complimentary PDF of the book by emailing media@nsc.org . About the National Safety Council Founded in 1913 and chartered by Congress, the National Safety Council, nsc.org , is a nonprofit organization whose mission is to save lives by preventing injuries and deaths at work, in homes and communities, and on the road through leadership, research, education and advocacy. NSC advances this mission by partnering with businesses, government agencies, elected officials and the public in areas where we can make the most impact – distracted driving, teen driving, workplace safety, prescription drug overdoses and Safe Communities. PressRelease