SHE KICKS SAND IN TRUMP'S FACE SNEERS AT THE DONALD'S BUCKS
ATLANTIC CITY Vera Coking, 70 years old, is hoping to live another 50 to 100 years whatever it takes, basically if only to bring great torment to the man whose name dwarfs this town, Donald Trump. "He's a maggot, a cockroach and a crumb, that's what he is," Coking said, standing outside the mammoth mix of blinking lights and concrete that makes up Trump Plaza Hotel and Casino. Across the street stood the three-story, white clapboard house that she and her husband bought in 1961, when Atlantic City was a place to go for salt air, the Boardwalk and nightclubs showcasing the likes of Frank Sinatra, Sammy Davis Jr. and Dean Martin. An Atlantic City that does not exist anymore. With help from the state, Trump hoped to claim and demolish Coking's home, as well as a nearby Italian restaurant and jewelry store, to help create additional parking and a waiting area for limousines. After five years of legal wrangling, a judge last week ruled for Coking in a decision celebrated by many local residents who believe the casinos are swallowing their city. Their unlikely heroine a 5-foot-3 widow born in Florence could hardly contain her glee as she stood outside her home last week, pumping her fists while miniature statues of Julius Caesar looked down at her from atop Caesar's Palace. "If Trump's thinking I'm gonna die tomorrow, he's having himself a pipe dream," Coking said. "I'm gonna be here for a long, long time. I'll stay just to see he's not getting my house. We'll be going to his funeral, you can count on that.

" In a brief telephone interview Friday, Trump boasted that his Atlantic City casinos besides Trump Plaza, he also owns the Taj Mahal and Trump Marina are booming, and that he's no longer interested in Coking's property. "She wants to sell it for more than it's worth," Trump said. "I am not an interested buyer.

" He suggested that Coking has allowed the house to deteriorate to gain sympathy. "Did she put on her old clothing for you?

" Trump asked. "The bottom line is, it's too bad for Atlantic City, but it's not too bad for me because I'm not interested in the property. "Nobody gets under my skin," he said. The feud evokes the epic passions that have riven this city as it evolved from a seaside resort to a gambling mecca. Many acknowledge that the hotels and casinos saved Atlantic City from oblivion by drawing millions of tourists and helping to generate new jobs, housing and the construction of a new public schools. But they also complain that the casinos have flattened 100-year-old homes and grand hotels in favor of parking lots, and that they have snuffed out the small bars and restaurants, the very places that gave the city its raffish charm. For them, Trump, with his omnipresent name and bravado, is the symbol of everything they oppose. And Vera Coking is their revenge. "One for our side," said Vito Gallucio, 57, the owner of Mr. Lucky's Barber Shop on Atlantic Ave. "Sure, Trump and the casinos did a lot for Atlantic City, but they don't help the little people. They didn't help the small-business owner. The man is a wolf.

" At one time, Vince Sabatini, for 33 years the owner of an Italian restaurant down the street from Coking's house on Columbia Place, said he welcomed places like Bally's and the Tropicana. But that was long before he realized that the casinos self-contained minicities with their own shops and restaurants took his customers. It also was before the state ever raised the prospect of condemning his property for Trump's expansion. "I voted for the casinos, but I wouldn't do it today," Sabatini said. "I want to leave this place to my kids, not Donald Trump.

" Anthony Rando, 42, whose family has owned a bakery in the city for 83 years, sneered while listening to his friend. "The casinos have gobbled our city," he said. "They ruined Atlantic City. They took away our parking spots, they destroyed our businesses. There's not much left.

" Next door, Peter Banin said he opened his secondhand jewelry store 18 years ago to support his wife and two children after they moved here from the Soviet Union. He was infuriated when he received a notice that the state wanted to claim his property for Trump's expansion. "The Soviet Union doesn't even do stuff like this," he said. "When they move you, they will provide you with the same thing you lost. They give you a choice. I didn't buy this property to make a little money and take off.

" Atlantic City, with its 37,000 residents, is a dizzying study in extremes. Pawnshops and dilapidated buildings share a landscape dwarfed by high-rise, neon-lit playpens. Homeless people sleep on benches a short distance from where limousines deliver gamblers who bet $20,000 at the baccarat table. Some argue that this so-called tale of two cities will never change if developers aren't lured to build in Atlantic City, if casino owners like Trump aren't encouraged to expand. Those who celebrate Coking's victory, they say, do not understand that it will hinder future development in a city that badly needs it. "Vera Coking will make it harder to get developers to come in here," Mayor James Whelan said before interrupting an impromptu interview to perform a wedding. "The fact is, Atlantic City would be dead if it wasn't for the casinos.

" Before it became Dice Town, the city was a place where middle-class families from all over could vacation for a reasonable price. The Boardwalk teemed with women in gowns and men in ties and jackets. The Miss America pageant was born here. Amusement piers featured freak shows, rides for kids and animal acts like the two boxing cats and the diving horse. Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis performed together for the first time at Skinny D'Amato's 500 Club in 1946, and Joe Milano, 73, a retired criminal court assignment clerk, said he was in the audience that night. "Everybody wet their pants, they were so funny," Milano said. "It was a beautiful town then. Magical. Italians, blacks, Jews. Everybody got along.

" Milano lives just down the street from the Boardwalk on South Brighton Ave., in the same house in which he grew up. Two decades ago, he saw a row of grand federalist homes when he stepped out on his porch. On Sundays, he awoke to organ music coming from a church across the street. The church is gone, and those homes are photographs in his scrapbook. All he sees when he goes outside is a parking lot and the Tropicana Casino. "They left us in a desert," said Milano, who was the only homeowner on his block who refused to sell his property. Milano said he was among those who believed the casinos would boost the city when they first started opening in the late 1970s. "They were like gods to us," he said. "I went out to Vegas to see how they did, and it looked great. They painted a beautiful picture of what they could do here. Whoever thought they'd say, 'We're taking your property. Here's two bucks, now get lost.

' " Since 1985, the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority has condemned 300 to 400 properties, nearly all of them to allow the casinos near the Boardwalk to expand. Penthouse publisher Bob Guccione was the first to try to buy Coking's house when he planned to build a casino in the early 1980s. He offered $1 million. She refused. "I like it here" is how she explained her reasoning. Coking and her husband Raymond, an engineer who died in 1967, paid $20,000 for their house, which they used during the summers to escape Philadelphia. Theirs was the biggest house on a street of predominantly Italian families. "At night, we would sit out on the porch and play the mandolin and the banjo," said Coking, a mother of six. "There was always a nice breeze. It was a beautiful time.

" Like many of her neighbors who believed Atlantic City was dying, Coking, a retired portrait painter, favored the casinos' arrival in the late 1970s. "It was dead around here," she said. After Guccione gave up on building a casino, Coking recalled several encounters with Trump during the 1980s before their court squabbles began. "He'd come over to the house, probably thinking, 'If I butter her up now, I'll get her house for a good price,' " Coking said. "Once, he gave me Neil Diamond tickets. I didn't even know who Neil Diamond was.

" Coking said she would sell the house to Trump for the right price, though her lawyer, Glenn Zeitz, urged her not to reveal what that price is (definitely in the seven-figure range). She said she would take the money and buy a beachfront condo a few blocks away. "I could go back to my painting," she said. "Try a new subject Donald, with little horns and long teeth.

" GRAPHIC: TALE OF THE TAPE AGE VERA COKING: 70 DONALD TRUMP: 52 BIRTHPLACE VERA COKING: ITALY DONALD TRUMP: QUEENS HOLDINGS VERA COKING: 127 COLUMBIA PLACE, ATLANTIC CITY, N.

J. DONALD TRUMP: TRUMP PLAZA, TRUMP TOWER TO NAME A FEW HOBBIES VERA COKING: PAINTING DONALD TRUMP: CASH MARITAL STATUS VERA COKING: WIDOWED DONALD TRUMP: DIVORCED FROM IVANA, SEPARATED FROM MARLA PASSION VERA COKING: TORMENTING DONALD TRUMP DONALD TRUMP: PUTTING HIS NAME ON MORE BUILDINGS

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!