VENTURA WON'T GO TO THE MAT, BAILS ON PEROT
WASHINGTON - Wrestler-turned-governor Jesse Ventura of Minnesota yesterday bolted the "hopelessly dysfunctional" Reform Party after fighting for control with Ross Perot, the Texas billionaire who founded it. Ventura, the Reform Party's highest-ranking officeholder, branded it "unworthy of my support and the support of the American people.

" The party has been riven by chaotic infighting, and many analysts say it won't survive without the colorful governor as its leader. The reclusive Perot is pushing hard-line conservative Pat Buchanan as the party's nominee for President, which Ventura, a moderate, said was unacceptable. "Buchanan is an anti-abortion extremist and an unrealistic isolationist," Ventura said. "The latest I hear is that he's now getting support from [white supremacist] David Duke. I can't be a part of that and I won't be part of that.

" But in walking away, Ventura ceded the party's $13 million of government campaign funds to Buchanan's presidential bid. "I don't even think about Pat Buchanan," he said. "From this day forward, I don't think about the national party. I could care less.

" Ventura said he was returning to Minnesota's Independence Party, a grass-roots third party that pre-dates the 1992 founding of the Reform Party. Before announcing his intentions outside the governor's mansion in St. Paul, Ventura said he consulted with megadeveloper Donald Trump, the governor's own pick for presidential nominee. "I got Donald's full blessing," said Ventura, who suggested Trump also might jump ship from Reform and run for President as the nominee of a theoretical national Independence Party. Ventura said he hopes to lay the groundwork for such a party with his Web site, www.

jesseventura.

org. "While I know I'm a natural leader for a new national third-party movement, I'm also the governor of Minnesota. That's more than a full-time job," he said. "I'll help by serving as a rally point so like-minded people in other states can find each other.

" Ventura's announcement came one day before the party convention today in Nashville, where the Perot faction plans to oust Ventura-supported party chairman Jack Gargan. The bile Ventura feels for Perot was evident in the way he referred to Russ Verney, former party chairman and Perot loyalist. "Who's that? Russ Varmint? Oh, Russ Vermin?

" Ventura joked.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!