INSIDE TRUMPS' BITTER BATTLE Nephew's ailing baby caught in the middle
's death would always hover as a painful shadow over the proud and successful Trump clan. On June 25, 1999, Fred Trump, one of the last of New York City's major postwar builders, died in a Queens hospital at age 93 after suffering from Alzheimer's disease for several years. Fred 3rd, a 38-year-old real estate broker, told the 650 mourners at Marble Collegiate Church that his grandfather was a generous man who had always shown an underlying responsibility to those in need. Fred 3rd was glad he had been invited to speak. It was an acknowledgment, he said, to his dead father's memory and to the fact that, no matter what, he and his sister were family. While Fred delivered his eulogy, his wife, Lisa, sat in one of the front pews, pregnant with their third child. That night, after returning to their home in Greenwich, Conn., Lisa went into labor. All seemed well at first. But 48 hours after baby William Trump was born, he turned blue in his mother's arms, his body stiffening and then shaking uncontrollably. It was the first of many devastating seizures to come. What followed for the next harrowing six weeks of his life were brain scans, spinal taps, blood tests and heart-wrenching visits to three hospitals, including Yale Medical Center. Doctors eventually diagnosed William with infantile spasms, a rare disorder that can lead to cerebral palsy or autism and a lifetime of care. "We just don't know what William's future holds, what he will be able to do in his life," said Lisa, a full-time mom. During the baby's three-week stay at Mount Sinai, Robert Trump called to assure his nephew that whatever the child needed would be covered by Precise, the Trump company medical plan. Round-the-clock nurses. Neurologists. Pulmon-ologists. Emergency room visits when William stopped breathing twice in the first eight months of his fragile life. "We were so relieved when Robert called," Fred remembered. Robert's call to Fred and Lisa was followed by a July 19 letter from a Trump company lawyer to the family insurance broker, which read: "Please instruct Precise to pay 100% of all costs relating to baby William's care, notwithstanding any plan limits (percentage, number of visits, or maximum dollar amount); and ... whether or not they are deemed by Precise to be medically necessary.