VETS' VENDING WAR
In 1968, Beazer Pitiger got hit square in the chest by some shrapnel in Vietnam. But it was a bill signed last week in Albany one that limits where disabled veterans can peddle in New York while promising new veteran-only zones that really broke his heart. "It was a shame, a real shame," said Pitiger, a 48-year-old former Marine who survives selling bric-a-brac on the streets of Manhattan, earning maybe $40 a day. It is a time-honored tradition: Ever since 1886, disabled New York veterans have been granted peddling licenses without regard to ceilings on the number of licenses for other vendors, the theory being that every effort should be made to offer employment to this special group. But disabled veterans say they are now under attack again this time by a city that is eager to push all vendors to the city's outer fringes. The legislation signed Thursday extended to 1998 a ban that has barred all vendors since 1991 from midtown Manhattan, an area defined as everything between 30th St. and 65th St., from Second Ave. to Ninth Ave. The original ban enacted in 1991 after vendors turned much of Fifth Ave. into an open-air bazaar, prompting complaints from area businesses would have expired July 1 had the Assembly done nothing. But faced with concerted pressure from business groups and the Giuliani administration, the Assembly voted last month to keep peddlers out of midtown after a vote that featured at least 10 last-minute reversals by Democrats previously opposed to the bill. Swaying the minds of many was an amendment to the bill suggesting that new areas of the city be opened to disabled veteran peddlers only, although midtown remains off-limits. The zones are to be defined by Nov. 20 by a new commission made up of four city officials and one veterans' representative. It is not clear where the zones will be, how many will be approved or what regulations will be enacted within those zones. The compromise satisfied some, including the American Legion, a veterans' group that had lobbied hard against the bill. But decidedly unpleased were Pitiger and other members of the Disenfranchised Disabled Veteran Vendors of New York City, a group that represents about 40 of the city's 66 licensed disabled veteran vendors. The "legislation is nothing more than a sloppy 11th-hour patch job by the City of New York," said James Kushner, the group's recording secretary, who most days can be found selling small plastic toys at Broadway and Worth St. in lower Manhattan. The group had proposed a plan that would have opened up all areas of New York except midtown to any disabled veteran with a license. The plan would have limited the number of vendors to one per block. Disabled vendors complain that under the new legislation, veterans will have to apply for specific street corners within specific zones, thereby limiting their much-cherished freedom of movement. "To be set up in a restricted area, on one corner, you'll be finished not just businesswise but physically," said Kushner, 46. "You are going to have a meltdown.

" Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver (D-Manhattan), who led the charge to approve last week's bill barring peddlers from midtown, said he would not seek to extend it beyond 1998 if the new zones do not "come out as fair" to veterans.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!