NY Daily News
Rep. Michael Grimm meets with former Rep. Bob Inglis in the Mayflower Hotel in Washington.

Republican Rep. Michael Grimm, whose Staten Island based district was rocked by Superstorm Sandy in 2012, becomes the first congressional Republican to admit changing his mind on man-made climate change in a documentary airing Sunday on Showtime.

Grimm declared himself a climate-change skeptic in his successful 2010 election to represent a district including Staten Island and parts of southwestern Brooklyn.

“I personally am one of the guys how has been skeptical of global warming from the beginning,” he said then. “The jury is obviously still out.”

Interviewed MSNBC host Chris Hayes for the, the docu-series " Years of Living Dangerously ," Grimm initially says “I don’t think the science is there to tell us what’s causing” climate change. “I don’t want to get into the political debate of what’s causing it,” he says.

But during the episode which tracks storm victims and paints a flattering picture of Grimm’s efforts to help them, Grimm changes his mind.

His flip follows a filmed conversation with former Rep. Bob Inglis (R-S.C.) whose push for Republicans to accept climate change science helped cost him his seat.

“After speaking with Bob Inglis, it made me do some of my own research, you know, I looked at some of the stuff that he sent over, my staff looked at,” Grimm tells Hayes. “But the mass majority of respected scientists say that it’s conclusive, the evidence is clear. So I don’t think the jury is out.”

“There’s no question that, you know, the oceans have risen, right?” Grimm says. “And the climate change part is, is a real part of it.”

But he says there is little he can do in the Congress on the issue.

“The problem that we're gonna have right now- there's no oxygen left in the room in Washington for another big debate, that’s the reality,” Grimm says.

“It's much bigger than me,” he continues.” I don't think that humans in America, Americans, have the will to do it.

Grimm does not take a position on any legislation to address climate change, which is an anathema to the GOP. But his position puts him at odds with most of his party, where members strive to avoid the issue. House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) has even discouraged his party’s members from discussing the issue.