Justin Bieber in Rolling Stone: Abortion is 'killing a baby' - even in cases of rape
Justin Bieber isn't comfortable talking publicly about girlfriend Selena Gomez, but he apparently has no problem discussing sex.



"I don't think you should have sex with anyone unless you love them," the 16-year-old declared in an interview featured in the March 3 issue of Rolling Stone.



Despite his strong Christian background, the teen sensation didn't say he's against pre-marital sex.



"I think you should just wait for the person you're ... in love with," he told the magazine when asked about abstinence.



On homosexuality, Bieber said, "It's everyone's own decision to do that. It doesn't affect me and shouldn't affect anyone else."



But abortion is a whole different matter.



"I really don't believe in abortion," he revealed. "I think [an embryo] is a human. It's like killing a baby."



And while he thinks it's "really sad" for a woman to become pregnant after being raped, he noted that "everything happens for a reason."



"I don't know how that would be a reason," he conceded. "I guess I haven't been in that position, so I wouldn't be able to judge that."



The Canadian singer also tackled another hot-button issue: healthcare in the United States.



"We go to the doctor, and we don't need to worry about paying him, but [in the U.S.], your whole life, you're broke because of medical bills," he said. "My bodyguard's baby was premature, and now he has to pay for it. In Canada, if your baby's premature, he stays in the hospital as long as he needs to, and then you go home."



If it seems strange for the "Baby" singer to talk about such adult issues, consider that he's hardly a typical teen.



"I hate paparazzi," Bieber told the magazine. "They're stalkers with a camera. If someone's following you, that's automatically a crime, but if they have a camera, it's okay? I don't agree with that at all."



He also doesn't attempt to understand his fans' behavior, namely their obsession with his every move.



"I really don't know why they're acting that way," the crooner admitted. "And you know what? I don't think about it. My attitude is, why ask questions when things are going so well? Ain't no questions that should be asked in this situation! They love me, and that's it."



But Bieber said he knows their love may not last forever.



"I don't think of myself as powerful. If anything, my fans are powerful," he said. "It's all in their hands. If they don't buy my albums, I go away."