Tower of babble: Trump calls out Clinton over religious devotion
Let us prey.

Would-be wall builder Donald Trump, cast stones at his presidential rival Tuesday, attacking Hillary Clinton’s commitment to her faith.

“We don't know anything about Hillary in terms of religion,” Trump said at a closed-door meeting Tuesday with religious and evangelical leaders.

“Now, she's been in the public eye for years and years, and yet there's no — there's nothing out there,” Trump, a Presbyterian, said.

“There's like nothing out there. It's going to be an extension of Obama but it's going to be worse, because with Obama you had your guard up. With Hillary you don't, and it's going to be worse.”

A group of interfaith religious leaders protest Trump outside the NYC hotel where he was scheduled to meet with religious leaders. (BRENDAN MCDERMID/REUTERS)

Clinton has spoken in the past about her Methodist background and how it has influenced her career in public service.

Trump’s meeting with religious leaders was closed to the press but E.W. Webb, a faith leader on hand for the event, posted video of the remarks.

Trump even had advice for voters on how they should talk with God.

Trump follows dismal fundraising numbers with threat to fund bid

“Some of the people were saying, 'Let's pray for our leaders,'” Trump said.

New York Daily News front pages on the presidential election

“I said, 'Well, you can pray for your leaders' — and I agree with that, pray for everyone — but what you really have to do is pray to get everybody out to vote for one specific person.

“And we can't be, again, politically correct and say we pray for all of our leaders, because all of your leaders are selling Christianity down the tubes, selling the evangelicals down the tubes,” Trump said. “And it's a very, very, very, very bad thing that's happening.”

Trump broke bread with pastors and priests in a closed-door Times Square talkfest aimed at restoring the faith of evangelicals who have questioned his commitment to their cause.

Trump’s own faith credentials have been called into question. While trying to reach out to evangelicals in January at a Liberty University speech, he made a biblical reference to “Two Corinthians instead of “Second Corinthians.”

The Rev. Dr. Amy Butler, senior minister of The Riverside Church, speaks at the Times Square event Tuesday. (Richard Drew/AP)

Meanwhile, protesters pointed out the log in Trump’s eye.

"Donald Trump has been promoting an agenda that's anchored in scapegoating religious majorities, in particular Muslims,” said Stosh Cotler, CEO of Bend The Arc Jewish Action, who led a march from the candidate’s Trump Tower headquarters to the evangelical meeting at the Marriott Marquis.

"We feel it's our moral imperative to speak out and take action."

Tuesday also saw the Trump campaign announce that it had formed an "evangelical executive advisory board" in an effort to sway the conservative group.

The board, which did not require an endorsement from those on it, includes Jesus Christ superstars such as former Minnesota congresswoman Michele Bachmann, Focus on the Family founder James Dobson and Liberty University President Jerry Falwell Jr.

Falwell tweeted that he was honored to introduce Trump at the Thursday summit and posted a picture with him. However,Twitter users were quick to point out a visual reminder of the awkward alliance between the bragadocious billionaire and the moral crusader, a picture of Trump on the cover of Playboy.

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!

With CHRISTOPHER BRENNAN