'Naked Chef' Jamie Oliver: British McDonald's is healthier than the American version

Getty 'Naked Chef' and organic foods advocate Jamie Oliver says McDonald's has better policies overseas than it does in the U.S.

Trek to the Golden Arches in England and you'll eat healthier than you would at a stateside Mickey D's. That's the word from celebrity chef Jamie Oliver, who praised the UK McDonald's for its free range eggs, organic milk and quality beef, according to ABCNews.

Though the chef's criticized the fast food giant in the past, he's now praising it for trying to turn out better food and be generally more conscientious.

"McDonald's in the UK is very different compared to the U.S. model," said Oliver at a press conference, as reported by ABC News, extolling its quality beef and noting that "their ethics and recycling is being improved and improved."

Not everyone's so sure that the Golden Arches deserve such a golden image. Whether McDonald's overseas policies could actually improve Americans' diets is not clear.

"We all have images of chickens wandering around some beautiful farm," Yale Prevention Research Center co-founder Dr. David Katz told ABC News. "(But) my understanding is free-range means very little and doesn't translate to any significant difference in nutrition."

And, he added, free-range chickens might not be given as much room to range as people think. Some small farms could produce chickens that are more nutritious if they are fed the right diets, but many free range chickens are not necessarily more healthful.

Commenting on the free-range label, Katz told ABC News, "It can mean something, but it usually doesn't mean anything." And, Katz says, organic isn't always a more healthful option.

"There is no scientific evidence at all that organic means anything for health," Katz told ABC News.

Oliver, who rose to fame in Britain as "The Naked Chef," successfully fought for school lunch reform in his home country. He has lately turned his attention to American school lunch policies, taping an ABC reality show, "Jamie Oliver's Food Revolution," in West Virginia and creating an online petition for better lunches, which he plans to present to the White House.