Supreme Court's 1st Hispanic justice to resign
TALLAHASSEE, Fla. - Raoul Cantero III, the first Hispanic to serve on the Florida Supreme Court and one of its most conservative members, said Friday he is resigning in September for personal reasons.

The 47-year-old justice was appointed to the court in 2002 by then-Gov. Jeb Bush, a Republican. He said it has been difficult for his family to leave their Miami hometown.

"They still call Miami home," Cantero said. "I always considered like I was kind of a judge for a day, somebody that didn't belong here that they let to be here for a day, and it happened to be six years worth."

Cantero's resignation letter was delivered Friday morning to Republican Gov. Charlie Crist, who will make his first appointment to the state's seven-member high court.

First, though, the Supreme Court Nominating Commission will seek applicants and recommend at least three finalists to the governor.

Cantero joined with Justice Kenneth Bell as the high court's most conservative members. They are the only justices solely appointed by Bush.

When Bush was governor-elect in 1998 he agreed to appoint Justice Peggy Quince jointly with outgoing Democratic Gov. Lawton Chiles, who died in office four days later.

Cantero said Friday that his most memorable case was the 2004 ruling that struck down a law Bush had rushed through the Legislature in an attempt to keep brain-damaged Terri Schiavo alive.

In an opinion written by Justice Barbara Pariente the justices ruled the law unconstitutionally attempted to reverse lower court decisions permitting the removal of the woman's feeding tube. With the tube removed, Schiavo died.

"It was a proud moment for us that we were able to reach a unanimous decision," Cantero said. "We were able to work through the issues dispassionately."

Cantero, the court's most junior member, wrote opinions that upheld a law allowing child molesters to be sentenced to life in prison without parole and ruled sex offenders can be held indefinitely if they have violent crimes on their records under the state's Jimmy Ryce Act.

"Snowbirds" and other part-time Florida residents who insure their cars back home cannot make claims under more-favorable Florida laws, Cantero wrote for the court.

In another auto insurance case, Cantero wrote that crash victims who lose personal injury lawsuits against insurance companies may be required to pay the insurers' legal fees in some cases.

When the justices wanted to send a message to the Legislature that Florida's death penalty law should be changed, they turned to Cantero in 2005. He urged that Florida require unanimous jury recommendations to impose death.

Florida is the only state that requires just a simple majority, Cantero wrote. It still does as even he couldn't persuade the lawmakers.

Cantero, though, often has been in the minority in closely decided cases, including a landmark 2006 decision that declared unconstitutional a state voucher program Bush had championed. It sent children from failing public schools to private ones at taxpayer expense.

Cantero joined the dissent written by Bell.

He also dissented from opinions that denied former Florida Senate President W.D. Childers a Supreme Court hearing on his bribery conviction, struck down local curfews for minors and a law that allowed grandparents to seek court orders allowing them to visit their grandchildren.

He also dissented in several cases that reversed death sentences.

"Throughout his tenure on the court, Justice Cantero distinguished himself as one of Florida's premier jurists," Crist said.

Cantero is Florida's 80th justice. A native of Madrid, Spain, he is the son of Cuban exiles who fled the communist regime and later settled in Florida in the 1960s. He is a grandson of former Cuban leader Fulgencio Batista.

Cantero said the fact he has three teenage children has made it important for him to return to Miami where he plans to go back to private practice. He said he has received some offers but has no firm plans.

His seat shouldn't necessary go to another Hispanic, Cantero said, but he added, "I do think the court benefits from a diversity of views."

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!