Trump blames MS-13 growth on Obama despite sanctions on the gang
President Trump thinks recent acts by the violent MS-13 gang are all his predecessor’s fault.

Without citing specific data or incidents — such as the recent ones on Long Island and in Houston — Trump said President Obama was light on immigration enforcement, causing a seeming spike in brutal acts by the El Salvador-headquartered gang.

“The weak illegal immigration policies of the Obama Admin. allowed bad MS 13 gangs to form in cities across U.S. We are removing them fast!” Trump wrote at about 5:40 a.m. Tuesday.

Attorney General Jeff Sessions later in the day addressed recent acts by MS-13, saying membership has grown “significantly” in the last few years and blamed it on limited border security.

What is MS-13? A look at the widespread and violent gang

“We cannot allow this to continue,” said Sessions, who didn’t directly blame the past administration. “We will secure our border, expand immigration enforcement, and choke-off supply lines.”

MS-13 members are often identified by their tattoos. (JOSE CABEZAS/AFP/Getty Images)

While the infamous gang has grabbed headlines in the last few months, it was on the FBI’s radar long before Obama took office in 2009.

And Obama took multiple actions against MS-13 — which dates back to 1980s Los Angeles — in an effort to reduce its U.S. footprint.

The FBI first seriously addressed the gang in 2004 by forming the MS-13 National Gang Task Force. By 2006, the group was in at least 33 states, according to FBI material at the time.

Long Island teen butchered for turning back on MS-13 pal: sister

By 2008, the year Obama was elected, MS-13’s footprint had spread to 42 states and Washington, D.C., according to the FBI. Membership estimates were as high as 10,000 and the bureau expected that to increase.

Recent acts of violence by MS-13 include four deaths in Suffolk County, New York. (Spencer Platt/Getty Images)

In an FBI fact sheet released Tuesday, the agency noted that crackdown efforts in 2009 and 2010 — Obama’s first two years in office — helped push back MS-13’s influence.

Members of the gang were as brazen then as they have been in recent years.

In November 2009, an arrested member told cops that leaders back in El Salvador ordered a hit on the Immigration and Customs Enforcement officer overseeing the New York crackdown.

MS-13 gang forced woman into sham marriage in ‘black widow’ plot

The Department of Treasury labeled the street gang an international criminal group in 2012, and sanctioned six El Salvadoran leaders the following year.

President Trump said the growth of MS-13 was because of President Obama's immigration policies. (MICHAEL REYNOLDS/EPA)

The goal was to freeze out profits the gang made from human traffic and drug smuggling, the Treasury Department said at the time.

But activities have increased in recent years, however, as El Salvadoran leaders send representatives illegally over the border to realign its “cliques,” according to the FBI.

Last week, Fox News host Jeanine Pirro blamed the rise in MS-13 violence on the Obama administration’s 2014 decision to let Central American children seeking refuge to enter the U.S.

Suspect in slay of Virginia teen was wearing ankle monitor

“The Obama administration flew them all over,” Pirro claimed. “They are in your schools folks.”

President Obama's administration deported an estimated 2.5 million people between 2009 and 2015. (KEVIN LAMARQUE/REUTERS)

Obama, who deported an estimated 2.5 million people during his first seven years, announced in November 2014 that his administration was focusing on deporting criminals who’d crossed into the U.S. since that January.

Those criminals would be moved to the top of the priority list, Obama said, according to the Wall Street Journal.

“Felons, not families. Criminals, not children. Gang members, not a mom who’s working hard to provide for her kids,” Obama said. “We’ll prioritize, just like law enforcement does every day.”

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!