Barack Obama says Hillary Clinton leaked Somali photo
The Democratic White House race detoured into name-calling and accusations of "fear-mongering" Monday as Hillary Clinton scrambled to save her teetering campaign from annihilation.

The increasingly bitter duel for the nomination in advance of tonight's final debate went nuclear over a picture of Barack Obama dressed in traditional African garments making the rounds on the Internet.

Obama's team accused a "shameful" Camp Clinton of circulating the photo of Obama dressed as a Somali elder, taken during a visit to Africa in 2006. Obama has been dogged by false rumors that he is Muslim.

The photo flap was the flash point in a bitter day of campaigning that also included:

Clinton blasting Obama as a reckless foreign policy lightweight." He wavers from seeming to believe that mediation and meetings without preconditions can solve some of the world's most intractable problems to advocating rash, unilateral military action," Clinton charged.

The two campaigns trading blows over the North American Free Trade Agreement. The policy has wiped out manufacturing jobs in Ohio, which votes along with Texas on March 4. Clinton is hanging her White House hopes on winning both states.

Complaints from Clinton's camp that the press is too tough on her. "Every time the Obama campaign [has] attacked Sen. Clinton in the worst kind of personal ways ... the press has largely applauded him," said her top spokesman, Howard Wolfson

A new CNN poll showing Clinton's once-commanding lead has evaporated. Obama now bests her in the Lone Star State, 50% to 46%. Bill Clinton has admitted his wife's campaign is toast if she loses either Texas or Ohio.

Obama's campaign manager, David Plouffe, Monday accused Camp Clinton of stooping to a new low in an increasingly desperate attempt to keep her campaign upright by circulating the photo.

"On the very day that Sen. Clinton is giving a speech about restoring respect for America in the world, her campaign has engaged in the most shameful, offensive fear-mongering we've seen from either party in this election," Plouffe said.

"It's exactly the kind of divisive politics that turns away Americans of all parties and diminishes respect for America in the world," he added.

"I know nothing about it," Clinton told an ABC affiliate in Texas. "This is in the public domain. But let's just stop and ask yourself: ‘Why are you — why is anybody concerned about this?'"

Clinton campaign manager Maggie Williams said, "If Barack Obama's campaign wants to suggest that a photo of him wearing traditional Somali clothing is divisive, they should be ashamed."

Williams noted Clinton has worn the traditional clothing of countries she has visited.

Asked if anyone in the campaign circulated the photo, Wolfson said, "No, not to my knowledge.

"Obviously, the campaign didn't sanction it and I don't know anything about it," he insisted.

The photo first appeared on the Drudge Report political Web site with a story about an e-mail purportedly from a campaign staffer saying, "Wouldn't we be seeing this [photo] on the cover of every magazine if it were [Clinton]?"

Clinton and Obama will square off today for the final time in Cleveland at 9 p.m. on MSNBC. It's her last face-to-face chance to stagger the steamrolling Obama.

msaul@nydailynews.com