Ratner foes to get Ratner bucks
They fought Atlantic Yards developer Bruce Ratner for close to a decade — and now the real estate mogul is on the hook for their legal fees.

Develop Don't Destroy Brooklyn and Prospect Heights Neighborhood Development Council will get hundreds of thousands of dollars to pay their legal eagles — a ruling that followed a rare court victory over Ratner in 2009.

That win, which forced the state to conduct a new study of the project's environmental impact, led to Supreme Court Judge Marcy Friedman’s ruling this week on the legal reimbursement.

The opposition groups said their battle against Ratner's Atlantic Yards proposal - which at one time included 16 skyscrapers, the Barclays Center, a hotel and thousands of units of housing, but now only consists of the completed arena and two pre-fab apartment buildings — cost $323,000.

A "special referee" will decide the final payment that Ratner must make.

Develop Don't Destroy Brooklyn's lead lawyer Jeffrey Baker said he felt "vindicated" by Friedman's decision.

"We prevailed and we are entitled to the fees," Baker said.

Develop Don't Destroy Brooklyn sued Ratner and the Empire State Development Corporation three times since 2006.

Atlantic Yards opponents, including Councilwoman Letitia James, fought the project for a decade. (Aeden Keffelew/CPL Media)

Initially, the group argued Ratner, along with government officials, unfairly used state laws to take control of a 22-acre plot of land off of Atlantic Ave. for the mega-development.

In the 2009 suit, opponents successful argued that Ratner and the state misrepresented the timeline to build the entire project, meaning that a new impact study was necessary.

Now necessary? Friedman said if the proper timeline had been disclosed before the Barclays Center was constructed, courts "may have favored" to block the plan.

Ratner's spokesman Joe DePlasco declined to comment.

Real estate law expert David Reiss cautioned against seeing the opponents’ victory as a big win the little guy.

"It is hard to call it a David-versus-Goliath win when Goliath is still standing and still going strong," said Reiss who teaches at Brooklyn Law School. "It is a tactical victory. The war has been lost. The arena is built."

simonew@nydailynews.com

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!