Experts, studies clash on benefits of pre-K
When it comes to his costly and ambitious plan to dramatically expand pre-school programs, Mayor de Blasio does not mince words.

Universal pre-K is "among the most effective ways to reduce income inequality," his office said in a report.

Is it?

Experts in early childhood education say enrollment in a quality preschool program has lasting benefits — not only in school, but even decades later in life.

According to three landmark studies that began in the 1960s and ‘70s, children who attend preschool are more likely to graduate high school, become homeowners, raise their own kids, have savings accounts, and own a second car than those who do not.

They also are less likely to receive welfare, abuse drugs, need special education, get arrested or spend time in prison.

Every dollar spent on pre-K results in a savings to government of $3 to $7, according to the research.

Ron Haskins, co-director of the Brookings Center on Children and Families and Budgeting, says universal pre-K is not the best use of public resources — and that the focus should be on the poor. (YouTube)

"During the pre-K years, children are developing the foundation for language in particular and their dispositions and habits," said Steven Barnett, director of the National Institute for Early Education Research at Rutgers University. "It's a period in which there's rapid growth and the child is more influenced by the environment."

It's not that the kids can't catch up later, Barnett said, "it's just more expensive to do that later."

But some experts criticize de Blasio's plan.

The three landmark studies focused on benefits to children from low-income families who had the most to gain from extra early help. The studies make the case not for universal pre-K, but for a targeted approach, said Ron Haskins, co-director of the Brookings Center on Children and Families and Budgeting.

"Universal pre-K is not a wise use of public resources," he said.

"Invest (government dollars) where they're most needed and that's with low-income kids. (This) is going to waste a lot of money on families that don't need it."

Hirokazu Yoshikawa, a researcher at New York University, has found that the benefits to middle-class children in universal pre-K outweigh the costs. (Tom Kates)

Haskins said there should be "some kind of sliding fee scale" so government is not paying for services that middle-class families can afford to pay themselves.

But backers of the universal approach argue the only way to ensure low-income children receive pre-K is to extend free early childhood education to middle-class kids.

"The public doesn't seem willing to support quality education if it's just for poor kids," Barnett said. "Head Start started in 1965; it still doesn't serve more than half the kids in poverty."

Supporters of universal pre-K also say the benefits to the low-income children increase when they are in classes with middle-class kids.

"Poor kids actually learn more if they're in programs with kids who aren't poor," Barnett said. "Kids do learn from each other, not just from the teacher."

A study by Hirokazu Yoshikawa, a researcher at New York University, found that benefits to middle-class children outweighed the costs of providing the service.

Hirokazu Yoshikawa, a researcher at New York University, has found that the benefits to middle-class children in universal pre-K outweigh the costs.

"However," he said, "children from low-income backgrounds benefit more."

Conservative critics of universal pre-K cite the 2002-06 Head Start Impact Study, which tracked 5,000 3- and 4-year-olds through third grade. By that time, according to the study, any test-score gains from the federally funded pre-K program for low-income kids had vanished. There was virtually no difference between kids who had been enrolled in a Head Start program and those who had not.

But other research shows that even when short-term benefits on tests fade, long-term benefits such as lower arrest rates linger. In the long-term, kids who attended Head Start programs were less likely to be unemployed or out of school, those studies showed.

There are "long-term effects on societal outcomes such as high-school graduation, years of education completed, earnings, and reduced crime and teen pregnancy, even after test-score effects decline to zero," Yoshikawa testified at a U.S. Senate hearing this month.

The piece of de Blasio's plan without research to back it up, experts said, is his contention that full-day pre-K is better than half-day.

"There isn't much great research on half day versus full day," said Yoshikawa. "A strong argument for full day is that half day doesn't meet needs of working families. Even with full day, there are needs for wrap-around childcare."

Barnett agrees that pre-K can be used to give the poor a better chance at life. "I think education is the most effective way to address economic inequality. And the biggest bang for your buck is at the pre-k level," he said.

William Gormley, professor of public policy at Georgetown University, says, "I don't believe there are silver bullets. But pre-K is like the lead-off hitter in baseball. The role of the lead-off hitter is to get on base and lay a foundation for what everyone else on the team does. That's what a good early childhood education program can do."

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!