Catholic priest NOT among three beheaded on video by Syrian rebels, says head friar Father Francois Mourad is not among the three gruesomely decapitated by Syrian rebels in the village of Gassanieh. A friar overseeing the Franciscans in the Middle East said Mourad had been fatally shot by rebels.

Friar Pierbattista Pizzaballa, head of the Franciscan Custody of the Holy Land, said Father Francois Mourad was killed and buried June 23 by gunshots and was not beheaded.

A Catholic priest was not among three men graphically filmed being beheaded in Syria last week a friar overseeing the Franciscans in the Middle East has told CNN.

Father Francois Mourad, a Syrian originally named as victim of a merciless mob, was instead shot eight times on June 23 when a group of rebels stormed his monastery, said Friar Pierbattista Pizzaballa, head of the Franciscan Custody of the Holy Land. He was buried that same day.

On Monday disturbing video allegedly capturing Mourad's supposed slaughter in broad daylight among two others in the village of Gassanieh was published online, leading to the Vatican's same-day confirmation of his martyrdom by the hands of jihadists on the 23rd.

Mourad's attackers were said to have killed him for collaborating with President Bashar Assar's regime.

RELATED: SYRIAN TERRORISTS BEHEAD CATHOLIC PRIEST

liveleak.com

Pizzaballa and The Custody initially denied reports of his death as well as any other monk's in a statement released five days later June 28.

"The monks in the region are all still alive," Pizzaballa allegedly told religious information service SIR while additionally publishing the following statement on its website:

"The Custody denies news stories that claim that three Franciscan friars have been killed in Syria in the last forty-eight hours.

"The Custody keeps itself as informed as circumstances allow of the events in Syria and of the news of its friars who are still present there. Having received news today, Friday the 28th of June, at noon it vigorously denies these stories."

RELATED: EGYPT’S MILITARY ISSUES 48-HOUR ULTIMATUM FOR MORSI

liveleak.com

Pizzaballa on Tuesday worked to set things straight while primarily tackling the way Mourad was identified in the heinous video.

"I deny this vigorously, he has nothing to do with this video and with these three poor persons," he told CNN. "We regret what happened. We condemn any kind of violence from all sides."

Pizzaballa, who said he watched the disturbing video himself, called it "shameful."

According to the original press release by the Vatican, local sources said Mourad's convent was ambushed by militants linked to the jihadi group, Jabhat al-Nusra - an Islamist terrorist organization linked to al-Qaeda in Iraq according to the U.S. government.

RELATED: SYRIAN CAPITAL ROCKED BY SUICIDE BOMBERS

liveleak.com

"Lately, father Murad sent me some messages that clearly showed how conscious he was of living in a dangerous situation, and offered his life for peace in Syria and around the world," Archbishop Jacques Behnan Hindo, titular of the Syrian Catholic Archeparchy in Hassaké-Nisibis reported to Fides News Agency on Monday.

According to the Vatican, Murad traveled to the area after becoming an ordained priest to help construct a coenobitic monastery dedicated to St. Simon Stylites in the village of Gassanieh.

"After the start of the Civil War, the monastery of St. Simon had been bombed and Fr. Murad had moved to the convent of The Custody for safety reasons and to give support to the remaining few, along with another religious and nuns of the Rosary," the release read.

ngolgowski@nydailynews.com

Warning graphic video: Daily News censors brutal beheadings in Syria

On a mobile device? Watch the video here