Sheldon Silver says, 'I'm sorry'
ALBANY — Facing growing pressure to resign his leadership post, Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver on Monday for the first time publicly said “I’m sorry” for helping to cover up the Vito Lopez sexual harassment scandal.

Silver said he was wrong to cut a secret settlement deal with two women who accused the now-former assemblyman of sexual harassment rather than follow Assembly rules by immediately referring the matter to an ethics committee.

“That I allowed this system to be bypassed . . . even though I believed I was acting in good faith, was a failure on my part and now that we know the atrociousness of the misconduct, it only makes the failure more glaring,” he said at a news conference.

“I accept the criticism and deeply regret not referring the original complaint to the Assembly’s Ethics and Guidance Committee, and for this I am sorry.”

Not long after the secret $103,000 settlement, Lopez went on to harass at least two other women, according to two investigations released last week. The investigations found that Lopez had sexually tormented at least eight female staffers.

Silver said “the degradation and emotional duress endured” by Lopez’s victims “weigh heavily on me.”

In making his mea culpa, Silver announced reforms in how the Assembly handles sexual harassment allegations. One change would prohibit secret settlements; another will create an independent investigator to handle claims.

Lopez, a Brooklyn Democrat, resigned from the Assembly on Monday.

Now in his 20th year as speaker, Silver (D-Manhattan) said he has given no thought to resigning his leadership post despite calls by Republicans and newspaper editorial boards that he step down.

On Monday, a Buffalo-area assemblyman became the first Democrat to break ranks by calling on Silver to surrender his speakership.

“I cannot be complicit anymore,” said Assemblyman Michael Kearns, who took office in September and voted against Silver as speaker in January.

“That’s the problem in Albany. It’s easy to go along and get along. I’m not going along anymore.”

Shortly after, four Republican assemblywomen issued a statement calling on the Democrats to replace Silver with “someone untarnished by the corrupt culture of Albany and who will not tolerate abuses toward women.”

Before his public apology, Silver met privately with Democratic members for the first time since the two investigations were released last week — one by a special prosecutor, the other by the ethics panel — ripping him for his handling of the Lopez matter.

Several Assembly members described the closed-door meeting as “tense and angry” at times, with several veteran female Democrats lacing into him.

“He was clearly taken aback,” said one legislator.

After the meeting, Silver issued his public apology flanked by more than two dozen Assembly Democrats.

He announced he had quietly formed a bipartisan task force in recent weeks to make recommendations on how to improve the Assembly’s sexual harassment policies.

But he said he already decided to create an investigator who would be independent of the speaker’s office to handle all harassment complaints in the future.

He also announced a new policy requiring sanctions for any lawmaker or supervisory staffer who does not report an allegation of sexual harassment. And he said he will sponsor a bill to ban all state agencies and public authorities from entering into confidential settlements.

“The responsibility for the mistakes that were made in the handling of the original complaints rests solely with me, and it is my responsibility to ensure that those mistakes are never made again,” he said.

Silver also emphasized that both of the investigations released last week cleared him of any criminal wrongdoing.

At least one of Silver’s members was upset that the full Assembly wasn’t notified sooner of the task force or the changes Silver would be seeking.

“When you set up a secret panel that comes out with preordained conclusions, it’s not necessarily a sign things are changing,” the legislator said. “He did what the always does: just enough to maintain his power.”

Silver did get another lifeline from Gov. Cuomo, who again refused to join the chorus of those seeking his ouster.

“People say, ‘I think the speaker should resign for the way he handled it,’ ” Cuomo said. “I say, ‘I don’t.’ . . . I believe the speaker mishandled the complaint and the situation. It is different, however, than what Vito Lopez did, which was actually be the person who is abusing women.”

Both Silver detractors and supporters said he has enough support to keep his job.

Assemblywoman Catherine Nolan (D-Queens) said she was satisfied with Silver’s remarks. “He admitted he made mistakes,” Nolan said. “He apologized and I thought it was sincere apology.”

But some critics were wary, saying they’ve heard Silver make such promises before.

In 2001, a legislative staffer accused Silver’s then-chief counsel, Michael Boxley, of rape.

Silver initially put out a statement backing Boxley, who denied the charge. An internal Assembly investigation was inconclusive, and the victim never filed a criminal complaint. Two years later, however, another legislative aide accused Boxley of rape. Boxley later pleaded guilty to sexual misconduct, a misdemeanor.

In 2008, when facing a rare primary challenge, Silver expressed “tremendous anguish” over the episode.

“I am deeply dedicated to ensuring that every woman in this state feels safe, and have devoted much of my career to protecting the rights of victims of sexual abuse, strengthening laws against rape and sexual violence, and providing resources for the treatment of survivors,” he said then.

But he did not use the words, “I’m sorry.”

Kearns said he believes most Democrats are afraid of taking on the powerful Silver for fear of losing perks like staff, committee chairmanships and the ability to move legislation.

“This is your career. . . . The speaker controls everything top down, we know what,” he said.

Kearns argued Silver had had since August — when the Lopez matter became public — to come up with reforms but did nothing until this week.

Silver said he was waiting for the state ethics commission and the special prosecutor — Staten Island District Attorney Daniel Donovan — to conclude their investigations.

Of Kearns’ departure from the conference, Silver spokesman Michael Whyland noted Kearns ran on a Republican line last year.

“Two members left the Democratic conference today,” Whyland said, “Vito Lopez and Mickey Kearns. One was a closet harasser, one a closet Republican. Neither one will be missed.”

With Glenn Blain

Sign up for BREAKING NEWS Emails privacy policy Thanks for subscribing!