Faso Says He’d Back Increasing Age For Gun Purchases
Republican Rep. John Faso in a radio interview on Friday said he would support legislation that would increase the age to purchase a firearm to 21 in the wake of a high school shooting in Florida that killed 17 people.

At the same time, Faso said in the interview on “Focus On The State Capitol” with Fred Dicker that he would support bolstering background checks and “hardening” schools to provide more security.

“Nothing here is perfect, but I do think given the emotional immaturity of many young men in particular at that point in their lives, 18, 19, 20, that that is a reasonable response to this,” Faso said. “I think we should make sure whatever we do is done with careful deliberation so that we understand the rights and liberties of individuals with public safety.”

It is illegal to sell a handgun to someone under the age of 21, but those over age 18 can purchase shotguns and rifles. The shooter at Marjory Stoneman Douglas Highschool is 19.

Florida Gov. Rick Scott, a Republican, backed a proposal on Friday to increase the age of firearm purchases to 21 as well as school security measures and increased safeguards on background checks to bar mentally ill people from buying a gun.

Raising the age of firearm purchases is not a guarantee as some gun-rights supporters would raise questions over whether it’s fair to do so given the minimum age to serve in the military is 18. Republicans, who control the White House and both houses of Congress, have been traditionally opposed to gun control legislation.

Nevertheless, the outcry after the Florida shooting has pushed some GOP lawmakers to be open to new legislation. Faso, a freshman elected in 2016, is seeking re-election in the competitive 19th congressional district in the Hudson Valley.

In the interview, Faso was skeptical outright bans on certain weapons would not work.

“There was already a ban on so-called assault weapons,” he said. “It was tried and was shown to not have been effective.”