Sketches of the Seven Nixon Aides Indicted by the Watergate Grand Jury
John Newton Mitchell

The champion of law and order in the Nixon Administration when he was Attorney General ... In addition to his indictment today, he is on trial in New York City, charged with trying to impede a Federal investigation in return for a secret $200,000 campaign contribution to Mr. Nixon from the fugitive financier Robert L. Vesco ... In March, 1972, the amply‐built pipe smoker left Justice to mastermind the President's re‐election campaign ... Three months later, two weeks after the break‐in at the Watergate, he resigned, saying his wife, Martha, had persuaded him to leave ... Now separated from his wife ... Has secluded himself in a Manhattan apartment ... Born in Detroit on Sept. 5, 1913 ... Worked his way through Fordham University and law school to wealth and prominence on Wall Street with national recognition as a specialist in municipal and state financing ... He learned politics, a friend said, “in the back rooms of statehouses arranging bond issues” ... Met Richard Nixon only a year or so before their law firms merged in 1967 ... Became Mr. Nixon's right‐hand man ... Ran Mr. Nixon's Presidential campaign in 1968 ... At the beginning of his Administration, the President called his Attorney General “my closest adviser, as you know, on all legal matters and on many other matters as wells.”

Harry Robbins Haldeman

Known as the “Prussian” ... Political philosophy falls somewhat to the right of the President ... As the White House chief of staff, he was in the strategic position of determining who should and should not be admitted to the Oval Office ... All the papers that wound up on the President's desk were first organized by him ... Credited with building a “Berlin wall” around the President ... For more than 20 years, his life moved back and forth between advertising and Nixonian politics ... First encounter with Mr. Nixon was when he volunteered to work for the Vice‐Presidential candidate in 1952 ... Has been in every Nixon campaign since, gradually assuming a larger role ... As advertising executive for J. Walter Thompson, he supervised the accounts for Walt Disney, 7‐Up and Black Flag Insect spray Born Oct. 27, 1926, in Los Angeles ... Earned degree in business administration from the University of California, Los Angeles, where he met his wife, Joanne, and his future colleague John D. Ehrlichman ... At the White House he looked like a Marine Corps drill instructor, crew‐cut, thin lips and rigid jaw, but now he has let his hair grow ... Famous for taking home movies on his history‐making trips with the President ... Prefers an evening at home with his wife and four children ... Has been living in Los Angeles since he resigned and is not working.

John Daniel Ehrlichman

Among the accomplishments he listed in “Who's Who” is the Distinguished Eagle Award from the Boy Scouts of America ... Formerly Mr. Nixon's top domestic adviser ... Now awaits trial in Los Angeles on charges he directed the White House “plumbers” unit to burglarize the office of Dr. Daniel Ellsberg's former psychiatrist ... Born in Tacoma, Wash., March 20, 1925 ... College chum of H. R. Haldeman at University of California, Los Angeles, where he also met his wife, Jeanne ... They have five children ... Graduated from Stanford Law School in 1951 ... Practiced law in Seattle with firm of Hullin, Ehrlichman, Roberts & Hodge ... Mr. Haldeman lured him into Mr. Nixon's campaign for President in 1960 ... Returned to Seattle law practice ... Worked briefly in Mr. Nixon's 1962 campaign for Governor ... Was “tour director” of 1968 campaign ... Reputation for hard‐nosed efficiency is legendary ... Combines an arch sense of humor with severe sense of duty ... A Christian Scientist who neither drinks nor smokes ... Became known as cool executor of Presidential wishes ... “He leaves no more blood on the floor than he has to,” says one colleague ... Since the powerful White House official resigned, he has been living in Seattle ... Formed an organization called Land Use Group, which specializes in giving businessmen aclvice on environmental laws.

Charles Wendell Colson

Dubbed one of the “original back room boys—the operators and brokers, the guys who fix things when they break down and do the dirty work when necessary” ... Served as special assistant to the President in charge and liaison with outside groups, and counsel to the President for four and a half years before he formed his own Washington law firm, Colson & Shapiro ... Frequently under attack in the press before Watergate for his tactics in the White House ... Examples: Feeding damaging information on Senator Joseph Tydings of Maryland to a Life reporter and orchestrating an Administration attack on George Meany ... Long experience in politics ... Served in nineteen‐fifties in Navy Department ... Was administrative assistant to Senator Leverett Saltonstall, Republican of Massachusetts ... Left to joint the law firm of Gadsby & Hannah in Boston, but maintained ties with the Republican hierarchy .. Graduated from Brown University and George Washington University Law School ... Recently reported religious conversion, saying he had found “a great inner serenity, really a new life” through Christ ... Said to be the author of the White House “enemies list” ... Charged with conspiracy yesterday by the Watergate Grand Jury for allegedly trying to cover up evidence in he Watergate burglary.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Robert Charles Mardian

Labeled a zealous conservative by many, a reactionary by some ... The son of an Armenian immigrant, born Oct. 23, 1923 ... Now a millionaire through the family's construction firm in Phoenix, Ariz ... Practiced law until 1963, when he became a vice president of a savings and loan association ... Developed his political appetite in Barry Goldwater's Presidential campaign ... Also worked to seat Ronald Reagan in the California Governor's office ... Through his friend and fellow Arizonan, Richard G. Kleindienst, he arrived in Mr. Nixon's 1968 Presidential campaign ... coordinated Republican efforts in Western States ... First Administration job was general counsel for the Department of Health, Education and Welfare ... Was the persistent apostle of Mr. Mitchell's “Southern strategy,” trying to ease the pace of school integration ... Later as Assistant Attorney General, in charge of the Internal Security Division, he pressed the Justice Department's fight against the antiwar Left ... Followed Mr. Mitchell to the campaign committee ... Was assigned to investigate the Watergate break‐in for the re‐election committee ... Charged with conspiracy yesterday by the Watergate grand jury ... He and John Mitchell suggested to John Dean, former White House counsel, that the C.I.A. be asked to provide covert funds for the original Watergate conspirators ... Now living with wife in Phoenix... They have three children.

Kenneth Wells Parkinson

Washington lawyer ... An equestrian ... Selected by the Committee for the Reelection to the President to represent it after the Watergate break‐in ... He “debriefed” people who had been before the grand jury, according to Hugh Sloan, a former campaign aide who described the lawyer's duties at the committee ... Indicted yesterday on a charge of conspiracy for allegedly operating as a conduit for hush money offers to the original Watergate conspirators from top White House officials ... Member of the Jackson, Gray & Laskey law firm here, which does a great deal of work for insurance companies ... He handles a number of small personal ininjury defense cases ... Tall, thin, with curly blond hair ... Native Washingtonian, born Sept. 13, 1927 ... Graduated from George Washington University with undergraduate and law degrees ... Law clerk to Judge David A. Pine of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia ... Active in local bar association, on its board of directors ... Member of bar association's admissions committee, which is being sued by local black lawyers for discrimination ... Also served as vice president of the Legal Aid Society and on the board of the Neighborhood Legal Service Project here ... Some colleagues observe that “he lacks street sense” but that he is an average solid lawyer.