GUN-CONTROL ACT WINS FINAL BATTLE AS G.O.P. RETREATS
WASHINGTON, Nov. 24— The Senate today passed a mandatory waiting period for the purchase of handguns after Republican opposition to the measure collapsed. It was an anti-climactic finish to seven years of Congressional battle.

The measure, the Brady bill, is the toughest gun-control bill passed by Congress since a ban on mail-order rifle sales passed in 1968, although even its supporters expect it to have only a modest impact on violent crime. It is now headed to the White House, and President Clinton said he hoped to sign it soon.

The bill had already bounced back from the dead once in recent days, when Republicans dropped a filibuster Saturday night in the face of strong public support for the measure. Then they stalled it again on Monday at its final threshold, blocking a vote on whether to adopt a House-Senate conference compromise version. 97 Empty Senate Seats

After days of personal animus and futile backroom dealing, Republicans backed down without much to show for their efforts. The bill passed without debate, with only three Senators sitting in a chamber emptied by the Thanksgiving holiday.

As Vice President Al Gore and Mark O. Hatfield, an Oregon Republican who supported the bill, watched, the two Senate leaders, Bob Dole of Kansas and George J. Mitchell of Maine, pronounced the measure adopted by unanimous consent. That is a parliamentary device allowing the leaders to pass the legislation themselves by voice vote after ascertaining that no senator would object.

"All of us are happy to have this issue behind us," Mr. Dole said. "After a long, long, hard fight, Jim Brady has won." 'Thanksgiving Present'

The bill was named for James Brady, who with his wife, Sarah, led the campaign in favor of the gun-control measure. Mr. Brady was President Ronald Reagan's press secretary when he was seriously wounded during the 1981 assassination attempt on Mr. Reagan. At a news conference after the vote, Mr. Brady raised his fist from his wheelchair and said, "It's an awfully nice Thanksgiving present for the people of America."

The Brady bill will set a waiting period of five working days to give sellers and law-enforcement officials time to check the backgrounds of prospective buyers for criminal records or mental instability. The waiting period will be lifted after five years, at which point an instant check of a buyer's background is supposed to be available nationwide by computer. The legislation will also provide states with more than $200 million to upgrade their computerized records on criminals.

"It will not by itself stop gun violence in America," Mr. Mitchell said. "It is, however, a significant, albeit a modest, step forward." Defeat for Gun Lobby

Passage of the bill represents a stinging defeat for the National Rifle Association, the gun lobby that contributes to the campaigns of scores of lawmakers. Wayne LaPierre, executive director of the N.R.A., repeated the organization's objection to the bill today, saying: "The waiting period is unfair to honest, law-abiding people. The criminals won't wait."

In the 22 states that already have such waiting periods, there has been no appreciable impact on rising violent-crime rates, although some felons wanted by the authorities have been denied guns and arrested. The bill will also have no effect on the 70 million handguns that are already on the nation's streets.

Still, law-enforcement officials say that at the very least the bill will provide a "cooling off period" that could stem crimes of passion by, for example, angry spouses and disgruntled employees. Robert T. Scully, executive director of the National Association of Police Organizations, said that by making waiting periods nationwide, people now denied guns will "not be able to run from Michigan to Ohio to buy one."

The bill had passed the House and then the Senate after an agreement that ended a Republican filibuster last week. But the version that won approval in a Senate-House conference bogged down when Senate Republicans complained that Democrats had stripped out provisions that were added as part of the agreement. In particular, Republicans were unhappy about the disappearance of two provisions to phase out the waiting period before five years.

As the struggle devolved into a grudge match between Senators Dole and Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Delaware Democratic who heads the Judiciary Committee, it appeared that Congress might not be able to pass the bill until late January at the earliest.

Mr. Mitchell, the majority leader, called on senators to return from their holiday break to vote to break the filibuster and pass the bill. Mr. Dole then offered a compromise proposal Tuesday night, but Democratic leaders continued to insist that Republicans accept the conference version, which included some earlier Republican proposals. Proposal by Dole

Mr. Dole dropped his opposition today when Mr. Mitchell agreed to let the Senate consider legislation modifying the Brady bill next year. As proposed by the Kansas Republican, the bill would make possible the phase-out of the waiting period in two years as long as the national computerized checking system reached a certain level of accuracy.

Gun-control supporters today hailed the Brady bill's passage as the first victory of many in Congress. "This is the first time since 1968 that the N.R.A. has been beaten on a major measure, but it won't be the last," predicted Representative Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of Brooklyn, the leading handgun-control advocate in the House. "Lawmakers will learn that there is life after voting against the N.R.A."

Indeed, the Brady bill is the best known of several gun-control measures moving through Congress. A $23 billion antic-rime package the Senate passed this month included a ban on the sale of handguns for juveniles and a ban on the manufacture of 19 types of military-style assault weapons. Similar assault weapon provisions have been blocked by the House in recent years, but the rising popular frustrations expressed over crime could change the equation this year.

Photo: President Clinton congratulating James Brady in the Oval Office after learning of the Senate passage of the Brady bill. At rear were Attorney General Janet Reno, Vice President Al Gore and Sarah Brady. (Associated Press)