Bush Lifts Drilling Moratorium, Prodding Congress
Congressional Republicans, who believe they have been making political headway on the drilling issue, lauded the president’s action, but the immediate reaction from the Democratic leadership was dismissive.

They accused the White House of exploiting the issue for political purposes and said the administration could take steps to accelerate exploration of tracts already available to oil companies if it was serious about boosting domestic production.

“We want oil and gas companies to drill for oil on the leases they have been given,” said Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the majority leader.

But Mr. Reid is facing an increasing uneasiness among his own senators who have talked more receptively about increased drilling in recent weeks as a result of public anger over rising gas prices. A bipartisan group of senators is trying to develop a compromise energy plan and the leaders of the Energy and Natural Resources Committee have scheduled a workshop for Thursday for lawmakers and other experts to appear and offer their ideas about how to respond to the climb in oil prices.Representative Rahm Emanuel of Illinois, the chairman of the House Democratic Caucus who was a prominent figure in the White House of President Bill Clinton, called Mr. Bush’s action “a political stunt.”

“If the president wants to lower gas prices, he should stop hosting press conferences and start taking action,” Mr. Emanuel said. “Releasing oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve and forcing oil companies to drill on the 68 million acres they already control would be a good place to start.”

The president used the Rose Garden appearance to urge Congress once again to allow exploration for oil and gas in portions of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, in Alaska, and to get behind him in efforts to expand America’s refining capacity. Tapping into currently restricted areas in Alaska could produce “roughly the equivalent of two decades of imported oil from Saudi Arabia,” Mr. Bush asserted.

Senator George Voinovich, Republican of Ohio, said that if drilling had started in the off-limits refuge area “10 years ago, when President Clinton vetoed it, and coupled it with a comprehensive energy plan, we wouldn’t be in this predicament today.” He added: “But now the chickens have come home to roost. We can afford to wait no longer.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, said the president was “deluding the American public into believing that new offshore drilling is a quick fix to $4 per gallon gasoline.” Nothing could be further from the truth, she said.

“Even if new offshore drilling were allowed off the coast of California and along the Outer Continental Shelf — which I wholly and resolutely oppose — it won’t produce oil in time to solve the gas price emergency American consumers are facing right now,” Senator Feinstein said.

Mr. Bush telegraphed his intention during his weekly radio address on Saturday, seeking to put the onus on Democrats who have opposed offshore drilling because of environmental concerns.

“One of the factors driving up high gas prices is that many of our oil deposits here in the United States have been put off-limits for exploration and production,” he said then. “Past efforts to meet the demand for oil by expanding domestic resources have been repeatedly rejected by Democrats in Congress.”