Joseph Farman, 82, Is Dead; Discovered Ozone Hole
About a year later, in October 1982, Mr. Farman collected Antarctic ozone readings so radically different from anything seen before that he assumed that his 25-year-old Dobson meters had given out. He ordered new ones. (The devices calculate ozone thickness by measuring the amount of ultraviolet radiation penetrating the atmosphere. They had been found to work best when their photographic plates and other sensitive instruments were wrapped in heavy quilts.)

The new machines produced results even more startling. “It just went haywire,” Mr. Farman said.

After a series of double- and triple-check tests, Mr. Farman and his colleagues Jonathan Shanklin and Brian Gardiner published a paper in the journal Nature in May 1985 showing that ozone levels over Antarctica had fallen by about 40 percent from 1975 to 1984. The ozone hole was no longer a theoretical possibility, as Dr. Molina and Dr. Rowland had postulated, it was a real and present danger to life on earth.

Based on the Britons’ findings, and later readings taken by American high-altitude aircraft, the Environmental Protection Agency concluded in 1986 that the increased exposure to ultraviolet radiation caused by the ozone hole could be responsible for 40 million cases of skin cancer and 800,000 cancer deaths in the United States over the next 88 years.

How NASA’s satellites missed it has been answered in various ways. In one version, the ozone hole was detected by NASA’s monitors but discarded by data-analysis computer software intended to dismiss wild anomalies. In another, NASA scientists said that the computer program only delayed their discovery of the ozone hole, and that a paper they had prepared on the phenomenon was about to be published when Nature published the British researchers’ work.

The paper by Mr. Farman and his colleagues, coupled with the research of Dr. Molina and Dr. Rowland — who with a Dutch scientist, Paul Crutzen, shared the 1995 Nobel Prize for chemistry for their ozone research — changed the international politics of environmental regulation. A treaty, the Montreal Protocol, intended to phase out the production of ozone-depleting compounds, was signed by 24 countries in 1987 and has since been ratified by almost 200.