Serge F. Kovaleski
Serge Kovaleski is an investigative reporter on the National Desk at The New York Times. Prior to rejoining the national staff, Mr. Kovaleski was a correspondent on the paper’s Culture Desk for two years and broke notable stories on the controversy over Harper Lee's new book, Prince's death from a drug overdose and art restitution advocate Ronald Lauder's own problems with the provenance of works within a Manhattan museum he co-founded. Mr. Kovaleski's return to the national staff marks his second tour on that desk. During his first tour, he covered major stories such as the Boston Marathon bombing, the Aurora, Colo., theater shooting and the complex and conflicting issues of law involved in the legalization of marijuana in states across the country.

Mr. Kovaleski was hired at the Times in July 2006 as an investigative and general assignment reporter on the Metro desk. As a member of the Metro staff, he also did investigative work for the Foreign Desk in the United Kingdom and for the National Desk in Alaska, Texas and Virginia. Mr Kovaleski served a seven-month stint on the Sports Desk, as well, reporting and writing from New York, Tennessee and Florida.

Before joining The Times, Mr. Kovaleski worked at The Washington Post, the New York Daily News, Money Magazine and The Miami News.

Mr. Kovaleski was awarded the 2009 Pulitzer Prize in the category of breaking news as part of the Metro team that covered the Eliot Spitzer prostitution scandal. In 2018, he was a Pulitzer finalist, along with other members of the paper's national staff, in the category of Breaking News for coverage of the Las Vegas massacre, the worst mass shooting in American history. Mr. Kovaleski was also a 2008 Pulitzer finalist in Breaking News for the Metro Desk's coverage of a Bronx fire that killed eight children and one adult, making it one of the deadliest residential fires in New York’s history. Mr. Kovaleski was one of the New York Times journalists awarded the 2015 Polk Award for Military Reporting for their investigation into U.S. Navy SEAL Team Six.

Born in Cape Town, South Africa, Mr. Kovaleski received a bachelor’s degree in philosophy from the College of William & Mary in 1984.