In a 11-7 Tally, the Fiscal Commission Falls Short on Votes
Co-Chairmen

Voted Yes Erskine B. Bowles A chief of staff to President Bill Clinton “Regardless of how the vote turns out, the era of deficit denial in Washington is over.”

Yes Alan K. Simpson A former Senate Republican leader from Wyoming “Whether we get two votes or 18, this baby ain't goin' away. Oh, sure, it may be buried in an unmarked grave soon, but when the votes for the budget and to extend the debt limit and the debate on that comes up in the spring, this cadaver will rise from the crypt.”

Appointed by President Obama

Yes Alice M. Rivlin A former budget director to Congress and to Mr. Clinton “I would've shifted the balance away from so many spending cuts and toward a little more revenue. I'm a little nervous about the timing of this large discretionary spending cut in 2013. But, that said, this is a very serious plan for dealing with an imminent catastrophe, and I hope it starts the Congress on a path toward a solution before it's too late.”

No Andy Stern Former president of the Service Employees International Union “The plan should better balance revenue and spending cuts ... We could do more to provide solvency to Social Security while still preserving benefits. I thought there were too many short-term cuts in health care.”

Yes David M. Cote Chief executive of Honeywell International “I don't like everything that's in this proposal, and in reality, I don't think it's big enough. And it goes nowhere near far enough to sort out our most pressing spending issue, Medicare and Medicaid. But I do know we need to start somewhere.”

Yes Ann M. Fudge Former chief executive of Young & Rubicam “I deeply support what we're trying to do in terms of tax reform. From a business standpoint, we have been hamstrung by the tax laws that we currently have in place relative to our global competitors.”

Republican Representatives

No Paul D. Ryan Republican of Wisconsin who will be chairman of the House Budget Committee “My primary concern with this plan is health care. I do not believe that this sufficiently fixes the health care problem. And guess what? Our debt problem is the health care problem.”

No Jeb Hensarling Representative of Texas who has frequently called for cutting spending and taxes. “We don't have a global expense cap here, and the cost of government is what it spends, not what it taxes. And I would say that is one of my greatest reservations of the plan, something that I'd hoped that we could have achieved.”

No Dave Camp Republican of Michigan; top Republican on the House Ways and Means Committee, which oversees tax matters. “I cannot support the proposal for two primary reasons. First, despite generally heading in the right direction on tax reform by broadening the base and lowering the rates, the proposal would impose higher taxes to cover higher spending. These tax increases would impede the economic growth we need to create jobs in this country. Second, the report fails to address the increased health care spending that would result from the new health care law.” Full release »

Republican Senators

Yes Judd Gregg Senator of New Hampshire who withdrew from consideration to be President Obama's commerce secretary. “There are no easy fixes here, so while I do not agree with all parts of the co-chairmen’s final proposal, I will support it because it represents a step forward that we urgently need.” Full release »

Yes Tom Coburn A conservative Republican from Oklahoma who is known for his efforts at thwarting expensive legislation. “The plan’s provisions to lower tax rates while creating fairness in the tax code are similar to pro-growth policies supported by President Reagan. The plan also reduces discretionary spending and takes meaningful steps to preserve Social Security. ... Still, the plan does not do nearly enough to address the crisis in health care spending.” Full release »

Yes Michael D. Crapo Republican senator of Idaho “This plan will not just avert a disaster, but help drive the kind of economic recovery we need to create jobs and spur growth.” Full release »

Democratic Representatives

Yes John M. Spratt Jr. A moderate Democratic congressman of South Carolina and chairman of the House Budget Committee “On balance, I believe that the risks of not moving this process are greater than the risks of moving it.”

No Xavier Becerra Representative of California; vice chairman of the House Democratic Caucus and a member of the Budget and Ways and Means Committees “So much of the reform, the savings, comes from programs that are essential in places like my working-class district, but not from those who, for the last 10 years, got the benefits of these massive tax earmarks.”

No Jan Schakowsky Liberal representative of Illinois who is on the Energy and Commerce Committee “I offered my own plan to achieve the goal outlined by the president to reach primary budget balance by 2015 with one very different assumption. I believe that we can do it without further eroding the middle class in America.” Full release »

Democratic Senators

Yes Kent Conrad Senator of North Dakota; chairman of the Senate Budget Committee “One of this plan’s most notable achievements is that it embraces fundamental reform of the tax code.” Full release »

No Max Baucus Senator of Montana; Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee; had a lead role on the health care law “The Deficit Commission recommendations would cut pensions for military members, lower Social Security payments, raise the retirement age and limit Medicare benefits. Cuts like that hit rural America the hardest because we proudly have more veterans and seniors than most other states.”