Can't see our content? Click here to view the email in your browser. All, Today, a judge ordered the Hillsborough County Supervisor of Elections to comply with the Scott for Florida team’s request to allow election observers -of both parties- access to the same room where the ongoing recount process is taking place, as required by Florida law. The SOE will now have to comply with the law and allow campaign observers inside the recount room. “While it is frustrating that this Supervisor of Elections chose not to follow the law until ordered to do so by a court, we are glad that our election observers now have the access they need to witness the ongoing recount. We will continue to fight to defend Florida law and uphold the will of the voters.” – Chris Hartline, Spokesman for Scott for Florida ### From: rick@rickscottpress.com

Sent: Tuesday, November 13, 2018 5:47 PM

Subject: Scott for Florida Legal Update All, Following the Scott for Florida’s request for local law enforcement to help protect the security of ballots, the Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections and the Palm Beach County Sheriff’s Department reached an agreement today to enhance security at the Supervisor’s office through the certification of the vote. Additionally, the Scott for Florida team has filed a new complaint in Hillsborough County requesting all election observers -of both parties- be provided access to the same room where the ongoing recount process is taking place. This follows the Hillsborough Supervisor of Elections not allowing observers into the recount room, which is a violation of Florida law. View the complaint HERE. “Once again, we succeeded in enhancing the protection and security of ballots- an important win for the voters of Palm Beach County. Unfortunately, we are also again having to turn to the court to force a Supervisor of Elections to follow the law and provide Floridians with the transparency they deserve. While Bill Nelson and his D.C. lawyer continue to file frivolous lawsuits attacking Florida’s laws, Senator-elect Rick Scott will remain focused on actually respecting the will of the voters.” – Chris Hartline, Spokesman for Scott for Florida ### From: rick@rickscottpress.com

Sent: Monday, November 12, 2018 5:26 PM

Subject: Scott for Florida Files Additional Complaints Against Broward and Palm Beach Supervisors All, This afternoon, the court ordered the Broward County Supervisors of Elections to follow the Scott for Florida team’s request for local law enforcement to help protect the security of ballots. Additional sheriff's deputies will be assigned to oversee enhanced security of all voting tallying devices and ballots, even when they are not in use, through the certification of the vote. “The desperate spin coming from Bill Nelson and his D.C. lawyer can’t change the facts… the Scott for Florida team requested that the security of ballots be continuously protected by law enforcement, and today, we won that. We will continue to fight to ensure the will of the voters is respected throughout the recount process.” – Chris Hartline, Spokesman for Scott for Florida ### From: rick@rickscottpress.com Sent: Sunday, November 11, 2018 3:37 PM

Subject: Scott for Florida Files Additional Complaints Against Broward and Palm Beach Supervisors Following the continued antics, failures and willful disregard of the law by Broward County Supervisor of Elections Brenda Snipes and Palm Beach County Supervisor of Elections Susan Bucher, the Scott for Florida team has filed emergency motions and complaints to protect the security of ballots and the ongoing recount process. View the complaints HERE. These filings request that FDLE and the Sheriff’s Office be required to impound and secure all voting machines, tallying devices and ballots when they are not in use until the conclusion of the recount. Considering Supervisor Snipes’ history of breaking the law by destroying ballots and Supervisor Bucher’s recent failure to follow legal requirements for reviewing ballots, these filings also request that both Supervisors be ordered to comply with all legal obligations and preserve all ballots and records connected with 2018 election. Additionally, the Scott for Florida team has filed a complaint requesting that ballots illegally counted after Saturday’s noon deadline by the Broward County Canvassing Board -a violation of state law- not be included in official returns. View the complaint HERE. “The Broward and Palm Beach County Supervisors of Elections has already demonstrated a blatant disregard for Florida’s elections laws, making it more important than ever that we continue to do everything possible to prevent fraud and ensure this recount is operated responsibly. Senator-Elect Rick Scott will continue to fight to protect the will of Florida voters.” – Chris Hartline, Spokesman for Scott for Florida ### Paid for by Rick Scott for Florida Email sent to sschwirian@scottforflorida.com by Rick Scott for Florida PO Box 3791, Tallahassee, FL 32315 Unsubscribe