With Nafta, Everyone Benefited From a Larger Economy
Eugene Beaulieu is the director of the International Economics Program at the School of Public Policy and professor of economics at the University of Calgary. He previously held the Norman Robertson Fellowship at the Department of Foreign Affairs and International Trade Canada.

As Nafta turns 20 on Jan. 1, its elder sibling, the Canada-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, which Canada pursued to secure access to an increasingly protectionist United States market, turns 25.

Both birthdays merit celebration. The Canada-U.S. pact and Nafta, which superseded it, have been incredibly successful in their key goals of expanding continental trade and investment.

Nafta facilitated an integrated North American economy, letting producers obtain and produce goods continentally and compete globally.

Trade between the three countries grew from 1/3 of their total trade in 1989, to half of their total trade today, according to Robert A Pastor in his paper "Speed Bumps, Potholes, and Roadblocks on the North American Superhighway." Moreover, while trade in North America tripled, foreign direct investment between the partners grew a staggering six times between 1994 and 2010. This success has translated into solid employment and economic growth in Canada. No wonder a recent survey found that 80 percent of Canadians support North American free trade.

But, the most significant impact of Nafta has been the integration of the North American economy in ways the architects of the agreement did not envision. Nafta was designed at a time when trade was in consumer goods; before global value chains changed trading relationships. Today, most trade is in intermediate products as part of a fragmented production process. Nafta facilitated an integrated North American economy allowing producers to obtain and produce goods continentally and compete in a globalized world. Canadian consumers have enjoyed access to quality products at lower prices.

Unfortunately, a push for further economic integration has been sidelined, principally by security concerns following 9/11. A strong case can be made that North America would benefit significantly from further integration.

Nafta should be enhanced and expanded to other countries and regions. These Nafta-plus agreements should go beyond Nafta to include local and regional government procurement, intellectual property, services and agriculture. These provisions are part of Canada’s recently announced comprehensive trade agreement with Europe.

But equally important, North American integration needs to go deeper and further than Nafta. North American economies should pursue a common external tariff, harmonized regulations, a continental energy strategy and improved labor mobility.

Nafta has worked. But we can make it work even better.



Join Opinion on Facebook and follow updates on twitter.com/roomfordebate.