Former governor touts broadband for rural locations, fields questions on political issues
Phil Bredesen, former Tennessee governor and current Democratic U.S. senatorial candidate talked about his proposed plan for rural broadband services at an event in Oak Ridge.

Phil Bredesen, former Tennessee governor and current Democratic U.S. senatorial candidate talked about his proposed plan for rural broadband services at an event in Oak Ridge.

Bredesen talked about the plan at a meeting of the East Tennessee Economic Council, which drew about 60 people.

Bredesen's plan involves enabling the Tennessee Valley Authority to provide broadband to rural areas within its “footprint,” which includes Tennessee and six other southeastern states. Bredesen said these areas have “fallen behind economically.”

“Its original DNA was about rural development,” he said of TVA.

He said President Franklin Roosevelt, who started the TVA, said the utility is not just a power company, but rather a corporation made to “raise the standard of life.”

Bredesen said he wants to “empower TVA to echo once again what it did in the 1930s and 1940s.” He also cited other large federal projects such as the interstate highway system created by President Dwight Eisenhower.

“I want our country to get back to the days when we could take on big projects,” the former governor said.

“Let's do a big project. Let's stop nibbling along the edges,” he said in a later interview.

Bredesen said TVA is already in the process of installing a fiber network for its own purposes and the organization already has the size and executive management to pull off offering broadband services.

“It takes some investment to make it work” Bredesen said during his speech. In an interview after the event, Bredesen said it will take “a lot more work” to estimate whether the program will require additional financial appropriations or whether it could manage the program with its current funds.

Bredesen also spoke at length about the need for broadband.

“Broadband connectivity is an essential utility today,” Bredesen said, comparing the internet service to electricity, phone and mail services.

He said he found it “a little odd” that Oak Ridge National Laboratory Director Thomas Zacharia has said he did not have broadband service.

In his interview, Bredesen said the program will be focusing on areas in which private providers have not stepped in to provide broadband, rather than areas like Oak Ridge, which does have private broadband providers, Comcast and AT&T, as The Oak Ridger has previously reported.

Bredesen said about 95 percent of the people in Anderson County have access to broadband services, but “there are a few people in some of the more rural areas that are lacking.”

He said in Cumberland County about half of the residents do not have broadband service; in Grainger County, 40 percent; and in Union County the percentage without broadband is 25 percent.

“These things are impediments to further economic development,” he said.

Bredesen said while Tennessee has “many successful areas,” other areas are struggling with the loss of manufacturing jobs.

“I really believe that access to this service is one of the basic infrastructure improvements we can make to help make them more competitive,” he said.

One member of the audience said the proposal will help students with completion of homework assignments and online courses.

President Donald Trump has also spoken about the issue of rural broadband access this year. During a Farm Bureau convention in Nashville, attended by some Anderson and Roane County residents, he signed an executive order easing the process to put broadband infrastructure on federal property.

The White House described the move, along with a memorandum directing the Interior Department to work on a plan to increase access to their facilities for broadband deployment, as "incremental," but the start of an effort to make progress on the issue.

“Most of this stuff is just words,” Bredesen said when asked by The Oak Ridger about Trump's actions and statements compared to his own proposal.

Bredesen is seeking the Democratic Party nomination for the U.S. Senate seat now held by Bob Corker, a Republican, as is President Trump.

Oak Ridge Council member Kelly Callison and Mike Arms, chairman of the Tennessee Valley Corridor board of directors and institutional liaisons, expressed support for Bredesen's TVA broadband proposal in interviews with The Oak Ridger after the meeting. Arms said Bredesen might get support from other rural areas in TVA's 200 counties for the proposal.

More issues

While Bredesen's speech focused on broadband, audience questions focused on other policy issues.

Arms asked about the impact on tariffs in Tennessee.

Bredesen said there were issues with international trade, including intellectual property, especially with China, but these issues require a “scalpel” rather than the dramatic action of recent tariffs.

“There's nothing good about a trade war like this,” Bredesen said, regarding its effects on various Tennessee industries such as soybeans, automobiles and Jack Daniel’s.

In response to a question by H.M. Hashemian, president of Analysis and Measurement Services Corp., about foreign policy and immigration, Bredesen listed positions on specific immigration issues.

Regarding what he called “the stuff going on at the southern border” he said, “I was not alive when we interned the Japanese in World War II, but it (current policy) just transcends anything that I've seen.

“I think it's child abuse. I'm glad we stopped doing it. I think it's going to be a huge problem to reunite all these kids with their parents that are scattered around and so on,” Bredesen said. He said he was glad a federal judge had “stepped forward” to take control of that process.

Bredesen said the country has a “moral obligation” to fix the problem of dreamers — people who entered the country illegally as children, called dreamers after the proposed Development, Relief and Education for Alien Minors Act. He said he had met some of them, and they had a stronger connection to the United States than to their native countries.

He said he does not support students attending U.S. universities if they don't plan on becoming U.S. citizens, saying people “take advantage” of American universities.

“We want them here, helping our economy and our culture and not going back to their home countries and competing with us,” he said.

He said immigration issues are more “complicated” with other cases.

“We've got a large number of undocumented immigrants. We're obviously not going to send them all back home,” he said, adding he would like to get the work visa program “fixed.”

After the meeting, Hashemian said he would like to hear more of what Bredesen has to say on foreign policy, particularly Iran.

Regarding a question on opioids, Bredesen compared the issue to the methamphetamine crisis during his own time as governor. He said the meth problem was “cut in half” when laws were enacted restricting people from buying certain drugs.

Bredesen proposed measures restricting the “front end” distribution of opioids. He also said he supported Republican Gov. Bill Haslam's legislation on the issue.

In regards to education, Bredesen said education is a state issue and he doesn't believe in a “nationalized core curriculum.”

He said he has split with his party on Supreme Court nominees and said the president had the “prerogative” of choosing judges.