Florida teachers battle bill tying teacher pay increases to student test scores
Nancy Noonan, the president of Marions United For Public Education, speaks into a megaphone during a march and protest rally at Speaker of the Florida House, Larry Cretul's office on State Road 200 in Ocala, Fla. on Thursday, April 1, 2010. Teachers, parents and students marched from the First Congregational United Church of Christ to Cretul's office to protest House Bill 7189, Senate Bill 6 and Senate Bill 2022, which threaten teacher tenure and pay. The bills have caused a statewide stir among teachers.

TALLAHASSEE _ Angry teachers have flooded Capitol phone lines, inundated lawmakers with emails and taken to the streets to protest a bill which will tie teacher pay increases to student test scores.

Teachers and education officials say the legislation, House Bill 7189, will have a detrimental impact on Florida's ability to recruit and retain teachers. Many view it as a legislative assault of the state's 175,000 tenured teachers and an attempt to wrest control from local school boards and concentrate all education decisions in Tallahassee.

The bill makes its easier to fire teachers and ties 50 percent of their pay increases to their students' test scores. It also does away with continuing contracts for teachers. Master's and doctorate degrees and years of classroom experience will no longer factor into a teacher's pay.

Rallies have been held across the state, including Ocala and Gainesville, by teachers and educators opposed to the bill.

A hearing scheduled to last eight hours Monday will give supporters and opponents an opportunity to discuss the bill before the Education Policy Council in the Florida House.

If approved by the House, Gov. Charlie Crist, who is locked in a heated Senate race, has indicated he intends to sign the bill.

On Crist's Facebook page, there are dozens of Floridians who are asking him to stop the bill.

There are no shortage of opinions, most of them negative, about the bill, which is the companion of Senate Bill 6, which was passed about a week ago.

"It's a bad bill and it attempts to move control from local school board to the Department of Education," said Andy Ford, president of the Florida Education Association.

"We are hoping someone will have the courage to buck Republican leaders who have railroaded this through," Ford said.

The fury of those opposed to the bill has surprised lawmakers. House Speaker Larry Cretul's office had to add additional telephone lines to handle the flood of calls, more than 5,200, most of whom were from people opposing the bill, said Jill Chamberlin, a spokeswoman for Cretul's office.

Thousands of emails have poured in, but Chamberlin said those have not been counted.

"They didn't expect this backlash," said Gunnar Paulson, president of the Alachua County Education Association. "I didn't expect this anger."

The bill's sponsor, Sen. John Thrasher, state Republican chairman from St. Augustine, insists the bill isn't about politics but education. Rep. John Legg, a Republican from Port Richey is the House sponsor.

"Education is about recruiting the best and the brightest to provide our children with world-class instruction that will allow them to compete and succeed in a global economy," Thrasher said in news articles published March 29 by several newspapers.

"Last year, 99.7 percent of teachers in the state earned a 'satisfactory' evaluation, yet 60 percent of our high-school students, 40 percent of our middle-school students and 30 percent of our elementary students couldn't read on grade level. Clearly there is a disconnect between how we judge the success of our teachers and what students are learning," Thrasher said, citing state Departmentn of Education statistics.

The bill has the backing and some say the fingerprints of former Gov. Jeb Bush and his Foundation for Florida's Future.

"The legislation reforms Florida's antiquated system of paying teachers based on seniority and degrees obtained and replaces it with a system that pays based on student performance," a flier to lawmakers from Bush's foundation reads.

"This is strictly a political ploy. Jeb Bush wants education to fail in Florida so it can be privatized," said Karen McCann, a Gainesville High School counselor and vice president of the Alachua County Education Association.

Chris Altobello, president of the Marion Education Association, opposes the proposed legislation.

"This is not reform, it's revenge," Altobello said. "This bill goes after the union."

The bills take away due process for teachers and "takes away teachers' rights," said Altobello, on leave from Osceola Middle School, where he taught science and served as a guidance counselor.

Jim Bice, a math teacher at P.K. Yonge in Gainesville, said although he likes some parts of the bill, there are other areas that concern him.

"I wish that this bill was a collaborative effort between educators and the legislature, but without teacher support it seems like an attempt to improve education from outside," Bice said.

"The speed at which this bill is being passed _the push seems to be coming from the Republican Party of Florida rather than constituents," he said. "It seems like a new flavor of the month for education improvement."

The bill has drawn the anger of House Democrats, who argue it will hurt the state's ability to retain and recruit high-quality teachers.

"We are trying to compete for the best nationwide, but we've made a hostile climate with this bill," said Rep. Keith Fitzgerald, a Democrat from Sarasota.

Rep. Martin Kiar, a Democrat from Davie, said the bill could be devastating to education in Florida.

"I truly think that Senate bill 6 and House bill 7189 are two of the worst bills I've seen in my years of Legislature," Kiar said, adding that he has received many calls from parents, teachers and students in opposition to the bill, but has not been contacted by anyone supporting the legislation.

Rep. Will Weatherford, chairman of the Education Policy Council, will hold a hearing on the bill Monday, said most of those who are opposed to the bill are misinformed about what it will do.

"Not a single teacher will lose a dollar if this bill passes. Not a single teacher will lose tenure if this bill passes," he said.

Excellent teachers will get merit pay increases in 2014, and their base pay will not be affected.

"There is an incredible amount of misinformation," he said.