Jeaneen Crisante owner of internet cafe not guilty of operating a gambling house
To one couple, it was a win. To the others closely watching their case, it was a triumph.

That's how it appeared in a Marion County courtroom Monday afternoon after a jury delivered a not guilty verdict in the case against an Internet cafe owner charged with violating state gambling laws.

Loud claps and cheers of “Yes!” rung out from the seats where about a dozen spectators had been watching the case against Jeaneen Crisante, 45, unfold over the past week.

She was charged with operating a gambling house, a third-degree felony, and possessing slot machines, a second-degree misdemeanor.

She and her husband, Tim, had operated Marion Internet Services on U.S. 441 for about four and a half months last year before the pair was arrested and the business forced to close.

They sold phone cards along with printing and faxing services, using electronic sweepstakes to promote the merchandise — a marketing tool the 5th Circuit State Attorney's Office is convinced was just gambling in disguise.

Following the trial, which was closely watched by other locals who have run similar businesses until they, too, were forced to close, the Crisantes walked out of the courtroom, beaming.

“We're going to see if the State Attorney gets the message,” said Kelly Mathis, the Jacksonville attorney who represented Crisante. “They [prosecutors] put on their best case and they still can't show there was a violation of criminal law.”

Indeed this was the second attempt by local prosecutors to bring an Internet cafe proprietor to trial in the past year. The first attempt ended in a mistrial last December after a circuit judge tossed the case out midway based on insufficient evidence presented by the state.

Assistant State Attorney Mark Simpson, who, along with prosecutor Jeremy Powers, has taken the lead on criminal investigations against these establishments, did not betray any tone of defeat following the verdict Monday.

“We lost the battle today, not the war,” Simpson said. “We've been in this for the long haul.”

That next battle is approaching quickly: The trial of Jeffrey Reed, the owner of Cyber Zone E Cafe who reopened his cafe after a mistrial last year, only to be rearrested, is set for December. Simpson said he expects that case to continue as planned.

“One thing I was pleased with is we really got a lot better from the first trial,” the prosecutor said. This time around, the state called expert witness Robert Sertell, a New Jersey-based gambling consultant, who contended the computers at Crisante's shop were effectively serving as slot machines.

While there are no Internet cafes currently in operation in Marion County, there are least 14 in Hernando County, three in Sumter County and four in Citrus, according to Simpson, who indicated there are some additional investigations throughout the circuit, “in the wings, waiting.”

The Crisantes, who reside in Orange County, declined to comment when asked whether they plan to reopen Marion Internet Services, which would offer free food and drinks to patrons who'd spend hours on the 75 computer terminals set up throughout the room.

Every dollar purchased on a phone card would net 100 free sweepstakes entries that could be used to play casino-style games at these computers.

While there are dozens of such businesses sprinkled throughout Florida, the cases against Reed and Crisante were the first ones to ever head to trial in the state, according to lawyers involved.

State prosecutors in Marion County have aggressively pursued these types of establishments since roughly a year ago, claiming such businesses are committing criminal acts by enabling gambling and using items like phone cards as a ruse to hook people into paying to play games with the chance to win something in return.

The owners of these stores, and their lawyers, counter that Florida's game promotion statute allows for such “sweepstakes marketing” and that nothing in state law prevents proprietors from simulating a casino-style environment for the amusement of its patrons.

“It's not against the law to simulate something else, even if you do it successfully,” Mathis said to jurors in his closing argument Monday.

But prosecutors claim Florida's game promotion statute does not offer protection to so-called Internet cafes, where, as Powers told jurors Monday, “the sweepstakes were the product” as opposed to “the byproduct” of the phone cards.

“They're trying to drive a Mack truck through an exemption that is this big,” said Simpson in his closing argument, as he formed a narrow space with his hands.

The Crisantes were formerly in the construction business and turned to commercial business ownership following the slump in that industry.

Meanwhile, a circuit judge is set to hear arguments in a non-jury trial Friday between Cyberville LLC and Internet Access Depot LLC and the Sheriff's Office.

The owners of those businesses have asked for an injunction against Sheriff Ed Dean's office from shutting down such establishments in the future.