What you need to know about the OCH health system – July 2016 « Ozarks Community Hospital
Updated 7/26/16:

By now, most of you have seen the news regarding our Springfield hospital. Some of the information circulating is incorrect, which is why we wanted to offer a few points of clarification on the recent announcement:

Due to staffing coverage, the OCH of Springfield Emergency Room will only be open until 6:00 am on Wednesday, July 27. After that, it will be closed. If patients have a medical emergency starting 6:00 am on Wednesday, July 27, please call 911 or visit a Springfield ER nearby: Cox North ER – 1423 Jefferson Ave Mercy ER – 1235 E. Cherokee Street Cox South ER – 3801 S. National

Our Springfield clinic campus (2828 N. National) remains open. We are not closing our doors. As of Monday, August 1, the main entrance on the Springfield clinic campus (previously ER entrance) will be open 6:00 am to 6:00 pm Monday through Friday.

Services affected by this change include our Springfield emergency department (which will remain open until midnight on July 29), our Springfield inpatient services unit, and our Springfield OR.

All OCH facilities continue to welcome Medicaid, Medicare and Tricare insurances, as well as many other insurances.

The OCH health system includes the following clinics: OCH Primary Care Clinic (2828 N. National), OCH Medical Offices Clinic (2828 N. National), OCH Northside Behavioral Medicine Clinic (2828 N. National), OCH Evergreen Clinic (1540 E. Evergreen); as well as OCH Christian County Clinic (Nixa), OCH Sparta Clinic (Sparta), OCH Webster County County Clinic (Rogersville), OCH Wellpointe Family Medical Clinic (Marshfield), OCH Lawrence County Clinic (Mt. Vernon), OCH Polk County Clinic (Bolivar), OCH Jasper County Clinic – Carthage Campus (Carthage), OCH Noel Clinic (Noel), OCH Gravette Clinic (Gravette, Ark.). Our health system also includes a hospital in Gravette, Arkansas.

All facilities listed above remain open and can accept new patients. For contact information, visit www.OCHonline.com.

Thank you to each of our employees and physicians who have selflessly helped us carry out our mission for the past 15 years. You are the lifeblood of our organization and we are heartbroken by this news. No matter what, our mission still remains our driving force. What has occurred does not dampen our spirit. We are grieving this unexpected change, but we remain dedicated to finding ways to provide access to care for those who need it most. ###

Tags: CMS, layoffs, OCH clinics, och closing doors, Ozarks Community Hospital, springfield hospital