anaheim, rail, speed, high, billion - News - OCRegister.com
These icons link to social bookmarking sites where you can share this story and discover new Web pages.

FINAL APPROACH: A Metrolink train arrives at a crowded station in Anaheim. Funds for a high-speed rail could come from stimulus package President Barack Obama is expected to sign.

The Orange County Register

Anaheim's two high-speed rail projects could get a funding boost if President Barack Obama signs the $787 billion stimulus package today.

Included in the stimulus package is $8 billion for high-speed rail projects, added by Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., according to Register reports. Anaheim has two rail projects on the burner. One is a train that would travel from Anaheim to San Francisco, and the other would travel from Anaheim to Las Vegas.

The Maglev (magnetic levitation) train would travel the 269 miles from Anaheim to Las Vegas. Another planned high-speed rail line, costing about $40 billion, would take passengers from Anaheim to San Francisco. Both lines could be eligible for some of the $8 billion in the stimulus package.

Darrell Johnson, director of rail programs for Orange County Transportation Authority, said the federal money targeted for local transportation projects is reason to be optimistic that projects such as the high-speed rail line connecting Anaheim to San Francisco will finally be built.

"We're very excited at OCTA about the potential of moving that project forward," he said. "We've spent about $7 million on environmental clearance for the line between Anaheim and Los Angeles. The high-speed rail concept has been around since the early '90s and I think we're now in a good position to make this a real project."

A high-speed train carrying passengers from Anaheim to Los Angeles in about 20 minutes could be a reality as soon as 2015, Johnson said, marking the first leg of the line connecting Anaheim to San Francisco.

"This would be the gateway to the rest of the state without having to get into your car or deal with our already congested airports," Johnson said.

A high-speed rail to Anaheim is a long-term investment, but one that could eventually pay big dividends for Anaheim and the region, said Elaine Cali, vice president of the Anaheim/Orange County Visitor and Convention Bureau.

"We feel that it would provide California and certainly Anaheim with a tremendous selling tool," she said. "It would provide easy and affordable access to the Anaheim area for visitors coming here for leisure or business travel. This would give us a competitive edge."

The high-speed rail line also would create jobs, Cali said.

Anaheim also is in the process of creating the Anaheim Regional Transportation Intermodal Center, or ARTIC. Once it's finished, the 16-acre center south of the Honda Center will have expanded Metrolink service, California high-speed rail, bus rapid transit, traditional bus service and a guideway system to serve different city venues such as the resort.

Anaheim mayor and OCTA board member Curt Pringle said he's encouraged that the stimulus bill could include money to move high-speed rail projects forward, though he is still awaiting details.

"There will be varying viewpoints about the stimulus package, but to the point that it affects us and provides additional funding for high-speed rail, we'll take advantage of it," said Pringle, who also is on the California High-Speed Rail Authority overseeing rail development in the state.

After years of planning, he said, including pushing forward plans for ARTIC and seeking environmental clearances for the Anaheim to Los Angeles segment of the high-speed rail line, local agencies have been put in line for receiving funding.

"A lot of pieces have come together," Pringle said. "We're in a very strong place now to say 'We're ready to go.' "

Pringle said he knows there will be critics who say the money should be spent for more immediate needs.

"There will always be opposition to any project," Pringle said. "But we also are elected to focus on the big ideas that affect the people we serve. High-speed rail is a big idea. We need to look beyond just planning for this year's budget; we need to plan for our future."

The bill also includes

•$2.6 billion in highway money;

•$1 billion in transit money;

•$1.6 billion in Title I education money for children in poor neighborhoods, and

•an estimated $10 billion to help pay for medical needs.