Disneyland and Disney California Adventure's attendance goes up; Universal gaining ground
In its second full year since a billion-dollar investment that included the creation of the immediately popular Cars Land, Disney California Adventure continues to see dividends on the investment as the once-troubled sister theme park to Disneyland again posted strong attendance.

More than 8.7 million people visited California Adventure in 2014, up 255,000 visitors, or 3 percent, from the previous year, according to the Themed Entertainment Association.

Theme parks don’t generally release attendance, but the association’s annual numbers are widely accepted. The figures were released Wednesday.

California Adventure maintained its rank as the 10th-most-attended park in the world. In 2011, the last full year without the massive upgrades, the park, which opened in 2001, had 6.3 million guests.

Meanwhile, 16.7 million people visited Disneyland in 2014, a 3.5 percent increase, or about 550,000 more visitors. Globally, Disneyland ranks No. 3.

Walt Disney World’s Magic Kingdom, with 19.3 million visitors, remains the world leader.

“Disney has such a rich content base to draw from,” said John Robinett, senior vice president of economics for AECOM, which produces the association’s annual report. “Disney also has deep pockets to fund major investment and re-investment in attractions.”

Regarding California Adventure’s re-tooling, Robinett said Disney officials were able to “create unique, compelling attractions, and they’ve gotten a good return for their investments.”

Globally, theme park attendance was up 4 percent, the fifth consecutive year of growth, according to AECOM.

Universal Studios parks in Japan, Orlando, Fla., and Hollywood showed the most dramatic year-over-year growth, increasing attendance by double-digit percentage points.

Universal Studios Hollywood increased by 11 percent, seeing 700,000 more visitors.

“Universal Studios Hollywood enjoyed a banner year with our best attendance ever in 2014,” said Larry Kurzweil, president and chief operating officer of the park, in an email.

“This incredible achievement is due in large part to the success and popularity of our adventure ride, Despicable Me: Minion Mayhem and the ongoing success of such break-through attractions as Transformers: The Ride – 3D as part of our continued transformation,” Kurzweil said.

Knott’s Berry Farm’s attendance remained the same, at 3.6 million visitors.

Attendance at Sea World in San Diego, still reeling from the “Blackfish” controversy, dropped 12 percent. The documentary, released in 2013, focuses on Sea World parks capturing and training orcas.

Meanwhile, Six Flags Magic Mountain decreased by 2 percent.

As the popularity of theme parks rises, the public should expect to see more competition among theme parks, better attractions and higher admission prices, said Bob Rogers, founder and chief creative officer of Burbank-based BRC Imagination Art.

Rogers, who has worked in the theme-park industry for more than three decades, said to consider how far theme parks have come since the opening of Disneyland 60 years ago this summer.

“When Disneyland opened, there wasn’t one single thrill ride,” Rogers said. “It wasn’t until the Matterhorn (Bobsleds) in 1959.

“Then Knott’s one upped them with the Calico Mine Ride a year later, which was the best dark ride on the planet until 1967 when Disney opened the Pirates of the Caribbean,” he said.

Rogers points to Universal Studios Orlando and Japan parks’ “The Wizarding World of Harry Potter” and how that land has “set the bar,” inspiring designers to try to top it.

“It becomes a self-feeding thing,” Rogers said. “The public wants better attractions. Designers provide the attractions.”

Contact the writer: 714-704-3764 or jpimentel@ocregister.com On Twitter: @OCDisney