Leader Cantor Delivers Remarks In Support Of The Keep The IRS Off Your Health Care Act
Today, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor spoke on the House floor in support of H.R. 2009, the Keep the IRS Off Your Healthcare Act.

“Mr. Speaker, I rise today to support the Keep the IRS Off Your Health Care Act. And I want to congratulate the gentleman from Georgia in his leadership in bringing this bill to the floor. I think, not only a timely bill, but a bill that is essential to the health and wellbeing of all Americans.

“Mr. Speaker, in response to the gentleman’s assertions, the prior gentleman who spoke from New Jersey, I would simply say those scare tactics do not have a place in legitimate debate on this floor. Scare tactics to say that somehow Republicans on our side of the aisle don’t care about people's health care is just not true.

"We don’t believe in omnibus, Washington-engineered health care. That’s what’s going on here. Washington bureaucrats deciding what kind of health care you can have, which doctors you can see, how much those doctors and hospitals are going to get paid, how the insurance companies have to act. All of that is in the hands of Washington bureaucrats under ObamaCare – which is why this law is suffering so much in terms of the minds of the public.

"This is not the right way to go. We believe in patient-centered care. Republicans believe that it ought to be about the doctor-patient relationship not between the bureaucrats and the doctors. It ought not be about the bureaucrats and the insurance companies. It ought to start with the patients and their families. So these scare tactics really are not relevant to this discussion and they are just that: scare tactics. We care about the health and well-being of the American people which is why this bill is coming to the floor.

“Recently, we have learned that the IRS has been abusing its power by targeting and punishing American citizens for their political beliefs and then recklessly spending tax dollars on lavish conferences and bonuses for its employees. This kind of government abuse must stop. The last thing we should do now is to allow the IRS to play such a central role in our health care.

“The IRS has a role in nearly 50 different aspects of ObamaCare. The agency’s involvement is so extensive that there is a designated office within the IRS just to implement ObamaCare. The IRS will have access to the American people’s protected health care information. Given that this same agency has illegally disclosed protected taxpayer information, the privacy concerns raised by many are legitimate. This is nothing short of an unwelcome, big government overreach into the most personal aspect of our lives.

“ObamaCare is bad for the economy and for working middle class families. It increases costs, impedes innovation, and we know is now turning full-time jobs into part-time jobs, which is why so many on both sides of the political spectrum are now beginning to realize – in the words of three democratic union leaders, that this law is creating “nightmare scenarios” in the health and well-being of millions of hardworking Americans.

“The legislation before us today will at least prevent the unnecessary intrusion of the IRS into our health care.

“Members of both parties should be focused on removing the federal bureaucracy from the everyday lives of the American people and this Act will do just that.