One NJ Releases 1st Television Commercial Highlighting the Real Story Behind Christie’s Record
Fact: NJ Is Falling Further Behind

(NEW JERSEY) – Tomorrow, One New Jersey is going up with its first television commercial to help people learn about the real story in New Jersey. The spot will run as a six-figure, state-wide cable buy for the next few weeks, and is being supplemented by a robust online ad buy.

You can view the :30 second spot – entitled “Real” – at OneNewJersey.org/Real.

“Governor Christie touted a Jersey Comeback. But, contrary to his claims, we’re clearly falling behind,” said Joshua Henne, spokesman for One New Jersey. “Our first commercial seeks to serve as a wake-up call to Trenton that there’s a huge gulf between the rhetoric being espoused and the reality on the ground. The sad truth is that New Jersey is falling further and further back due to the wrong-headed policies and misplaced priorities of the past few years. No amount of hype or hyperbole can hide the fact that middle-class and working families are hurting, while millionaires and powerful interests get special treatment – and New Jersey ends up worse-off, as a result.”

The facts speak for themselves. Over the past few years, New Jersey has consistently trailed the rest of America when it comes to jobs. In fact, under Christie and his policies, the state’s unemployment rate reached its widest distance from the national average since the 1970s. Right now, New Jersey has the country’s 7th highest unemployment and is the worst state in the region when it comes to joblessness.

While Christie’s policies have surely warmed the hearts of right-wing think tanks, they’ve had a chilling effect on New Jersey’s families. Protecting tax cuts for multi-millionaires, but vetoing an increase to the minimum wage reveals a backwards set of priorities. Property taxes skyrocketed some 20% on Christie’s watch, while services are slashed. Fiscal pain is pushed along to municipalities, while local residents are paying more and receiving less from local government. New Jersey also became home to the 2nd highest percentage of mortgage loans in foreclosure in America, even though rates nationally are falling to their lowest levels since 2008.

Since launching in the Summer of 2011, One New Jersey consistently shines a light on those policies striking against the best interests of New Jersey residents. One New Jersey is also exposing efforts to divide the state and its people for political gain. Along those lines, One New Jersey has written op-eds and offered commentary on a whole host of issues – including economic failures, broken promises on jobs, regressive policies and New Jersey’s chronic unemployment. A true “Jersey Comeback” would, indeed, be a great thing. Unfortunately, that’s not the real story, as the facts prove otherwise.

One New Jersey is an independent 501(c) 4 advocacy organization that monitors policy positions and actions of elected officials and brings to light their records on the issues that matter to New Jersey’s middle-class and working families. You can follow @OneNJ on Twitter and search for “One New Jersey” on Facebook.

* * * * *

Title: “Real”

Format: 30-second TV

Paid for by: One New Jersey

Date: April 9, 2013

“REAL” SCRIPT

It’s not just statistics. It’s real lives.

Under Republican Chris Christie New Jersey had the highest increase in unemployment in the country last year.

Nearly one in ten jobless.

The worst unemployment in the region.

Near the bottom in economic growth.

Yet Christie protected a tax cut for millionaires but vetoed a minimum wage hike.

The real story of New Jersey under Republican Governor Chris Christie?

We’re falling behind.

“REAL” BACKUP

“Under Republican Chris Christie New Jersey had the highest increase in unemployment in the country last year.”

New Jersey Had Highest Unemployment Increase from December 2011 to 2012: From December 2011 to December 2012, New Jersey was tied with New Hampshire for having the highest unemployment increase according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The unemployment rate increased in New Jersey from 9.2% in December 2011 to 9.5% in December 2012, a 0.3% increase. Data is summarized below:

Rank State 12/11 12/12 % Change

48 WEST VIRGINIA 7.3 7.4 0.1

49 PENNSYLVANIA 7.7 7.9 0.2

50 NEW HAMPSHIRE 5.4 5.7 0.3

50 NEW JERSEY 9.2 9.5 0.3

(U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Over-the-Year Change in Unemployment Rates for States,” http://www.bls.gov/web/laus/laumstch.htm)

- – - – - – - – - -

“Nearly one in ten jobless.”

New Jersey Had 9.5% Unemployment Rate in January 2013: As of January 2013, New Jersey had a 9.5% unemployment rate, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics.

(U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Over-the-Year Change in Unemployment Rates for States,” http://www.bls.gov/web/laus/laumstch.htm)

- – - – - – - – - -

“The worst unemployment in the region.”

New Jersey Had Fourth Highest Unemployment Rate in Nation – 9.5% – in January 2013: As of January 2013, New Jersey’s 9.5% unemployment rate was the fourth highest unemployment rate in the nation, according to the latest state statistics available from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. New Jersey was tied with North Carolina with fourth highest unemployment rate, while California and Rhode Island had the highest rates, and Nevada having the third highest. The latest unemployment data is summarized in the table below:

Rank State 01/12 01/13 % Change

1 CALIFORNIA 11 9.8 -1.2

1 RHODE ISLAND 10.8 9.8 -1

3 NEVADA 12 9.7 -2.3

4 NEW JERSEY 9.2 9.5 0.3

4 NORTH CAROLINA 9.6 9.5 -0.1

(U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Over-the-Year Change in Unemployment Rates for States,” http://www.bls.gov/web/laus/laumstch.htm)

- – - – - – - – - -

“Near the bottom in economic growth.”

U.S. Department of Economic Analysis Ranked New Jersey 47th in Economic Growth in 2011: In June 2012, the U.S. Department of Economic Analysis issued a report on state economic growth for 2011 that ranked New Jersey as 47th in economic growth out of all 50 states. The department reported that New Jersey has lost 0.5% is its real GDP from 2010 to 2011.

(U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Widespread Economic Growth Across States In 2011,” June 5, 2011)

- – - – - – - – - -

“Yet Christie protected a tax cut for millionaires but vetoed a minimum wage hike.”

Christie Conditionally Vetoed Minimum Wage Increase (2013): In January 2013, Christie vetoed minimum wage increase. Reuters reported: “New Jersey’s Republican Governor Chris Christie on Monday conditionally vetoed legislation that would increase the state’s minimum wage to $8.50 per hour from $7.25 and tie it to the consumer price index.”

(Reuters, “Chris Christie Vetoes Minimum Wage Increase, Proposes Smaller One,” January 28, 2013)

Vetoed Millionaire Tax (2010): In June 2010, Christie vetoed a tax passed by the legislature, referred to as the “millionaire tax.” The tax would have restored previously expired higher income taxes on residents making over $1 million annually, while temporarily freezing or decreasing taxes paid by seniors or low income families. High income earners would have been taxed at 10.75% instead of 8.97% for a period of one year. The previous tax had expired on December 31. The tax was meant to provide property tax rebates and healthcare benefits to seniors. In explaining his veto, Christie claimed that taxing the wealthy caused them to leave the state.

(The Star-Ledger, “Showdown in Trenton over millionaires tax, Democrats pass bills on income surcharge, and Christie quickly vetoes them,” May 10, 2010)

Vetoed Second Attempt to Increase Millionaire’s Tax Included In Legislature’s 2012 Budget (2011): In 2011, Christie vetoed increasing the millionaire’s tax, which was in the legislature’s 2012 budget. Christie’s veto meant that income tax would not be raised from 8.97% to 10.75% for individuals with incomes of more than $1 million.

(Politifact New Jersey, “State Sen. Jim Whelan Says Gov. Chris Christie ‘Slashed School Aid In This Budget,’” http://www.politifact.com)

* * * * *

One New Jersey is shining a light on politicians who act against the best interests of New Jersey’s residents and who seek to divide our state for their own political gain. It is giving voice to the important issues that affect our daily lives. One New Jersey will closely monitor policy positions and actions of elected officials and expose their records on the issues that matter. You can follow One New Jersey on Twitter (@OneNJ) or search for “One New Jersey” on Facebook.