English (United States) Dallas Cowboy Stadium
Page Content

The Opportunity:

In 2006 Oncor was presented with a unique opportunity to partner with the Dallas Cowboys and the city of Arlington to assist in constructing a new Cowboys stadium.



The Solution:

Oncor’s team of 45 highly qualified and experienced engineers and contractors worked round-the-clock for the next three-and-a-half years to produce the most technologically advanced extensive electrical infrastructure for the 3 million square feet complex. The stadium, which is the largest domed stadium in the world, uses more power than most medium-sized cities and relies on a fully automated intelligent power grid to ensure stadium lights stay on and the scoreboard -- the largest high definition video screen in the world -- stays lit.

The stadium’s electrical infrastructure and fiber-optic communication system can power far more than just the stadium. Anticipating additional development in the area, the power grid was designed to provide electricity to high-rise buildings, hotels and other projects that may be constructed in years to come.

The Success:

Cowboys Stadium is home to the highest valued sports franchise in the history of the United States, and second in the world – falling behind United Kingdom’s Manchester United. The NFL team annually generates close to $300 million in ticket sales and merchandise.

The venue also plays host to a variety of other sports and entertainment activities such as concerts, basketball games, boxing matches, college football, high school football, soccer matches and motocross races. Annual revenue from the stadium is estimated at $350 million.



In 2011, Cowboys Stadium hosted Super Bowl XLV generated more than $600 million in economic activity for North Texas cities including Dallas, Fort Worth, Arlington and Irving.



Oncor’s Super Bowl Preparedness Committee has visited and toured past Super Bowl host cities, stadiums and electric utilities in Tampa, Miami and Houston to ensure that they are on the right track in their preparations. Oncor looks forward to ensuring exceptional reliability, security and service at the stadium and other venues throughout North Texas during Super Bowl XLV and in years to come.