Democrats make their campaign points at convention in Athens
This year's election is a choice between continued mismanagement of state government and a return to prosperity, Roy Barnes, the Democratic nominee for governor, said Saturday at the party's state convention in Athens.

Photos Back Back Next DAVID MANNING Back Next DAVID MANNING Back Next DAVID MANNING Back Next DAVID MANNING

Unless Democrats retake the reins, Atlanta could lose its status as the economic capitol of the South to cities like Charlotte, N.C., or Jacksonville, Fla., Barnes said.

"There are those times when an election really makes a difference, and this is one of those times," he said.

He compared it to 1962, when Alabama voters put segregationist Gov. George Wallace into office while Georgians elected moderate Gov. Carl Sanders. The result was that Birmingham, Ala., exploded in racial violence as Atlanta and Georgia became the region's economic engine, he said.

"Why should we let that prosperity and jobs slip away?" he said.

But that is exactly what Republicans are doing, he said.

Although Republican nominee Nathan Deal served in Congress from 1992 until earlier this year, Barnes tied him to the state Republican leaders who, he said, cut education funding, raised property taxes and let lobbyists and banks run wild.

"Nathan Deal is part of the team that brought Georgia to where we are now," Barnes said.

Deal's spokesman responded by tying Barnes to the Obama Administration.

"Roy Barnes is part of the team that has run up trillions of dollars in debt that Americans will spend years paying off, and they've done it without creating one job," Brian Robinson said.

Barnes is promising billions of dollars in new spending that will kill job growth, Robinson said.

"Georgians aren't just going to say 'no,' they're going to scream 'no,' " he said.

Democrats argued, though, that Republicans' spending cuts will lead to job losses as businesses flee an uneducated and gridlocked state. Billions of dollars in cuts to education under Republicans, Barnes said, amounts to "the greatest moral retreat that's ever been seen in our history."

"That other team wants to do away with the public school system," he said. "They want to take a voucher and give it to their kids, and they don't care about ours."

Vouchers - tax money given to parents to send their children to the school of their choice - are popular with some Republicans, but it's not an issue Deal has campaigned on. He supports more choice, charter schools and local control, but is open to vouchers only if they don't hurt public schools, Robinson said.

Barnes also criticized banks that loaned money to homeowners, then foreclosed on those homes when the economy turned sour.

"They slapped you on the back when they gave you the money, and they slapped you in the face when times got hard," he said.

Barnes said he would pass a law requiring banks to try to negotiate a payment plan with delinquent debtors before they foreclosed.

Up and down the ballot, Democratic candidates said the same thing: Republicans have mismanaged the state since taking power in 2002 and 2004, worsening an already bad recession and costing thousands of Georgians their livelihoods.

Millions of Americans are out of work, underemployed or have given up trying to find a job altogether, said state Labor Commissioner Michael Thurmond.

"The economic destiny of our nation is literally hanging in the balance," he said. "The stakes could not be higher."

Thurmond accepted his party's nomination to run against U.S. Sen. Johnny Isakson at the Classic Center, the site of a former firehouse where he once delivered vegetables with his father, an illiterate sharecropper.

"It was a special moment for me," he said.

The Athens native recalled how his father told him that one day, if he worked hard, the vegetable route could be his. Instead, Thurmond went to law school, came back and ran for a state House of Representatives seat. He won, he said, because the district mirrored the vegetable route, so all his father's old customers knew him.

Thurmond pledged to speak out on behalf of small businesses and people who've lost their jobs, lost their homes or been victims of discrimination.

"Self-serving Washington insiders have turned a deaf ear to the cries of the people," he said.