Hillary Clinton on Gun Control
arget="_blank"http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/loose.dtd">

Hillary Clinton on Gun Control

Hillary Clinton on Gun Control Secretary of State; previously Democratic Senator (NY)





Sub-sections under Gun Control: Legislation

Other issues under Gun Control

I believe in 2nd amendment but 33,000 people died from guns

Source: Third 2016 Presidential Debate in Las Vegas , Oct 19, 2016

Respect 2nd amendment but close loopholes

TRUMP: People that will respect the US Constitution. Also, the Second Amendment, which is totally under siege by people like Clinton. They'll respect the Second Amendment and what it stands for, what it represents.

CLINTON: I respect the Second Amendment. But I believe there should be comprehensive background checks, and we should close the gun show loophole, and close the online loophole.

Source: Second 2016 Presidential Debate at Washington University , Oct 9, 2016

Gun epidemic is leading cause of death of young black men

Source: First 2016 Presidential Debate at Hofstra University , Sep 26, 2016

2008: Fondly recalled being taught to shoot by grandfather

However, in 2008, when Clinton ran against Obama, she sent out mailers attacking Obama's position on gun control. It was striking because Clinton had spent most of her career advocating for gun control. Yet, to compete against Obama, she dramatically shifted her stance and presented herself as a Second Amendment advocate, who "fondly recalled being taught to shoot by her grandfather in Scranton."

Now, Clinton has shifted away from talking about learning to shoot a gun to attacking Sanders for refusing to support the Sandy Hook victims in their lawsuit against gun manufacturers.

FactCheck: 33,000 gun deaths includes suicides & accidents

The federal CDC publishes statistics on causes of death for all Americans. Here are the figures from their 2013 update:

21,175 suicide by gun

11,208 homicide by gun

505 accidental discharge of firearms

32,888 total deaths by firearm

Source: OnTheIssues FactCheck on 2016 NBC Democratic debate , Jan 17, 2016

Arming more people is not appropriate response to terrorism

CLINTON: Guns, in and of themselves, will not make Americans safer. We lose 33,000 people a year already to gun violence, arming more people to do what I think is not the appropriate response to terrorism. The first line of defense against radicalization is in Muslim-American community.

Source: 2015 ABC/WMUR Democratic primary debate in N.H. , Dec 19, 2015

Reverse gun manufacturer immunity; let them get sued

CLINTON: I said I made a mistake on Iraq, and I would love to see Senator Sanders join with some of my Senate colleagues in addition the Senate that I see in the audience. Let's reverse the immunity. Let's put the gun makers and sellers on notice that they're not going to get away with it.

SANDERS: Let's do more than reverse the immunity.

Q: Was that a mistake, Senator?

SANDERS: Let me hear if there's any difference between the Secretary and myself. I don't know that there's any disagreement here.

Source: 2015 CBS Democratic primary debate in Iowa , Nov 14, 2015

Sensible restraints on manufacturer liability & online sales

Source: Fox News 2015 coverage of 2016 presidential hopefuls , Oct 5, 2015

Gun control advocates see Clinton as an ally

According to Rhode Island Public Radio, as governor, Chafee supported 2013 legislation that would have banned semi-automatic assault weapons and high-capacity magazines. (That legislation was watered down significantly before it passed the legislature.)

Source: Rolling Stone magazine on 2016 presidential hopefuls , Jun 18, 2015

Rein in idea that anybody can have a gun anywhere, anytime

"We've got to rein in what has become an almost article of faith that anybody can have a gun anywhere, anytime," she said. "And I don't believe that is in the best interest of the vast majority of people."

Citing a number of shootings that arose from minor arguments over loud music or texting, she drew a comparison: "That's what happens in the countries I've visited where there is no rule of law and no self-control." She added: "That is something that we cannot just let go without paying attention."

Source: Wall Street Journal, "Anywhere, Anytime Gun Culture" , May 6, 2014

Balance lawful gun ownership & keeping guns from criminals

CLINTON: I respect the Second Amendment. I respect the rights of lawful gun owners to own guns, to use their guns, but I also believe that most lawful gun owners whom I have spoken with for many years across our country also want to be sure that we keep those guns out of the wrong hands. And as president, I will work to try to bridge this divide, which I think has been polarizing and, frankly, doesnít reflect the common sense of the American people. We will strike the right balance to protect the constitutional right but to give people the feeling & the reality that they will be protected from guns in the wrong hands.

Source: 2008 Philadelphia primary debate, on eve of PA primary , Apr 16, 2008

Give local police access to federal gun tracking info

I will also work to reinstate the assault weapons ban. We had it during the 1990s. It really was an aid to our police officers, who are now once again, because it has lapsed--the Republicans will not reinstate it--are being outgunned on our streets by these military-style weapons.

I will also work to make sure that police departments get access to the federal information that will enable them to track illegal guns, because the numbers are astounding. Probably 80% of the guns used in gun crimes got there illegally. And under the Republicans, that information was kept from local law enforcement.

Source: 2008 Philadelphia primary debate, on eve of PA primary , Apr 16, 2008

Against illegal guns, crack down on illegal gun dealers

Source: 2008 Democratic debate in Las Vegas , Jan 15, 2008

Backed off a national licensing registration plan on guns

Source: 2008 Democratic debate in Las Vegas , Jan 15, 2008

Get assault weapons & guns off the street

A: I think itís important to remember that the crime rate was driven down, & gun violence was driven down in the 1990s because of a combination of policies, like 100,000 police on the street and getting assault weapons off the street, and because of a growing economy. 22 million new jobs gave people who were hopeless a better chance for a future. So I want to get back to what works. This administration has tried to kill the 100,000 police. Youíve got mayors whose police force is outgunned by the criminals and the gang-bangers. Assault weapons are back on the street. Weíve got to go and do what works again. In addition to having policies that will get guns off the street, we do have to give young men particularly a better chance of a future that includes educational & economic opportunities & second chances when they get caught up in the criminal justice system.

Source: 2007 NAACP Presidential Primary Forum , Jul 12, 2007

Background check system could prevent Virginia Tech massacre

A: Yes. You know, I remember very well when I accompanied Bill to Columbine after that massacre and met with the family members of those who had been killed and talked with the students, and feeling that we had to do more to try to keep guns out of the hands of the criminal and of the mentally unstable. And during the Clinton administration, that was a goal--not to, in any way, violate peopleís Second Amendment rights, but to try to limit access to people who should not have guns. Unfortunately, we saw the tragedy unfold at Virginia Tech. We now know that the background check system didnít work, because certainly this shooter, as heís called, had been involuntarily committed as a threat to himself and others. And, yet, he could walk in and buy a gun.

Source: 2007 South Carolina Democratic primary debate, on MSNBC , Apr 26, 2007

FactCheck: VA Tech shooter not declared a danger to others

Thatís only half true. Itís correct that Seung-hui Cho had a court-documented history of mental illness that should have precluded his purchase of a firearm. And he was indeed found to present ďan imminent danger to himself as a result of mental illnessď in a ruling dated December 14, 2005. But the Judge did not check a box that would have declared Cho Ēan imminent danger to others.ď Moreover, the judge declined to involuntarily commit Cho and sent him to outpatient counseling. Clintonís confusion on this might stem from bad reporting by some news outlets that said Cho was found to be a danger to himself and others.

Source: FactCheck on 2007 South Carolina Democratic debate , Apr 26, 2007

Keep guns away from people who shouldnít have them

Source: www.hillary2000.org, ďGun SafetyĒ , Sep 9, 2000

Limit access to weapons; look for early warning signs

Source: www.hillary2000.org, ďSafe SchoolsĒ , Sep 9, 2000

License and register all handgun sales

Source: CNN.com , Jun 2, 2000

Tough gun control keeps guns out of wrong hands

Source: Press Release , Jul 31, 1999

Gun control protects our children

Source: Forum at South Side Middle School in Nassau County , Jul 15, 1999

Lock up guns; store ammo separately

Source: ABCís ďGood Morning AmericaĒ , Jun 4, 1999

Ban kidsí unsupervised access to guns

Source: ABCís ďGood Morning AmericaĒ , Jun 4, 1999

Get weapons off the streets; zero tolerance for weapons

As part of a ďzero toleranceĒ policy for weapons, drugs, and other threats to the safety of teachers and students, the President signed an executive order decreeing that any student who comes to school with a gun will be expelled and punished as a condition of federal aid.

Hillary Clinton on Legislation

I support Brady Bill and closing the Charleston loophole

OnTheIssues explanation: "The Charleston loophole" refers to a recent shooter in Charleston S.C. who legally purchased the weapon he used in the shooting because of a "default proceed" rule. That rule means, if the FBI does not notify the dealer within three days, the purchase can proceed. In the case of the Charleston shooter, he WAS on the FBI list due to previous arrests, but due to a clerical error by a county jail clerk reporting his arrest with the4 wrong agency, he was allowed to purchase the weapon.

Don't shield gun manufacturers from lawsuits:I vote that way

SANDERS: Bernie Sanders has a D-minus voting rating from the NRA. Back in 1988, I told the gun owners of Vermont that I supported a ban on assault weapons. I have strongly avoided instant background checks, doing away with this terrible gun show loophole. And I think we've got to move aggressively at the federal level.

Q: Is Bernie Sanders tough enough on guns?

CLINTON: No, not at all. We have to look at the fact that we lose 90 people a day from gun violence. This has gone on too long and it's time the entire country stood up against the NRA. The majority of our country supports background checks, and even the majority of gun owners do.

Source: 2015 CNN Democratic primary debate in Las Vegas , Oct 13, 2015

2000: advocate for national gun registry; 2008: backed off

Her position on gun control puts her at odds with the staunchly pro-gun GOP, and the push for gun control laws at the federal level has been historically unsuccessful. As president, Bill Clinton sought to tighten gun laws but was unable to achieve lasting effects.

Source: Wall Street Journal, "Anywhere, Anytime Gun Culture" , May 6, 2014

Let states & cities determine local gun laws

A: I want to give local communities the authority over determining how to keep their citizens safe. This case youíre referring to is before the Supreme Court.

Q: But what do you support?

A: I support sensible regulation that is consistent with the constitutional right to own and bear arms.

Q: Is the DC ban consistent with that right?

A: I think a total ban, with no exceptions under any circumstances, might be found by the court not to be. But DC or anybody else [should be able to] come up with sensible regulations to protect their people.

Q: But do you still favor licensing and registration of handguns?

A: What I favor is what works in NY. We have one set of rules in NYC and a totally different set of rules in the rest of the state. What might work in NYC is certainly not going to work in Montana. So, for the federal government to be having any kind of blanket rules that theyíre going to try to impose, I think doesnít make sense.

Source: 2008 Philadelphia primary debate, on eve of PA primary , Apr 16, 2008

Congressí failure at Littleton response inspired Senate run

Source: Living History, by Hillary Rodham Clinton, p. 503-4 , Nov 1, 2003

Donít water down sensible gun control legislation

Source: Remarks to NEA in Orlando, Florida , Jul 5, 1999

Voted NO on prohibiting lawsuits against gun manufacturers.

Exempt lawsuits brought against individuals who knowingly transfer a firearm that will be used to commit a violent or drug-trafficking crime

Exempt lawsuits against actions that result in death, physical injury or property damage due solely to a product defect

Call for the dismissal of all qualified civil liability actions pending on the date of enactment by the court in which the action was brought

Prohibit the manufacture, import, sale or delivery of armor piercing ammunition, and sets a minimum prison term of 15 years for violations

Require all licensed importers, manufacturers and dealers who engage in the transfer of handguns to provide secure gun storage or safety devices

Reference: Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act; Bill S 397 ; vote number 2005-219 on Jul 29, 2005

Voted NO on banning lawsuits against gun manufacturers for gun violence.

Reference: Protection of Lawful Commerce in Arms Act; Bill S.1805/H.R.1036 ; vote number 2004-30 on Mar 2, 2004

Prevent unauthorized firearm use with "smart gun" technology.

Make America the ďSafest Big CountryĒ in the World

After climbing relentlessly for three decades, crime rates started to fall in the 1990s. Nonetheless, the public remains deeply concerned about the prevalence of gun violence, especially among juveniles, and Americans still avoid public spaces like downtown retail areas, parks, and even sports facilities.

We need to keep policing ďsmartĒ and community-friendly, prohibiting unjust and counterproductive tactics such as racial profiling; focus on preventing as well as punishing crime; pay attention to what happens to inmates and their families after sentencing; use mandatory testing and treatment to break the cycle of drugs and crime; and enforce and strengthen laws against unsafe or illegal guns. Moreover, we need a renewed commitment to equal justice for all, and we must reject a false choice between justice and safety.

Technology can help in many areas: giving police more information on criminal suspects so they do not rely on slipshod, random stop-and-search methods; allowing lower-cost supervision of people on probation or parole; and making it possible to disable and/or trace guns used by unauthorized persons.

Above all, we need to remember that public safety is the ultimate goal of crime policy. Until Americans feel safe enough to walk their neighborhood streets, enjoy public spaces, and send their children to school without fear of violence, we have not achieved public safety.

Goals for 2010 Reduce violent crime rates another 25 percent.

Cut the rate of repeat offenses in half.

Develop and require ďsmart gunĒ technology to prevent use of firearms by unauthorized persons and implement sensible gun control measures.

Ban racial profiling by police but encourage criminal targeting through better information on actual suspects.

Require in-prison and post-prison drug testing and treatment of all drug offenders.

Source: The Hyde Park Declaration 00-DLC11 on Aug 1, 2000

Search for...



X

Page last updated: Nov 06, 2016