Dold, Poliquin rake in most Wall Street money in competitive House races
The Dow’s recent skids have investors on edge about how bad things might get on Wall Street. But there is one thing they can count on: the financial industry’s place as a top donor to congressional candidates cycle after cycle.

Two Democrats who are challenging Dold in Illinois — former Rep. Brad Schneider , who is seeking a rematch against the Republican, and Nancy Rodkin Rotering , the mayor of Highland Park, Ill. — also posted strong backing from Wall Street at almost $45,000 and over $39,000, respectively.

OpenSecrets keeps money in politics transparent and accountable. Please support our work by making a donation today. Help us count cash and make change by making a donation today.



For permission to reprint for commercial uses, such as textbooks, contact the Center: Feel free to distribute or cite this material, but please credit the Center for Responsive Politics.For permission to reprint for commercial uses, such as textbooks, contact the Center: [email protected]

Support Accountability Journalism At OpenSecrets.org we offer in-depth, money-in-politics stories in the public interest. Unlike many media outlets, we keep our content paywall-free and accessible to all. And whether you’re reading about 2020 presidential fundraising, conflicts of interest or “dark money” influence, we produce this content with a small, but dedicated team. OpenSecrets is independent and non-partisan, allowing us to write about what is most important to our readers, free of commercial and political bias. We give it to you straight, with fact-based stories that do not favor any one party or viewpoint. This allows us to expose powerful interests and promote transparency without being beholden — to anyone. Every donation we receive from users like you goes directly into promoting high-quality data analysis and investigative journalism that you can trust. Your help is essential to maintain OpenSecrets as not just a news source that cuts through the noise, but as a force multiplier that provides the public and reporters with data to defend democracy. Please support our work and keep this resource free. Thank you. Support OpenSecrets ➜

Support Accountability Journalism At OpenSecrets.org we offer in-depth, money-in-politics stories in the public interest. Whether you’re reading about 2020 presidential fundraising, conflicts of interest or “dark money” influence, we produce this content with a small, but dedicated team. Every donation we receive from users like you goes directly into promoting high-quality data analysis and investigative journalism that you can trust.Please support our work and keep this resource free. Thank you. Support OpenSecrets ➜

About The Author Alex Lazar is the summer 2015 reporting intern for OpenSecrets Blog. He is a graduate of George Washington University. His previous articles have been published by various news organizations including The Hill, ABCNews.com and The Huffington Post. Follow Alex Lazar

Read more of Alex's posts

Other candidates who counted either securities and investment or commercial banking among their top five donor industries include Rep. Martha McSally (R-Ariz.) (almost $98,000), who beat incumbent Rep. Ron Barber (D) in 2014 by a margin of just 167 votes; Rep. Carlos Curbelo (R-Fla.) ($65,000), another freshman who won in a close election, as well as his challenger in the classic swing district, former Miami-Dade Democratic Party Chairwoman Annette Taddeo (nearly $10,000); and former Pentagon official Eric Lynn (D) (over $23,000), who is running to replace Rep. David Jolly (R) in Florida as Jolly vies for the Senate seat being vacated by presidential contender Marco Rubio (R); Overall, — and in keeping with its recent contribution trends — Wall Street has given far more to Republican contenders in these tossup races than to Democrats: $659,000 to $222,000, or a margin of 3-to-1. The securities and investment industry has consistently ranked as one of the top five industry contributors to Congress since the 2000 election cycle . During the 2014 cycle , the industry was third (nearly $46.7 million) in giving to Congress. Commercial banks ranked eleventh during that same cycle (over $17.5 million). The top securities and investment firmin political giving to candidates and parties during the 2014 election cycle was Goldman Sachs at nearly $3.7 million, with then-Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) the largest recipient, snaring close to $97,000. The top-contributing commercial banking firm during that same cycle was Citigroup Inc. at almost $2.1 million, with Sen. Rob Portman (R-Ohio) reaping the most from the industry at almost $103,000. Dold and Poliquin are also among the half-dozen House candidates whose total fundraising for their 2016 races has spilled into seven figures. Others include McSally (nearly $1.7 million), Curbelo (over $1.15 million) O’Connor (over $1.1 million) and Rep. Gwen Graham (D-Fla.) (nearly $1.1 million).Out of the candidates surveyed (aside from Dold and Poliquin), 10 received between 5 and 8 percent of their contributions from Wall Street, 15 received between 1 and 4 percent, and five received less than 0.5 percent (in some cases none at all). At the other end of the spectrum, the five candidates in these toss-up races who have received the lowest share of Wall Street contributions, all challengers and all but one Democrats, were: Arizona rancher Gary Kiehne (R), Palm Beach County Commissioner Priscilla Taylor (D), Michigan State Rep. Gretchen Driskell (D), Las Vegas philanthropist Susie Lee (D) and Pennsylvania State Rep. Steve Santarsiero (D). Doug Weber contributed research to this post.