Prisons don't use reading scores to predict future inmate populations
The statement gets tossed out at conferences, pops up in blogs and surfaces in newspaper editorials. It is always a variation of this: "Some states use their third-grade reading scores to plan for future prison beds."

A prominent early education researcher at Yale University told me five years ago that California uses third-grade reading scores to plan for its prison space. A story in Education Week ten years ago said Indiana does the same, except using second-grade reading test results. A quick search on the Internet reveals similar statements from a principal in residence at the U.S. Department of Education, an officer in the International Reading Association and by several op-ed columnists.

The statement in all of its variations appears to be an urban myth, corrections officials say.

I asked Max Williams, director of the Oregon Department of Corrections, if state planners looked at reading scores in projecting the state's prison population.

"I do not believe they have ever looked at third-grade reading scores," he said.

Instead, he said, planners look at complicated formulas that are based on arrest rates and demographic data, such as the number of 18-to-28-year-old men in the state.

The California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation does not look at elementary school reading levels or literacy scores to project future prison bed needs either, wrote spokeswoman Terry Thornton, in an email Monday.

"This is an urban myth," Thornton wrote. "The CDCR uses about 100 factors in projecting its future prison and parole populations. The major factors are historical trends of new admissions from courts, length of stay in prison, average length of stay on parole and the rate of return to prison from parole. We also consider any changes in sentencing practices in court....

"A few weeks ago I contacted nearly every department of corrections in the nation. I heard back from 25 states saying they do not use elementary reading levels to plan for future prison beds. We have no idea where this originated from."

The myth probably has survived and circulated for more than a decade because it reflects the more fundamental truth that there is a powerful connection between school failure and crime. Several early childhood studies have shown that disadvantaged children who enter strong preschool programs are far less likely to get mixed up in crime when they get older.

A study that tracked 3- and 4-year-olds in a Chicago public preschool program for 15 years found children who did not participate in the program were 70 percent more likely to be arrested for a violent crime by age 18. A 22-year study found that about 7 percent of children in the well-known High Scope/Perry Preschool program became chronic offenders, with more than four arrests, compared to 35 percent of their peers who were not in the program.

About 68 percent of state prison inmates have not received a high school diploma, according to a report last year by an Oregon organization of law enforcement officers and prosecutors called Fight Crime: Invest in Kids.

Increasing the graduation rate in Oregon by 10 percentage points would prevent approximately 17 murders and 1,300 aggravated assaults in Oregon each year, according to the group's report.

The connection between education and crime is obvious to police leaders, said Martha Brooks, state director of the group, which is based in Beaverton.

"We work on the early education issues because we know that most development happens ages zero to five," she said.

Kids who start getting into trouble in middle and high school usually "have been struggling all the way along," she said.

And if they're struggling, they're more likely to stumble into jail. But that doesn't mean their third-grade reading scores will be used to reserve prison beds.

– Bill Graves