Your guide to Medicare decision time, one month early
Over the years, the only time seniors could review and change their private Medicare insurance fell around Thanksgiving and Christmas, adding a complicated yet important task to the harried holidays.

This year, seniors, Santa comes early.

Open enrollment for the 2012 plan season begins a month early -- Oct. 15 -- and ends earlier -- Dec. 7. That scheduling shift appears to be the biggest change facing thousands of Oregonians enrolled in private Medicare plans. It's like a carol in the ears of anyone who's gone through this before.

For those who haven't, open enrollment is the seven-week period when seniors 65 and older can switch their comprehensive health and drug coverage. That is, they can switch Medicare Advantage health plans or Part D stand-alone drug plans.

Most seniors aren't on such plans. They settle for the government's basic Medicare insurance, Parts A and B, which costs most seniors $115.40 a month. But nearly 40 percent of the 625,000 Oregonians eligible for Medicare pay additional premiums for private insurers to deliver their doctor and hospital care.

HMOs, preferred provider organizations and private fee–for-service plans offer the coverage, which might include dental or eye benefits that basic Medicare lacks. All but a couple of plans charge additional monthly premiums.

An additional 30 percent of Oregon seniors pick stand-alone Part D drug plans to help defray their prescription costs.

This year, the landscape for both types of plans looks pretty user-friendly. There is no 22 percent jump in average premiums, which happened two years ago. And no major insurers are quitting, leaving thousands of enrollees hanging, which happened the past two years

There are fewer, though still many, plans to choose from and better tools with which to make those choices.

It also appears that premiums, on average, will actually decline with no significant reductions in benefits, experts say. Locally, Kaiser Permanente has cut premiums on both of its plans. That happened in part because of its high quality scores, said David Northfield, spokesman for the health maintenance organization. Medicare provides bonus payments to providers if they have high quality scores.

Lower premiums are not what critics of the 2010 federal health care reform predicted.

"If you listened to them, you would've thought we would have fewer plans, cuts in benefits and premiums going through the roof," said Joe Baker, president of the Medicare Rights Center, a consumer advocacy group in Washington, D.C. "Overall, premiums are going down 4 percent nationwide, and it looks like folks will have plenty of choice in the Medicare Advantage market."

Coverage in the gap has improved as well. That's the odd "doughnut hole" where Medicare won't pick up all of your drug costs before it then picks up nearly everything.

The gap starts once total annual drug costs exceed $2,840, and it closes when costs exceed $6,448. The rest is on the enrollee, unless you purchase coverage for the gap. In 2009, one in five enrollees in nonsubsidized plans reached the gap, the nonprofit Kaiser Family Foundation research center estimates.

This year, drugmakers had to discount the price of brand-name drugs by 50 percent for enrollees in the gap. That discount continues in 2012 and will reduce out-of-pocket costs by $1,800 for someone using only brand-name drugs, the foundation estimates.

In addition, health care reform requires plans to cover 14 percent of the cost of generic drugs in the gap in 2012, up from 7 percent in 2011.

Cost and benefit changes all vary from plan to plan, so it's still a good idea to review any notice of plan changes you received in the mail and make sure you're not affected by them. Here are a few tips on how to approach that task:

Talk to your doctor's office. Make sure they're in the plan you're eyeing and that their experience with that provider has been a good one. "We, as patients, only see that plan in operation in regard to ourselves," said Baker. "Doctors might have 50 or 60 patients in that plan. They can tell you the problems."

The government's online Plan Finder is a wonder drug in this operation. It's fairly easy to use. Plug in your ZIP code, answer a couple of questions, type in the list of drugs you take and identify your preferred pharmacy. The website will then spit out good estimates of what your out-of-pocket costs will be under each plan available in your county.

If you're not comfortable online, or you find the site confusing, a volunteer can help you navigate. Be sure to look at the accompanying chart for ways to make an appointment with a trained Senior Health Insurance Benefits Assistance counselor.

Be wary of paying for gap coverage. Average monthly premiums for such plans are more than double those plans offering little or no gap coverage, the Kaiser Family Foundation says. Yet in many cases, the coverage is only slightly better than what federal health reform requires.

For instance, the co-pays in Humana's Enhanced PDP drug plan double for the "few" generic drugs the plan covers in the gap, the foundation says. Some generic drugs cost less than the plan's $16 co-pay, making the more expensive premiums of questionable value.

"It's not necessarily a better deal for people," said Juliette Cubanski, the foundation's associate director for Medicare policy. "It really depends on the specific drugs that the individual is taking and whether the plan actually offers gap coverage for those specific drugs."

Take advantage of low-income help. Singles making less than $16,355 and couples making less than $22,065 most likely qualify for help paying for drug costs. The coverage gap disappears, and deductibles, premiums and co-pays will be lower or nothing. You can apply for assistance through the Social Security Administration, 800-772-1213 or ssa.gov. You can also contact Oregon SHIBA for help at 800-722-4134.

Your second chances are limited. Once Dec. 7 passes, most enrollees won't have a chance to switch plans until next October. But there's a new option this year. Beginning Dec. 8, if you're in a plan rated lower than five stars, you can switch into any plan with a five-star overall rating, said Lisa Emerson, program manager for Oregon SHIBA. It's a way of rewarding plans with the highest overall quality, she said, and it's available once through Nov. 30, 2012.

Unfortunately, Medicare wasn't ready to release ratings in time for this story. They should be available at medicare.gov starting Wednesday.

Also, between Jan. 1 and Valentine's Day, you have one chance to drop your Medicare Advantage plan and revert to Original Medicare Parts A and B, Emerson said. As you do this, you can also enroll in a stand-alone Part D drug plan, Emerson said.

-- Brent Hunsberger; 503-221-8359