Umpqua Community College goes from patrolman with pepper spray to deputy with gun
An armed sheriff's deputy began patrolling Umpqua Community College's campus Monday in a step intended to reassure students and staff members of their safety.

The patrolman carrying a gun is a big step up from the one guard armed only with pepper spray who was stationed at the Roseburg campus Oct. 1, when a shooter's rampage left a teacher and eight students dead and another nine people wounded.

The Douglas County Sheriff's Office picked a recently retired deputy with experience as a school resource officer for the job. Scott Batsch, who worked as a sheriff's patrolman and detective, will have a car on campus but will patrol mainly on foot seven hours a day, five days a week.

"Obviously the school has been through a lot and the community has been through a lot, and having that uniformed presence will make everyone involved feel a little bit better going forward," said Corporal Dwes Hutson, the sheriff's department spokesman.

Under state law, Oregon community colleges can't employ armed officers. But they can contract with police agencies for the service, as Clackamas Community College does.

Students protested at Portland State University and the University of Oregon when administrators decided to arm their own officers. But Anne Marie Levis, Umpqua Community College public information officer, expects no opposition on the Roseburg campus.

"After a tragedy like this, people have a different perspective," Levis said. "We've had other armed police officers on campus, so it's one of those things that just gives people peace of mind, at this point."

Oregon State Police troopers and other armed officers have patrolled Umpqua's campus at times since the shootings, Levis said.

Umpqua will pay the sheriff's department $30,000 for the patrols through June 30 under terms of a contract approved by county commissioners. County Commissioner Tim Freeman said the college requested the contract, which he and the other two commissioners approved.

"It's a large campus, so it's hard to say that having one armed officer, depending on the situation, could have been effective," Freeman said. "I don't want to give any false illusions about how much or how little it'll make things better."

But Freeman, who has a son studying at Umpqua, sees the addition of a sworn officer as one of several measures that will help the college and community deal with the tragedy.

"There'll be many steps forward where people are working together to heal the community," he said, "and making sure people can go about their daily lives."

-- Richard Read

503-294-5135, rread@oregonian.com

Follow on Twitter: @ReadOregonian