Umpqua Community College not a gun-free zone: Oregon laws prevent that
Umpqua Community College, site of a mass shooting Thursday, bans guns, knives longer than 4 inches and other weapons from campus.

But that policy has one big exemption that renders the pastoral 100-acre campus near Roseburg anything but a gun-free zone: Everyone with a concealed firearms license is allowed to bring guns on campus.

That is because a 1989 Oregon law forbids any public body except the Legislature from restricting the rights of concealed weapons permit-holders to bring guns where they wish.

Proponents of gun rights have seized on Thursday's tragic killing of eight Oregon college students and their writing instructor as evidence that so-called gun-free zones, or places where all guns are banned, are especially dangerous because a gunman plotting a mass killing will know there is no armed person there who can stop him. Proponents of gun restrictions have shot back with their own take on gun-free zones.

The college's no-guns policy seems to be obvious evidence that the Umpqua campus was such a place. But Oregon gun owners with concealed firearms licenses know those licenses entitle them to carry loaded guns in nearly all public places.

About one in 16 Oregon adults have such licenses, Oregon State Police figures indicate.

John Parker, a 36-year-old Army veteran studying to become a drug and alcohol counselor, is among the UCC students who hold weapons permits and bring guns to campus. He had his gun and his license with him on campus Thursday when the shooting took place.

He was in the college's veterans center, just a few buildings away from Synder Hall, with some other students who were similarly permitted and armed, he told The Oregonian/OregonLive.

A college employee talked them out of leaving to try to use their guns to save others. The active shooter could have taken them down first. Law enforcement officers already on the scene would not have known their guns would be used to defend students and instructors, not hurt them, he said.

"If we would have run across the field, we would have been targets," he said. "We made a good choice at the time."

Rules at Umpqua Community College do mean that knives, air guns, paint ball guns and fireworks are prohibited on campus, as is smoking, drinking alcohol except at specially permitted functions, and skateboarding on central campus.

Guns, including handguns and rifles, are allowed on campus for people who have passed all background checks and conditions to qualify for a concealed weapon permit.

Penny Okamoto, executive director of Cease Fire Oregon, which favors gun restrictions, said allowing people with firearms licenses to bring guns on campus endangers student safety rather than helps it. To qualify for a license, an Oregonian "doesn't need to show he can hit the broad side of a barn" with a gun, let alone that he or she is trained to respond to an active shooter or deescalate a crisis, she said.

The best way to prevent mass gun deaths on campus, Okamoto said, is to prevent dangerous people from getting guns, especially semi-automatic ones.

Many Oregon college and university leaders dislike having armed people on campus, and public colleges have tried to make rules prohibiting the practice.

But the courts have ruled those policies invalid when it comes to licensed permit- holders. When Western Oregon University suspended a 30-year-old student, a former Marine, for carrying a tactical knife and having an unloaded semiautomatic rifle in his pickup truck, the student and gun rights activists sued - and won.

Public colleges have no grounds to restrict concealed weapons permit-holders' rights, the Oregon Court of Appeals ruled.

Kevin Starrett, executive director of the Oregon Firearms Federation, says too many colleges and other public agencies try to mislead people from thinking all guns are banned, despite the clear laws to the contrary.

Carli Brosseau reported from Roseburg and Betsy Hammond reported from Portland.

-- Carli Brosseau

cbrosseau@oregonian.com

-- Betsy Hammond

betsyhammond@oregonian.com

@chalkup