Armed officers, weapon-free zones not allowed at Oregon's community colleges
Oregon community college administrators are striving to tighten security after the mass shootings at one of the two-year schools. But they can't arm their own guards or remove someone who appears on campus with a gun.

Umpqua Community College, the Roseburg school where nine people and the gunman died and nine more were wounded Oct. 1, posts only one security guard armed with pepper spray on its 100-acre campus.

That's typical of community colleges with similar enrollments across the state, said Abby Lee, a public information officer at Treasure Valley Community College in Ontario, near Oregon's border with Idaho.

Lee said Treasure Valley has a full-time security director and six part-time campus officers, none of whom carries a gun. Administrators have directed officers to patrol buildings and become more visible since the shootings at Umpqua. But Lee said her school has received conflicting legal advice on its weapons-free policy, which bans firearms including guns carried by students, faculty members and employees who have concealed-weapons permits.

Campus alerts Texts, Twitter and Instagram can alert college community members to mass shootings, but messages don't always go out in time. Read related story.

"There's not a community college that isn't reviewing its policies and procedures," she said. "We're still very much reeling. We're all looking for answers, trying to find that one answer that would have prevented this."

State law does not allow the two-year colleges to form police departments staffed with armed, state-certified law enforcement officers. Weapons-free zones declared by many school administrators are riddled with exceptions that immobilize officers confronted by gun-toting strangers.

Legislators in key positions to change the law to permit two-year colleges to shift from stationing security guards to deploying certified police officers carrying firearms show no intention of forcing the issue. Sen. Floyd Prozanski, D-Eugene, who chairs the interim Judiciary Committee, said he plans to bring community college leaders together to hear their opinions and discuss whether their schools should gain that authority, which public four-year universities already have.

"We have legislative days set for November and January, and this is one of those issues that we definitely want to look at in great detail," said Prozanski, who survived a recall campaign this year after the Legislature expanded background checks on gun sales. "But we will not want to rush this process."

Sen. Jeff Kruse, R-Roseburg, also doesn't want to hurry through changes, but may favor a minor budget increase to boost community-college security staffing. Legislators raised Oregon community-college funding in their last session, but money remains tight. The $550 million appropriated for 2015-2017 remains about $20 million short of pre-recession support when adjusted for inflation.

Portland security paradox

The lack of authority to form community-college police departments with armed officers results in a paradox.

Leaders at Portland State University -- which has about 29,000 full- and part-time students -- recently succeeded in arming campus officers despite vocal opposition. But Portland Community College, with about 85,000 full- and part-time students, cannot form a department with armed officers.

Sen. Michael Dembrow, D-Portland, a longtime Portland Community College English instructor, filed a bill in 2013 that would have allowed community colleges to form police departments with armed officers. The bill would also have allowed community-college managers to decide whether to ban concealed-weapons permit holders from packing guns on campuses.

The bill died in committee. Dembrow said he worries that the fear of a classmate carrying a concealed weapon will keep students from engaging in vigorous debates.

"That's babbling nonsense," said Dave Workman, senior editor at TheGunMag, a publication of the Second Amendment Foundation, a firearms-right organization in Belleview, Washington. "If a student who's licensed to carry is carrying that firearm concealed and nobody else knows about it, out of sight out of mind, big deal."

It's by no means clear that many community-college officials want to hire officers toting Glocks. At Central Oregon Community College, a consultant conducted campus interviews before the Umpqua shootings and issued a report in August that discussed arming officers but chose not to recommend the step, said Ron Paradis, a spokesman for the Bend-based school.

Even if community colleges won the power to arm officers and then overcame anti-gun opposition to do so, they would need ample time and money to gear up, judging by the University of Oregon's experience.

Oregon began forming its police department in January 2012 and is only now reaching full capacity, said Kelly McIver, the department's spokesman.

"A lot of people had the impression that we would just sort of be knighting security officers and handing them guns," McIver said. Properly training and equipping armed officers with the power to arrest offenders took time, he said.

Colleges depend on police

Community colleges have found alternatives to creating police departments. Many have formed close relationships with local law enforcement agencies for armed backup.

Clackamas Community College has a special arrangement with the county sheriff's office, which grants police powers enabling the school to field four full-time and three part-time officers armed with guns, said Bobby Smith, campus safety director. Treasure Valley depends on the nearby Ontario Police Department, whose officers arrived within three minutes in June to help save the life of a student who lit himself on fire.

Smith, a retired Las Vegas police lieutenant, would like legislators to grant community colleges the right to form their own police agencies, complete with certified police officers. The two-year Oregon colleges can hire armed private security guards, but those employees would lack police powers such authority to arrest suspects, said Eriks Gabliks, director of the Oregon Department of Public Safety Standards and Training, which trains and certifies law enforcement officers.

The same law that doesn't allow community colleges to form police departments does permit school districts to do so. The Beaverton School District is unique in Oregon for having its own law enforcement agency, which employs an armed officer as safety director. The district also has school resource officers on its grounds who work for local law enforcement agencies and carry guns, a common practice across the state.

Unarmed community college officers are empowered essentially to move traffic and issue parking tickets, said John Wykoff, legislative director for the Oregon Community College Association. The association completed a summary last week of each of its 17 members' firearms policies.

Karen Smith, association general counsel, issued a memo Oct. 3 summarizing state gun laws and court decisions. The memo attempts to dispel confusion among community college leaders.

Smith wrote that Oregon law prohibits the possession of firearms or dangerous weapons while in or on a public building. But weapons bans, such as one imposed by Columbia Gorge Community College, are subject to numerous exceptions.

For example, state law allows a person with a concealed-firearms license to carry a hidden handgun in public buildings, Smith wrote.

In the wake of Umpqua's casualties, Clackamas Community College officers plan to conduct drills for responding to a mass shooter.

Officers at Clackamas are also training for a moment when an open-carry activist could appear on campus carrying a plainly visible gun -- which requires no permit, as would be the case with a concealed weapon. Smith, the school's campus safety director, said officers can't block gun owners from doing that.

"We would talk to them," Smith said. "We'd say, 'Hey, the only reason we're interacting with you is because we're concerned.'"

-- Richard Read

503-294-5135, rread@oregonian.com

Follow on Twitter: @ReadOregonian