Curry, Josephine counties could face local income tax as legislators react to defeat of public safety levies
Oregon lawmakers say they can't allow troubled southern Oregon counties to descend into lawlessness, spurring them to move legislation that could impose local income taxes in counties where voters have defeated public safety levies.







Lawmakers from both parties as well as aides to Gov. John Kitzhaber say they are stepping up their effort to pass the legislation in the wake of failed property tax levies last week in Curry and Josephine counties.

"Our role as the state is to act as the safety net," said House Majority Leader Val Hoyle, D-Eugene. "I don't feel good that we have parts of Oregon that are becoming like parts of Appalachia. I don't think it's right that a woman who needs immediate help because she is being attacked has to wait three hours until a police officer can get there."

Curry County, located on Oregon's southern coast, could be the first to ask the state to step in. County commissioners say they may ask voters again in September to approve higher property taxes but are willing to let the state impose a local income tax if nothing else works.

"Our first duty is to protect the safety of our citizens," said David Brock Smith, chairman of the Curry County Board of Commissioners, adding that "we're down to our last dollars."

Oregon's timber-dependent counties have struggled for years following the steep decline in logging on federal lands. But the crisis has become acute in the last year as federal support payments to timber counties dried up and officials made big cuts in jail, patrol and other public safety services.

Both Curry and Josephine counties say they can no longer provide around-the-clock patrols and are forced to cite and release many property and low-level violent offenders for lack of jail space. There have been a spate of stories about a rising number of home break-ins and the lack of a police response to many emergency calls.

"We get people suggesting, 'Just buy another shotgun,'" said Curry County Commissioner David Itzen. "Most people see that as kind of a ridiculous response."

In Salem, Hoyle and other legislators plan to take up their rescue legislation, House Bill 3453, at a June 3 meeting of the House Rules Committee.

The latest version of the bill would split the costs of providing a minimum level of public safety between the state government and local taxpayers. It would allow the governor, with the approval of Democratic and Republican legislative leaders as well as the affected county commissioners, to impose a local income tax without a vote of the people.

The failure of the levies "just reinforced the need" for the legislation, said Greg Wolf, the governor's director of intergovernmental relations. Wolf said Kitzhaber is worried not only about the danger to citizens and visitors in counties with minimal law enforcement but also that it could lead to more crime in neighboring areas. In addition, he said, businesses could be discouraged from locating in rural areas.

Wolf said that Coos and Klamath counties also face increasing problems paying for public safety services.

Kitzhaber has worked closely with Rep. Bruce Hanna, R-Roseburg, the former House co-speaker, on the legislation. Hanna said he has insisted that county commissioners be able to sign off on any compact with the state that would include a local income tax.

However, Hanna said he can't see just letting the troubled counties go their own way.

"It would be like saying you're out in your boat in a lake," he said, "and the neighboring boat is sinking, and you just back up to get out of their wake when it goes under."

Not everyone is on board with the legislation. The Association of Oregon Counties is staying neutral after several commissioners raised objections.

"You'll find the counties generally opposed to the imposition of an income tax," said Douglas County Commissioner Doug Robertson, who argued that the real solution is to allow greater logging on federal lands.

Hoyle and Hanna said the intent of the state bill is to act as a safety net while the Oregon congressional delegation works on legislation to allow more logging on federal timberlands that once belonged to the defunct Oregon & California railroad. Those checkerboard lands, which make up about 2.6 million acres, for decades provided harvest revenues to the counties that covered almost all of their local government needs and enabled them to have low property tax rates.

Sen. Ron Wyden, D-Ore., who now plays a key role as chairman of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, on Thursday released a framework for legislation that suggests counties could receive less federal money if their local taxes are particularly low compared with other timber-dependent counties. Currently, Josephine County has the lowest property tax rate in the state and Curry is second.

Wyden's proposal and the threat of state intervention could spur voters in Curry County to reconsider their vote against new property taxes, said Itzen, the county commissioner.

"For us in Curry County, state involvement is not what we want," Itzen said. But if the county can't get more property tax revenue, "I think we would be planning for that eventuality."

Josephine County Commission Chairman Simon Hare said his county should be able to struggle through the rest of the year. Although the levy lost by just two percentage points, he said he is skeptical about returning to voters in September. For one thing, turnout was below 50 percent in Tuesday's primary election. Under state law, a vote in September would require both majority approval and at least a 50 percent turnout.

Hare also expressed doubt about a state-imposed income tax as a solution, saying he isn't sure the state would agree to share the added costs of restoring public safety services.

Hoyle, the House majority leader, said that the situation reminds her of how Dean Smith, the legendary basketball coach from the University of North Carolina, would allow players to raise their hands to signal that they needed a rest.

"We don't want people waiting until they are too tired and everything is devastated before they raise up their hand and say, 'I need help...,'" said Hoyle. "What we want to do is get people back to work, start sustainably harvesting the timber we have and find innovative ways to attract businesses to our rural areas. But for now, it's a crisis."

-- Jeff Mapes