Measure 57 on hold to prop up budget
SALEM -- Oregon lawmakers agreed Saturday to spare public safety agencies from deep cuts but suspend most provisions of a voter-passed law mandating longer sentences for repeat property offenders and drug dealers.

The 18-month delay of Measure 57 won't take effect until early next year and is expected to save $25.5 million. Lawmakers also increased earned, good-time credit for some nonviolent offenders, saving about $6.5 million.

That helps get the public safety budget for 2009-11 to $1.3 billion, a 7 percent drop from 2007-09.

Facing Tuesday's deadline to wrap up this year's session, the Senate spent hours Saturday debating budgets, education policy and other matters. Tempers were frayed as the end of the difficult session nears.

But senators spent less than 15 minutes politely debating House Bill 3508, the product of months of negotiations over how the state can keep prison costs down while honoring the intent of Measure 57, approved by voters last year.

The law requires longer sentences for repeat property thieves and drug offenders. The Oregon Criminal Justice Commission estimated that it would cost the state $60 million over the next two years.

Critics pointed out that the Legislature itself put Measure 57 on the ballot as an alternative to an even stricter sentencing measure.

"The voters passed it," said Sen. Fred Girod, R-Stayton. "The last thing we should do is go back on what we agreed to do."

Because the Legislature is suspending a voter-passed law, both chambers needed a two-thirds majority to go along. The Senate voted 22-8 in favor of the delay Saturday, following the 40-19 vote in the House on Friday. In both chambers, the Democratic majority needed Republican votes to make the change.

"In many ways, this deal is historic because it's very rare that the Legislature chooses to be smart on crime rather than just tough on crime," said Rep. Chip Shields, D-Portland, one of the proponents of the Measure 57 delay. "Public safety is about more than just prisons. It's about putting troopers on the road and funding forensic labs, and drug and alcohol treatment."

The budget spares the Oregon State Police so that the state can hire enough troopers to maintain 24/7 coverage; keeps a youth correctional facility in Burns open; and pays for drug and alcohol treatment programs along with forensic labs. All were slated for cuts if the sentencing law had not been suspended.

The state's district attorneys fought the delay of Measure 57 and the increase in earned-time credit, which is scheduled to sunset in four years. Prosecutors argued that a suspension of the measure would put public safety at risk and that a jump in good-time credit for felons "is a smoke and mirrors move to let people out of prison early."

The district attorneys wanted a mass one-time release of nonviolent offenders from the state's prisons rather than a change in policy.

"If there's a silver lining in this bill, it's that the cuts weren't taken and Measure 57 stays in place for the next eight months," said Kevin Neely, a lobbyist who represents the Oregon District Attorneys Association. It's also possible, Neely said, that the Legislature could reconsider its decision when it meets again in February.

The district attorneys raised questions through Saturday, when lawmakers discovered that language concerning the suspension date needed clarification. Senate leaders promised to fix the problem with another bill they expect to vote on Monday.

At issue in many of the Measure 57 debates in Salem was just how much the tougher sentences would cost taxpayers. The state's district attorneys will report to the Legislature in January on the real costs of implementing the measure in 2009. District attorneys hope that will lead legislators to decide that the estimates were too high and then reinstate the longer sentences.

The budget deal also reduces the amount of reincarceration time for certain probation violations, which is expected to save $9.8 million in the next two years. The bill saves also $5 million by allowing probationers who comply with their release conditions to shave time off their active supervision.

Partnership for Safety and Justice, a statewide advocacy organization that pushed for the delay of the sentencing provisions and the increase in earned time, called the compromise a good deal for taxpayers and for public safety.

"Much of this bill is an acknowledgement that there are smarter ways to address crime and public safety than Oregon's status quo," said David Rogers, the group's executive director. "Oregon's prison spending has been skyrocketing and ineffective, and the country's economic crisis demands we do better."



-- Susan Goldsmith: susangoldsmith@news.oregonian.com