State-funded abortions would end with passage of Initiative 25
By Marylin Shannon

"No public funds shall be used to pay for any abortion, except to save the life of the mother or as may be required by federal law." Thus reads the entire text of Initiative 25, a proposed amendment to the Oregon Constitution that petitioners, led by the Oregon 2012 Petition Committee, are seeking to place on November's statewide ballot. The initiative's goal: to ensure that Oregonians who are morally or fiscally opposed to paying for abortions are no longer forced to do so with their tax dollars.

Why is Initiative 25 so necessary? Let's review the background.

In 1978, the Oregon Legislative Emergency Board crafted a rule prohibiting state funding of abortion for any financially eligible woman unless "a physician ... has certified in writing that the abortion is necessary because the life of the woman would be endangered if the fetus were carried to term." The rule also limited the number of abortions the state could fund for any one woman. But in 1984, the Oregon Supreme Court determined the rule "arbitrarily limits the number of elective abortions a woman in the program may receive" without regard to the "conditions of each individual case."

Today, as the state attorney general's office has noted in its Initiative 25 petition text, "Oregon law allows public funds to be used for abortion coverage and services when medical provider determines that procedure is medically necessary and when otherwise qualified for public funding." This wording conveys the impression that Oregon still imposes significant limits on which abortions to fund with state taxpayers' dollars.

But that impression is misleading; "medically necessary" is a spongy term that can be used to justify virtually any abortion. "Since the 1973 Supreme Court decisions in Roe v. Wade and its companion case, Doe v. Bolton, federal law has interpreted 'health' abortions to include all abortions performed for the sake of social or emotional 'well-being,'" notes the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. Indeed, "four years after California expanded legal abortion to include those for 'physical and mental health,' legal abortions skyrocketed from 7,000 per year to 116,749 per year. Over 90 percent of these abortions were for 'mental health.'"

What has the foregoing meant for abortion in Oregon today?

In a recent seven-year stretch, 2003 to 2009, $11.1 million of state taxpayers' money funded more than 26,000 abortions. In 2009, the taxpayer-funded Oregon Health Plan paid for 3,375 abortions -- fully one-third of the 10,801 performed in Oregon.

Is this what Oregonians want? Whatever one's position on abortion, certainly it should be agreed that taxpayers should not be forced to pay for elective abortions. Initiative 25 would keep them from being forced to do so.

July 2 is the deadline to submit petitions to put Initiative 25 onto November's ballot. To help in the effort, interested voters should print, sign and return single-signature petitions (available at oregon2012.org).



Marylin Shannon is a former Oregon state legislator and co-chief petitioner for Initiative 25.