Oregon House approves bill tightening rules for parents who opt children out of immunizations
SALEM -- After an emotional discussion filled with personal stories about lives touched by serious diseases, the House passed a bill tightening rules for parents who opt their children out of vaccinations.

The House voted 45-15 to approve Senate Bill 132. The bill cleared the Senate earlier this month and now heads to Gov. John Kitzhaber.

Under Senate Bill 132, parents opting out for non-medical reasons would need to obtain the signature of a doctor or other health care practitioner certifying that the parents received immunization education, or provide a certificate confirming they'd watched an approved online educational video.

Oregon leads the nation in kindergartners whose parents have exempted them from vaccination requirements. Some schools have vaccine opt-out rates of 70 percent or more.

Rep. Bob Jenson, R-Pendleton, said his father contracted polio at the age of 7, years before the polio vaccine was developed.

"He remained a cripple for his entire life," Jenson said. "He died at a really young age, at 62, pretty much as a direct consequence of having had polio."

His daughter also contracted chicken pox, measles and whooping cough at the same time when she was a baby. "She almost died," he said. "I can 't leave here... and let some other family have to go through that kind of problem."

State law requires children attending schools and child care programs to receive vaccines for diseases such as polio, chicken pox, measles and others. Currently, parents can submit a statement signed by a doctor citing medical reasons why a child does not have the immunizations, or sign a form citing religious reasons for an exemption.

Senate Bill 132 would still allow non-medical exemptions, but would eliminate the specific reference to religious exemptions. Parents are not currently required to receive education about vaccines.

Rep. Jason Conger, R-Bend, questioned the effectiveness of vaccines. He said children currently receive 71 shots over the course of their childhoods, but many are for diseases such as tetanus, which aren't contagious.

"I don't believe the justification is really there," said Conger, who voted against the bill. "Most of the diseases that are mandated for vaccinations to enroll your child in school are not deadly."

-- Yuxing Zheng