Tigard-Tualatin elementary schools debut Common Core-aligned reading
TIGARD--The Alberta Rider second graders in Cheri Gamache’s reading class may not know it, but they are in for a tougher year than their older siblings and neighbors.

They are expected to master more vocabulary, read more nonfiction and show they can think about what they read, not just recite it. This new approach to reading is part of Tigard-Tualatin School District’s shift to Common Core State Standards, a nationwide push to hold students to higher bars.

Across Oregon, Common Core has been rolling out to different degrees across grade levels and different subjects. Students will be tested on these new standards next school year. In Tigard-Tualatin schools, the biggest shift to Common Core is happening in elementary classrooms as students learn from new reading books.

The books have prompted concerns about whether struggling students can keep up and whether teachers have received enough training for the shift.

On the surface, nothing seemed radically new in a recent morning in Gamache’s class. The students in small groups read a passage about helping dogs. They typed several sentences on their iPads about how ordinary dogs help people. They highlighted soft Cs in a short story about mice. If students finished early, they read more stories on their iPads.

“Our kids need to competitive and be on the same playing field as kids from other states,” said Gamache of the new curriculum’s benefits. “Having smarter kids is good.”

Here’s a closer look at how this year differs from years past:

More rigorous

Students are reading at a higher level, although the difference isn’t as simple as saying second-graders are now reading at a fourth grade level. Kindergarteners are expected to read 88 common words like “you” and “the,” versus 30 last year. Students should know multiple meanings of words early on.

Parents of high-achieving students have responded positively, said Alberta Rider Principal Laura Kintz. On the flipside, “The parents who are concerned are hearing so much that it is rigorous and are worried that their child can’t keep up,” said Kintz.

Gamache’s goal is to keep students in the main classroom. She asks them to talk to each other about what they read. She tells them what they should learn upfront.

When the first five-week reading unit wraps up in October, students across the district will be assessed. Those lagging will be retaught concepts in week six. Those excelling will receive advanced instruction.

Shift to nonfiction

What students are reading has changed: Fewer stories, more nonfiction.

“As an adult you spend most of your time engaged in informational text,” said Sue Scott, Tigard-Tualatin’s associate director of Curriculum and Instruction.

Take dinosaurs – an instructional text could be an Encyclopedia-like entry about pterodactyls, a chart categorizing different species as herbivores, carnivores and omnivore or notes from a fossil dig.

Literature is going from 90 percent of what elementary school students read to half of what they read. Each week usually involves delving into one fiction story and one nonfiction story. In Gamache’s class, the students ended up reading two informational stories – one about choosing the right dog, the other about seeing-eye dogs.

More non-fiction means more specific vocabulary that would ordinary appear in science and social studies classes, like mammal and veterinarian in Gamache’s class. By the time students take high school English, they will read and analyze Federalist papers and Supreme Court opinions alongside Shakespeare.

“Support your thinking”

A hallmark of Common Core is fewer student opinions and personal narratives and more analytical and persuasive writing. In early reading classes, students spend more time with fewer texts. They compare stories and informational pieces and answer questions using what they learned from their reading.

“If they have to point to words in stories that support your thinking, that’s a much higher level than just retelling the story or regurgitating,” said Scott, the district official.

But it’s still an important reading skill for children to connect what they read to their own lives, as Gamache has her students do when she asked them to write how ordinary dogs can help their owners.

“Think about ordinary dogs. What does your puppy do for you?” Ms. Gamache asked as she notices many students writing about the seeing-eye dogs they just read about.

Appearing on the students’ iPads:

“When I am feeling sad my dog will come cuddle with me.”

“A dog is a mammal that help people by crossing the road.”

Teacher development

The abrupt transition to the new reading books late last school year prompted the teachers’ union leader to call professional development “severely lacking.”

"Master teachers, for the first time in their career, have not been clear about what was expected of them when school started," Tigard-Tualatin Education Association President Brian Haliski told the school board in September.

Teachers have sought advice on how to instruct students in small groups and readjust their schedules and routines to a new teacher’s edition. The training schedule includes peer coaching this fall and a districtwide training day in December.

For Gamache, the best preparation comes from trial and error in the classroom.

“It’s like riding a bike for me,” Gamache said. “You don’t learn it by reading about it. You learn about it by doing it.”

--Fenit Nirappil: 503-294-4029; fnirappil@oregonian.com

Follow Tigard-Tualatin school district news on social media by following me@TigTuReporter on Twitter; on Facebook and on Google Plus.