Some Portland parking tickets climb as Transportation Bureau struggles to raise revenue
After slipping a parking stub into the window of her Volkswagen Rabbit downtown Portland on Monday, Ashlee Reintzell admitted that she sometimes skips the trip to a meter and risks getting a ticket. But come Feb. 7, the 21-year-old might want to live a little less dangerously. The fine for failing to get a meter receipt will climb from $45 to $60. "That's outrageous," said Reintzell, a cook who was on her way to Mama Mia Trattoria to drop off a résumé. "I think even $40 is kind of intense. To raise it is crazy." The violation is among seven whose fines will go up, the Portland Bureau of Transportation and Multnomah County Circuit Court announced Monday. The goal, officials said, is to bring Portland's fines in line with those in comparable cities, and to encourage scofflaws to follow the rules. The money also will help the cash-strapped Transportation Bureau, which splits ticket revenue with the circuit court. The court sends its share to the state's general fund, with Portland expecting to keep about $6.3 million this fiscal year. The increase in fines -- for everything from failing to correctly display a receipt to parking in a truck-loading zone -- will bring in an extra $1.4 million a year.

Portland isn't the only city with costly tickets. Drivers in San Francisco who get caught failing to feed a meter are fined $72, according to a recent Portland survey, and $58 in Oakland.

But it's also true that the Transportation Bureau needs cash. Fees and fines from on-street and garage parking make up nearly a quarter of the agency's annual budget, which has been stretched thin in recent years by big-ticket construction projects such as the Sellwood Bridge replacement and the MAX line to Milwaukie.

City officials have been studying new revenue sources for the bureau, including a possible road maintenance fee or local gas tax, since mid-2012. New Mayor Charlie Hales has pledged to re-examine spending before going along with anything, though.

If there's any good news in the agencies' announcement, it's this: The fine for overstaying a metered spot will hold steady at $39, up from $34 in 2011. By comparison, the penalty is $25 in Denver, $44 in Seattle and $73 in Oakland, according to the city's survey.

Cheryl Kuck, a Transportation Bureau spokeswoman, said motorists can also take heart in this: The bureau doesn't expect to raise any additional parking fines this year.

"This is probably it for awhile," Kuck said. "We think this takes care of it."

-- Beth Slovic; on Twitter