Florida's pre-K program earns low marks in national report - again
Florida's pre-K program earns top marks for enrolling 79 percent of the state's 4-year-olds but offers them preschool classes that fail to meet most "quality benchmarks," according to the annual The State of Preschool report.

The 2012 version shows Florida ranked first in the nation when it comes to access to its pre-K program, which is provided free to any 4-year-old. The program enrolled more than 175,000 youngsters last school year.

But, as in years past, Florida's Voluntary Pre-Kindergarten program meets only three of the 10 "quality benchmarks" the folks at the National Institute for Early Education Research (NIEER) think are important. NIEER has put out "The State of Preschool" reports for the past decade.

Florida scores poorly on the "quality" rankings because it doesn't require its pre-K teachers to have college degrees and doesn't keep the teacher-to-student ratio at 1 to 10, among other issues.

The Sunshine State also spends less than many other states, earning a finance rank of 35 out of the 38 states with pre-K programs, the report said.

Florida spent $2,281 per pre-K student last year, the report noted. Neighborhing Georgia spent $3,490 while the national average was $3,841.

State officials defended Florida's program and noted Florida's program includes accountability measures -- something the NIERR report doesn't take into account.

The state measures pre-K "effectiveness" by assessing each student's "readiness" for kindergarten. The state also started pre-and-post tests for its pre-K students "so we know how well children are learning what they need to know to be ready for kindergarten," said Shan Goff, executive director of the state's Office of Early Learning, in a statement.

Education Commissioner Tony Bennett agreed, saying the state has made a "strong commitment to early learning" with its free Pre-K program that will be enhanced by the Legislature's decision to move early learning (including pre-K) fully into the Florida Department of Education.

"Our state ranks first in the nation for access and we are proud of that," Bennett said. "We look forward to working with the legislature and all of the stakeholders interested in early learning as we continue our commitment to ensuring high-quality early education for children and families in Florida.”