Radio spot in Orlando accuses Crist of causing a 'lost generation of African-Americans'
TALLAHASSEE -- A shadowy political group called "Progressive Choice PAC" is airing a racially tinged ad on black radio stations in Orlando accusing former Gov. Charlie Crist of siding with the gun lobby and imposing sentencing and drug policies that disproportionately impact African-Americans.

“The punishment fits the crime. It’s enshrined in our Constitution -- the essence of American Justice, unless you live in Florida and happen to be black,” the radio spot opens.

“Under Gov . Charlie Crist, the NRA called the shots in Tallahassee, giving Crist big money and an ‘A’ rating, stopping even the most sensible gun control bills, allowing weapons to flow into our cities, even permitting concealed guns at work.

“But while Crist was coddling the gun lobby, he was cracking down on us -- passing maximum sentencing laws, signing the nation’s harshest marijuana laws, and enacting the country’s strictest penalties against non-violent offenders, many of whom just happen to be black."

Crist did embrace the NRA agenda when he was a Republican governor, reveling in his nickname "Chain-Gang Charlie" during his 2006 gubernatorial campaign. Florida also enacted stricter sentencing laws for non-violent offenders under his watch.

But the ad goes on to say that “It’s time Charlie Crist answer to Floridians for his record, for a lost generation of African-Americans and for trampling on the ideal that the punishment fit the crime.”

That claim -- causing "a lost generation" of blacks -- has many Democrats fuming. The Crist campaign responded Monday by calling the radio spot "a new low for Rick Scott and his special interest donors."

But there is little they can do for now to reveal the funders behind the ad.

The group has been behind a series of robo-calls and mailers so far attacking Crist, and the only person tied to the group has refused to disclose its donors. These kinds of organizations are allowed to shield their activities until closer to the elections. This group incorporated in Delaware just before starting its paid-media, and is being run by an operative out of Maryland. So long as it ceases operations 30 days before the election, it will never have to disclose donors.

"Progressive Choice is not hiding or running away from this ad, as you mention in your article. Race is always a very sensitive and difficult issue to talk about," the operative behind the radio spot, Jamie Fontaine-Gansell, said in an email after this report posted.

"However, no one can dispute that the type of legislation Crist has introduced and supported in his career - and its implementation - disproportionately affects members of the African American community."

Democrats have accused the group of being a front for traditional Republican donors. In the 2012 cycle, the Republican political consulting firm Data Targeting and its founder Pat Bainter created an ad-buying group called "progressives" and ignored Florida's disclosure law while sending out mail pieces attacking Democrats in at least four state Senate races for supporting GOP policies.

This time, it's anyone's guess who is behind the radio spots. And it isn't surprising why no one wants to take credit for the race-baiting accusations.

Fontaine-Gansell, though, suggested her group's donors weren't being released because the Florida Democratic Party might single them out for retaliation.

"This is tough work – and we want to take on tough issues across the country," she said. "The FDP is in attack mode against anyone who doesn’t support their Republican candidate – so of course, we are protecting our supporters."