Orange schools won't let grades slip below 50
From now on, the lowest grade an Orange County secondary student will get for a class is 50.

The School Board on Tuesday night formalized the year-old practice of eliminating zero grades for middle and high school. It will not affect individual assignments, but at the end of a quarter or semester, no students will have an average grade lower than 50, a failing grade.

The decision came despite objections from a group of teachers.

"I'm against inflating school grades in violation of our contract," said Wendy Doromal, who teaches at Timber Creek High School. "This forces teachers to commit academic fraud and sacrifice their professional integrity. This also conflicts with state statutes."

But district officials say the change, which is intended to help students eventually pass who might otherwise give up, complies with a state law that requires an F to span from 0 to 59.

"Fifty-nine doesn't mean that you're passing. We're not moving that goal post," said board member Daryl Flynn.

Jesus Jara, the district's deputy superintendent, said the move is good for students.

"It's really giving kids an opportunity who have slipped up in a marking period," he said. With the change, "they don't fall so far behind that they can't make it up in an academic year," he said.

He also noted that treating an F as spanning from 50 to 59 is akin to the 10-point ranges for other grades, such as 80 to 89 for a B.

Superintendent Barbara Jenkins said that last year, 43 percent of students who were helped by pushing their grade to 50 percent still failed. The majority who recovered got a D, she said. But the policy is still important "so they don't lose all hope," she said.

Even with a 50 at the end of the first quarter, a student still needs two A's and a B to get a final grade of C, Jenkins said. "That certainly indicates mastery," she said.

The grading rules are part of the district's pupil-progression plan, which outlines procedures for assessments, student promotion and diplomas. A public hearing Tuesday night drew dozens of people, including parents upset about testing requirements for student portfolios and teachers concerned about the grading policy.

Board member Pam Gould said her eldest son would have benefited from a policy that held failing grades at 50.

"By the time he got the self-motivation, it was too late," she said. "While we're under this crazy system, I don't want to sacrifice our children's futures any more than we already have."

But the teachers who spoke at Tuesday's hearing all opposed the change.

"Rewarding students who put little to no effort into assignments does them a disservice," said Wendy Wing, who teaches special-education students at Piedmont Lakes Middle School.

Board member Nancy Robbinson said she doesn't understand why some teachers oppose shrinking the F range. She described the mind-set that grades be used to punish children as "that old-school mentality."

In Lake County, it's common for teachers to round up zeros, but the practice varies from school to school, a district spokesman said last year, when Orange first started its new grading practice. Seminole, Volusia and Osceola schools have policies that copy the state guidelines.

State statute makes 0-59 as the official range for an F in public middle and high schools, and zero percent as the value for an incomplete. A 2009 memo to superintendents from the public-schools chancellor said districts aren't allowed to raise the floor for an F.

But no one with the state Department of Education would comment this week on whether Orange is violating statute. Jara said the district's legal department vetted the plans and determined they comply with the law.

Even so, the new plan likely won't resolve grading inconsistencies among schools.

In some schools, principals require every assignment to be given a grade of 50 or above. At others, it is only the final grade that must be changed. District officials couldn't say which schools take each approach but were gathering that information.

Jenkins said a committee is meeting to look at other grading changes, including setting a floor for assignment-level grades or setting a districtwide four-point scale.

But it's not just teachers who dislike the new policy.

David Nwankwo, 14, a freshman walking home from Edgewater High School on Tuesday, said he doesn't like the message the new policy sends.

"If you were really trying, you wouldn't have gotten below 50 in the first place," he said.

And senior Elizabeth DiRenzo, 17, agreed.

"I think every so often you have to have a reality check," she said. "It just encourages them to be lazy."

lroth@tribune.com or 407-420-5120