After losing public records suit, Orange County will end Dropbox file sharing
Orange County has abandoned a file-sharing service that lets employees work at home, saying it's too risky to use in the wake of a court ruling.

The county's decision was related to a court order requiring Mayor Teresa Jacobs and Orange County government to disclose IP addresses of all computers that tapped into accounts on the cloud-based, file-sharing service known as Dropbox, which allowed employees to view and edit county documents on laptops and other mobile devices.

Peter Miller, Orange County's technology-security chief, said disclosing IP addresses could leave the county vulnerable to hackers.

"It could be catastrophic," Miller said, pointing out that a skilled hacker could find and tamper with computers used to control the county's wastewater operations, manage the jail and monitor security at the courthouse.

"I think the news recently has shown what can happen...

IP addresses — the IP stands for Internet Protocol — are unique numeric identifiers for computers and other electronic devices.

You don't have to be a politician to wield power in Orlando. In no particular order, here is a sampling of key, unelected power brokers in the region. They are people who make things happen in business, the arts and in the community, and sometimes behind the scenes in politics and government. Send updates or suggestions for new members of the list to mskoneki@orlandosentinel.com with the subject line of "Orlando Power Brokers." (Mark Skoneki) (Mark Skoneki)

Orange Circuit Judge Robert Egan forced the mayor and the county to reveal the IP addresses after ruling in favor of Organize Now, a coalition of groups that pushed for paid sick time and then successfully sued county leaders involved in the so-called "textgate" controversy.

Stephanie Porta, Organize Now's executive director, sued for the IP addresses to see who had access to the county's Dropbox accounts.

Though Orange County disagreed with Egan's ruling that the addresses were public records, the officials provided the documents Tuesday to reporters and Organize Now's lawyers.

The mayor's staff also said Organize Now's leaders were offered an opportunity to review unredacted Dropbox records before the group filed its lawsuit.

In an email response, Porta said her organization would review the IP addresses and "determine who had access and when to the mayor's Dropbox."

"It's no surprise that when a judge orders [Jacobs] to turn over documents, her first response is to delay their release as long as she can, then hold a press event to discuss records no one was able to inspect," Porta said in the email.

Miller said he was concerned hackers could use IP addresses to launch a cyber-attack.

"This is a very basic security concept. This is not anything that you need a PhD to understand," Miller said. "While we try to be as transparent as possible, some information still needs to be...considered confidential."

Barbara Peterson, president of the First Amendment Foundation, said the county's security fears were "overblown."

"If their security walls are so vulnerable that someone can hack in and obstruct the criminal-justice system or shut off water to citizens simply by getting access to an IP address, they've got concerns far worse than Organize Now," she said.

shudak@orlandosentinel.com or 407-650-6361.