Crist's Digital Domain deal becomes lawsuit by Scott
TALLAHASSEE — A page-turning chapter in Florida's gubernatorial campaign reads like an entertaining bit of beach-time crime fiction. But its implications are stark for taxpayers who assume that state stewards of their dollars take the job seriously.

Gov. Rick Scott's office is suing over a failed jobs project from former Gov. Charlie Crist's past, which "had the makings of a big-budget Hollywood blockbuster: greed, corruption, special effects, and a star-struck audience willing to suspend belief."

The lawsuit's author is William Scherer, the Fort Lauderdale lawyer who was lead counsel for the victims of Scott Rothstein's multibillion-dollar Ponzi scheme. Scherer's vivid lawsuit has sections titled "The Color of Money" and "Death of a Salesman."

The suit seeking to get the state's money back argues that the now-famous Digital Domain deal was an $82 million scam that duped Crist and lawmakers into overlooking red flags and giving Digital's architects "free money" to pay off their personal liabilities in California.

Crist's campaign has called the lawsuit against the defunct company and a litany of investors "a stunt" launched by a Scott supporter. Scherer admits he's a political ally of the governor's — just as he was once a Crist ally when Crist was a Republican.

But he took the case to make money, not support anyone's political ambitions, he said. "This had all the feathers of a turkey."

The 2009 project to aid Port St. Lucie-based Digital Domain — a special-effects company founded by James Cameron that worked on films including "Titanic" — was pushed by Crist using a backdoor process of inserting "proviso language" into the budget.

The lawsuit, however, comes 16 months after Scott's inspector general released a report shedding light on the deal but concluding that Crist and a former legislator, Tampa Republican Kevin Ambler, had broken no laws.

"The bottom line is the timing of the lawsuit," said Senate Democratic Leader Chris Smith, D-Fort Lauderdale. "It's starting to smell a little bit."

Scherer said the Digital Domain deal smelled from the start.

It began in April 2007, when Jupiter Island entrepreneur Sean Heyniger — a friend of Digital co-owner John Textor's — threw a party at his house and invited the newly elected Crist.

The party's "true purpose was to illegally lobby Governor Crist and pitch Digital Domain Florida as a worthy candidate for State money," Scherer wrote.

The party also featured Heyniger's former wife, Kelly, who "had been dating the Governor for a few months before the event."

Crist became an immediate ally and flew to California to kick the tires. Textor began lobbying lawmakers and the governor's economic-development director, Dale Brill.

Over the objections of Florida's corporate-incentive arm, Enterprise Florida, Crist and lawmakers authorized $20 million for the company.

That gave it leverage to wrestle more money from Port St. Lucie and West Palm Beach. Before Digital went south, Orlando and Florida State University were also poised to invest another $50 million to supposedly create jobs.

What none of them knew: Digital Domain was struggling to make payroll and planning to immediately transfer the Florida cash out of state to pay off creditors.

In an email to another potential investor, Textor bragged about the taxpayer "freebee" Florida had given him.

By the time the company closed in 2012, it had lost $250 million, with an additional $212 million in liabilities. Crist "got sold a bill of goods and bought into it hook, line and sinker," Scherer said.

adeslatte@tribune.com, 850-222-5564 or on Twitter @adeslatte