Democrats to push gun background check bill
TALLAHASSEE – Democratic legislators continue to press for more gun control measures in the wake of last week’s shooting at the Fort Lauderdale airport.

Sen. Gary Farmer, D-Fort Lauderdale, announced Tuesday his plans to file a bill to require background checks for sales of firearms at gun shows.

“Last week horror came to our state and to the Fort Lauderdale airport,” Farmer said. “That horror came in the form of a deranged man who should’ve never been allowed to buy, own or in any way possess a dangerous firearm.

Although federal law requires background checks for guns purchased from licensed gun dealers, Farmer wants to close what he calls a "loophole" that allows firearms to be sold without background checks at gun shows. He said he plans to file the bill next week.

Farmer’s bill comes on the heels of a bill filed last week by Sen. Linda Stewart, D-Orlando, that would ban the sale of assault weapons.

Democrats admit the bills have little chance of passing in the Republican-controlled Legislature, but say it’s important to put forward an alternative to the legislation favored by the GOP that relaxes gun restrictions.

CAPTION Winter Park voters will choose between incumbent Steve Leary and U.S. Navy veteran Jim Fitch for Mayor. The winner will receive $3,000 pay and a 3-year term. Winter Park voters will choose between incumbent Steve Leary and U.S. Navy veteran Jim Fitch for Mayor. The winner will receive $3,000 pay and a 3-year term. CAPTION Orlando Police chief John Mina delivers remarks announcing his candidacy for Orange County sheriff, in a press conference on the Orange County Courthouse steps in downtown Orlando, Thursday, Feb. 15, 2018. (Joe Burbank/Orlando Sentinel) Orlando Police chief John Mina delivers remarks announcing his candidacy for Orange County sheriff, in a press conference on the Orange County Courthouse steps in downtown Orlando, Thursday, Feb. 15, 2018. (Joe Burbank/Orlando Sentinel)

Sen. Greg Steube, R-Sarasota, is sponsoring a bill to let concealed carry permit holders carry guns on college campuses, in airport terminals and government meetings. Those with concealed carry permits would also be allowed to carry openly in the state under the bill.

Pro-gun control groups have been galvanized by the shootings at the Pulse nightclub and the Fort Lauderdale airport. Groups with the Coalition to Prevent Gun Violence, a collection of organizations that formed after the Pulse massacre, were on hand to back Farmer’s bill.

“The lives of our children are being gambled with,” said Florida Parent-Teacher Association president Cindy Gerhart.

The enthusiasm from advocates is translating to Democrats, some of whom have voted in favor of bills backed by the National Rifle Association in the past.

“We have to start doing things, we can’t just sit back and every time there’s a tragedy every other week come out with a press conference saying, ‘gee I’m sorry,’” Stewart said. “No, we’re more than sorry, we need to act.”

More gun control bills could be coming. Stewart said she plans to file a “no-fly, no-buy” bill that would prevent those on the FBI’s no-fly watch list from being able to purchase a gun in Florida, and Farmer said a bill that would let local governments pass their own gun control ordinances could be filed soon.