Scott pollster: Public split on Medicaid expansion
TALLAHASSEE – A poll commissioned by Let’s Get to Work, Gov. Rick Scott’s political committee, shows voters are split on “significantly expanding the federal Medicaid program under Obamacare here in Florida.”

The poll of 700 likely voters, which was conducted April 8-12 and obtained by the Orlando Sentinel, shows 44 percent favor Medicaid expansion and 44 percent oppose expansion, and 12 percent had no opinion.

Some of the results of the poll were released to Politico, but the split on Medicaid expansion was not made public. The poll also included a sample of 500 GOP primary voters that was not made public either.

Republican primary voters oppose Medicaid expansion 75 percent to 15 percent, with 58 percent strongly opposed. Half of GOP primary voters also said the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, had harmed their family’s health care, and 44 percent said it has not made a difference in it’s health care.

The poll also asks, “Would you favor or oppose the state of Florida taking over Federal Health Care Programs here in Florida if you knew that it would cost state tax payers billions of dollars over the next 5 years?”

The question doesn’t mention Medicaid expansion, which would rely exclusively on federal dollars in the first years of the program, but the state would be required to pay up to 10 percent after 10 years. The question could also apply to the end of the Low Income Pool, a Medicaid program paying for health care for low-income and uninsured patients scheduled to end June 30. Scott has said he doesn’t want to use state dollars to replace the federal program.

General voters oppose taking over the federal health care programs with state dollars by 64 percent to 23 percent, and GOP voters coming out against it 74-14 percent.

Voters' overall opinion of Obamacare is negative, with 55 percent opposed and 42 percent in favor.

Scott’s job approval rating sits at 50 percent in favor and 45 percent opposed among general voters, and at 76-22 percent in favor among GOP primary voters.

The poll has a margin of error of +/- 3.7 percent.