Nelson says GOP health plan loses momentum
U.S. Sen. Bill Nelson on Wednesday brushed off a new GOP ad tying him to calls for single-payer health insurance, while also saying the Republican’s own health plan “has no momentum” in the Senate.

Nelson, in Orlando to meet with students to talk about his proposed Senate bill to cap student loan rates, also called for a diplomatic solution to the North Korean missile crisis and largely praised the decision to restart the National Space Council under Vice President Mike Pence.

With federal student loan interest rates for undergraduate students increasing from 3.76 percent to 4.45 percent just this week, Nelson said his bill would cap rates for undergraduates at 4 percent and allow current borrowers to refinance their loans to the new lower rate.

“What we want to do is make loans affordable to students,” Nelson said. “We don’t want the necessity of education dependent on the vagaries of the Wall Street marketplace.”

As to whether Republicans would vote for the plan, “I won’t know until I try,” he said.

The National Republican Senate Committee launched a Facebook ad Wednesday featuring U.S. Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., and her comments about how “the next step is single payer” for the U.S. health care system. The ad goes on to ask, “Does Senator Nelson agree?”

Nelson, who faces a path to re-election in 2018 through a more progressive Democratic primary base and then a general electorate that voted for President Donald Trump last year, said his focus was not on creating a government-run, single-payer system but on preserving Obamacare, or the Affordable Care Act, from being repealed and replaced with the Republican plan.

“When people say, ‘Are you for single payer,’ I’m having enough trouble right now just keeping the ACA,” Nelson said. “America is not ready for single payer, but America is ready — and has — the ACA. People are trying to take that away and take health care away from 22 million people.”

He also criticized Republicans for wanting to “eviscerate” Medicaid in their bill, which would decrease spending on the program by $800 billion over the next decade.

“They’re short seven Republican senators, and what [Republican Majority Leader] Mitch McConnell is trying to do is twist arms over the course of the July Fourth recess. … But I think that’s going to be extremely difficult.”

Nelson also said “there is no good scenario in a military conflict” with North Korea following its intercontinental ballistic missile launch, due to “the ability of North Korea to shell South Korea and especially the capital city of Seoul.”

He also warned Russian President Vladimir Putin to stop his cyber attacks “or we can unleash such a punishing attack on him he’ll never try it again.”

Nelson is scheduled to appear with Pence on Thursday at Kennedy Space Center for the announcement of the new National Space Council, “which puts the focus of the space program in the White House,” instead of broken up among several administrators and agencies.

“[It] helps us get a much more clear focus,” he said of the plan, “ … particularly since we are going to Mars, and we’re going to Mars with humans, and we’re going in the year 2033.”

Asked by one of the students if that meant that Pence would be in charge of climate science, Nelson said no. “Believe you me, I’m watching that,” Nelson said.

slemongello@orlandosentinel.com, 407-418-5920 or @stevelemongello

Nelson, Rubio react to Republican Senate health care bill »