Kassab: Rick Scott shamelessly plugs low wages in Florida
Nobody sells Florida like Gov. Wawa.

He swooped in to California this week and told all of those clueless west coast liberals the truth.

His pitch goes something like this:

"Why pay your lowest-rung employees $15 an hour? Come to Florida, where the minimum wage is only $8.05 and the sun shines just as bright."

Rick Scott touts new jobs at Wawa (yes, that Wawa, purveyor of hot hoagies and regular unleaded) as one of his biggest job-trolling success stories.

And he's convinced his strategy of making Florida a low-wage mecca is a winning one.

As evidence of his confidence, he used our tax dollars to pay for radio ads in the Golden State.

"[California] is beautiful, but you just can't afford to live here," laments one of the actors.

One thing that allows our governor to be so exuberant in this endeavor is his ability to completely discount facts from his logic.

He manages to take one of Florida's worst attributes — the median income has dropped 12 percent in this state since 2007, the sixth-largest drop in the nation, according to a new report from Congress' Joint Economic Committee — and turn that into a sales pitch.

"By raising the minimum wage in California, 700,000 people are going to lose their jobs, there are a lot of opportunities for companies to prosper in Florida and compete here, and that's what I'm going after," he said on his three-day tour.

In that single line alone Scott gives the honey badger a run for his money.

Gov. Wawa doesn't care that the 700,000 figure he cites was rated "Mostly False" by Politifact.

He doesn't care that a study by economists at the UC Berkeley Labor Center found that the negative impacts of a minimum wage increase in Los Angeles such as higher payroll costs and job losses would be offset by greater spending among workers who receive a raise, as a Los Angeles Times story noted.

Let's not even discuss how nearly half of the workers who would see a pay bump in Los Angeles don't work at the kind of businesses that could pick up and move to Florida even if they wanted to. We're talking restaurants, hospitals, temp agencies or janitorial companies.

And Gov. Wawa gets lots of credit for being able to ignore data from the U.S. Census, which shows that more people fled Florida to California in 2014 (25,622) than Californians who now live in Florida (23,239).

Yes, things are hunky-dory in the world of Wawa openings.

It's been just four years since Wawa opened its first store in Florida and Scott proudly posed for photos with a pair of cartoonishly-large scissors to cut the ribbon, the start of an expansion of more than 60 stores in the Sunshine State.

The hoagies are a hit and I've noticed a deliberate effort by RaceTrac to up its frozen yogurt game in a tit-for-tat convenience store arms race that I can only imagine other states dream about.

Never satisfied though, Scott returned last year to Wawa's home state of Pennsylvania to meet again with executives.

"Because we are focused on eliminating redundant regulations, we've made Florida more competitive for attracting jobs like those at Wawa," Scott said in a press release at the time that tallied total Wawa jobs at more than 2,100.

Unbelievably, Yale University and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange didn't jump on board when Scott pitched them.

Jeremy Ring, the state senator from Margate and a founder of Yahoo, says Scott is going about it all wrong, especially on his jaunt to San Francisco and San Jose this week.

"You don't go out to Silicon Valley to steal jobs, you go out to Silicon Valley to get venture capital," Ring told the Sentinel. "I would go there with a bagful of great ideas from our universities and get venture capital."

What Ring and others don't understand is that Scott also appears not to care about research that says the best and highest-paying jobs are grown at home — not poached from other states — by nourishing companies with a smart workforce produced by top-notch schools, a solid transportation network and neighborhoods that people want to call home.

I guess a nearby Wawa doesn't hurt, either.

bkassab@tribpub.com