Marco Rubio praises America to party faithful in Seminole County
Speaking before a friendly gathering of fellow Republicans Tuesday night in Altamonte Springs, U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio stressed patriotism in the midst of racial dissension in declaring that America is still strong.

“America is going to be OK. America is going to be fine,” the Floridian said at the Lincoln Day Dinner fundraiser organized by the Seminole County GOP at the Hilton Orlando. “American has never been perfect, but it’s always gotten better.”

Rubio also briefly mentioned President Donald Trump’s announcement Monday that he plans to have a steonger military presence into Afghanistan.

“For us to walk away from that commitment would actually make the world more dangerous,” Rubio, who tangled frequently with Trump during last year’s presidential campaign, said about Afghanistan.

In a reference to the white supremacy marches in Charlottesville, Va., this month, Rubio blasted racist groups.

“There is nothing conservative about those people, nothing,” he said. “We don’t want them in our party. We don’t need them in our party.”

Before Rubio’s speech, scores of protesters stood along the road outside the hotel claiming that Rubio has avoided voters by neither holding town hall meetings nor having face-to-face meetings. Instead, he meets with fellow Republicans at fundraising dinners.

Some in the crowd of protesters held signs with messages including, “Speak to us, little Marco” and “Where’s Marco?” Some chanted: “What do we want? A town hall. When do we want it? Now.”

“I think anybody who is elected by the people should meet with the people,” said Kathy Richards, 51, of Leesburg. “It’s very disturbing.”

For local party officials, the event was a way to begin raising money and recruiting volunteers among the GOP faithful in preparation for next year’s high-profile races, including the contest for the governor’s mansion.

Tickets for the event ranged from $150 to attend, or up to $3,000 a dinner seat up front.

Among those attending included Republican gubernatorial candidates Jack Latvala and Adam Putnam. Local party stalwarts state Sen. David Simmons, state Rep. Scott Plakon and County Commissioner Brenda Carey also attended.

Rubio, however, stopped short of endorsing either Putnam, the state’s agriculture commissioner since 2011, or Latvala, a state senator from Clearwater.

Putnam, 43, served as a Congressman from 2001 to 2011. He was 22 when he was first elected to the Florida House in 1996 and has served in elected office ever since.

While Latvala, 65, may be seen as the more moderate candidate, Putnam has recently taken stances moving him to the right on several issues, including on guns and immigration. He recently declared himself on social media as a “proud NRA sellout.”

Putnam spoke briefly, and mocked the protesters outside the venue, specifically one who had a tambourine.

“What is protest-ful about a tambourine?” Putnam asked. “If you’re going to protest, bring a real instrument. Come on. … There’s plenty of room in New York if they want to move there.”

During Rubio’s speech, a protester stood up and questioned the senator about his support for large oil companies. The woman then walked out of the event. Rubio said that’s what he “loves about America” that someone is able to protest at a political event.

Latvala, who announced his candidacy this month, didn’t speak at the event but did lead the Pledge of Allegiance. He served two terms in the Florida Senate, from 1994 to 2002, before leaving because of term limits. He returned to the Senate in 2010 and will be term limited next year.

Latvala is seen as a moderate Republican, including on issues of immigration and the state’s pension system. He also led the effort to kill a bill that would have opened the state to fracking.

But it was Rubio — a former presidential candidate — who was the big draw of the evening. It helps the Republican party across the state to have him headline Tuesday’s event and encourage party members to work toward getting a Republican elected as governor next year, said Susan MacManus, a political science professor at the University of South Florida in Tampa.

“In the primary season, grass roots are critical,” she said. “This is all about getting the money, lining up local volunteers and getting people in the trenches.”

Putnam agreed.

“The grass roots movement; that’s what our party is all about,” he said.

mcomas@orlandosentinel.com or 407-420-5718