Malarkey Meter vets claims by Putnam, Greene and Grayson
It’s campaign season, which means it’s time to dust off the Malarkey Meter to vet the dubious claims, nasty accusations and outright lies that fill your mailbox and TV screen.

I asked readers what ads they wanted me to check out and received more than 100 responses ... which suggests the malarkey’s pretty deep these days.

Here is our first batch:

/ Orlando Sentinel In a 30-second TV ad, GOP gubernatorial candidate Adam Putnam accuses his primary Rival Ron DeSantis of wanting to raise sales taxes by 23 percent. But the ad leaves out so many details, columnist Scott Maxwell rated it as "Misleading Malarkey." In a 30-second TV ad, GOP gubernatorial candidate Adam Putnam accuses his primary Rival Ron DeSantis of wanting to raise sales taxes by 23 percent. But the ad leaves out so many details, columnist Scott Maxwell rated it as "Misleading Malarkey." (/ Orlando Sentinel)

The race: GOP primary for governor

The claim: A 30-second TV spot where Adam Putnam says Ron DeSantis wants to “increase sales taxes by 23 percent, hurting families, destroying jobs, devastating tourism.”

The analysis: More people asked about this ad than any other, wondering whether DeSantis was really eager to hurt families and destroy jobs. Admittedly, it sounds like a dreadful campaign platform.

This ad is misleading. It’s based upon DeSantis’s support of the Fair Tax, which would implement a federal sales/consumption tax of at least 23 percent (and which critics say is actually 30 percent using traditional definitions). But the ad leaves out a whopping big part of the plan — that the Fair Tax calls for also eliminating most every other federal tax, including income taxes.

So Putnam’s ad focuses on only the negative part of DeSantis’s proposal, while leaving out the positive. Now you can argue the Fair Tax is a bad idea or a regressive idea. But this only describes half the idea.

It would be like me offering to trade you an apple for a cupcake and someone claiming: “Scott Maxwell wants to take your cupcakes!”

The verdict: Misleading malarkey(Note: An earlier version of this piece also mentioned state sales taxes, but shouldn’t have. The Fair Tax plan DeSantis supported was separate from — and would have been in addition to — any state sales taxes.)

/ Orlando Sentinel In a TV spot, Democratic gubernatorial hopeful Jeff Greene uses an oil-draped frame to accuse Gwen Graham of being bad for the environment. He has a point about her Keytone Pipeline vote, but plays fast and loose with facts on a mall that that isn't actually in the Everglades. In a TV spot, Democratic gubernatorial hopeful Jeff Greene uses an oil-draped frame to accuse Gwen Graham of being bad for the environment. He has a point about her Keytone Pipeline vote, but plays fast and loose with facts on a mall that that isn't actually in the Everglades. (/ Orlando Sentinel)

The race: Democratic primary for governor

The claim: A 30-second TV spot where Jeff Greene accuses Gwen Graham of not being a true environmentalist because she voted for the Keystone Pipeline and is “threatening the Everglades by building a huge mega-mall there.”

The analysis: Yes, a “huge mega-mall.” Not a tiny mega-mall, you understand. Or even a medium mega-mall. This one is huge and mega. It kind of is. The American Dream mall would be one of the biggest in America, complete with an indoor water and snow park. Because that’s what South Florida needs … snow.

But Graham’s not “building” it. And it’s not in the Everglades or even alongside it. Her family’s company owns some of the land. And it’s several miles east of the Everglades in a part of town that’s already so developed, there are asphalt and mining companies on one side and a country club and Carrabba’s Italian Grill on the other.

In fact, the Everglades Trust (a pretty good judge of what threatens the Glades) says the mall is less damaging than the mining that might otherwise be allowed under current zoning. And the Everglades Trust endorsed Graham over Greene and the other Democrats.

But the ad is accurate when it says Graham voted for the controversial Keystone Pipeline. She was among 28 House Democrats to vote for it back when she served in Congress. Graham said she viewed the pipeline as less environmentally destructive than other options. Regardless, the ad is right about that.

The verdict: Mixed Malarkey

/ Orlando Sentinel Alan Grayson claims US Rep. Darren Soto "abandoned" his constituents "The DAY Hurricane Irma hit Central Florida" so he could go "DINING WITH DC LOBBYISTS!" Except Soto says the fundraiser took place several days before the storm hit and he has proof he was in Fla during Irma. Alan Grayson claims US Rep. Darren Soto "abandoned" his constituents "The DAY Hurricane Irma hit Central Florida" so he could go "DINING WITH DC LOBBYISTS!" Except Soto says the fundraiser took place several days before the storm hit and he has proof he was in Fla during Irma. (/ Orlando Sentinel)

The race: Democratic primary for U.S. House District 9

The claim: A mailer from Alan Grayson accuses Darren Soto of “DINING WITH DC LOBBYISTS!” while Hurricane Irma was ravaging Florida.

The analysis: This piece seems to try to use deceit by date. Irma hit Orlando on Sept. 11. Soto says his Washington fundraiser was Sept. 7 — and that he was back in the district by Sept. 8. As evidence, his campaign offered up office schedules, Facebook photos and even a boarding pass from an American Airlines flight to Orlando. (He enjoys AAAdvantage Gold status, by the way.)

When I asked Grayson’s campaign what was up, a spokesman argued that the mailer doesn’t specifically claim Soto was in D.C. on the precise day the storm hit (again, Sept. 11), but rather that Soto was in D.C. “during the state of emergency” — which Rick Scott declared on Sept. 4.

Except Grayson’s mailer has a big red arrow pointing to the date of Sept. 11 that says: “The DAY Hurricane Irma hit Central Florida!” right under the claim that “Darren Soto abandoned us when we needed him most.”

The verdict: Major Malarkey

As a parting gift, I wanted to highlight what might be the most malarkey-filled mailer I’ve seen anywhere in Florida. It hit mailboxes in Tampa where a shady PAC accused a GOP candidate for the county commission of hanging out with “liberal friends.” As evidence, the mailer shows a photo of Republican Todd Marks standing with … wait for it … Barack Obama!!!! There’s just one little detail: It’s a wax figure of Obama. Marks had someone snap the photo when he was goofing around at a wax museum in Vegas — as explained in the Tampa Bay Times piece: “Mailer slams GOP candidate for posing with a smiling Obama. But he’s a wax Obama.”

The verdict: Moldable malarkey

smaxwell@orlandosentinel.com

Columnist Scott Maxwell takes Ben Stein's commercial supporting Florida's casino expansion to the Malarkey Meter test Columnist Scott Maxwell takes Ben Stein's commercial supporting Florida's casino expansion to the Malarkey Meter test SEE MORE VIDEOS