After Pulse: Where our congressional candidates stand on assault weapons
In the days after her brother, Javier, died inside Pulse night club, Yazmin Jorge Reyes heard from some of Florida's members of Congress and top state government officials.

"They were really nice and very supportive," she said. "But we want more than just, 'I'm sorry.' I don't think we're asking for a lot. This is about the protection of American lives."

Jorge Reyes and some of the other family members of the 49 people who died June 12 — as well as some of the people who made it out of the club alive that morning — are calling on Congress to ban the sale of military-style assault weapons.

Her argument is simple: "One person should not have all of that power."

By that, she said, she means a firearm such as the Sig Sauer MCX that fired one round after another from a high-capacity magazine as quickly as the Pulse shooter could pull the trigger.

"The main point is that these weapons have the capacity to do a lot of damage in a very short period of time," she said. "My brother was shot five times."

That was part of the reasoning behind this country's ban on assault weapons until Congress let it expire in 2004.

The argument that it's not the gun that's the problem but the person who fired it doesn't hold sway with Jorge Reyes.

"I've heard that, 'The problem is not the tool, it's the people,'" she said. "With that logic, let's make everything legal, then. It's so easy to say that when it doesn't affect you personally."

Jorge Reyes put together a video of Pulse families pleading with Congress. She posted it on YouTube and tried to send it to as many people as she could, including some elected officials.

"But we haven't heard anything from the people who we want action from," she told me.

She and the other family members, as well as voters who will choose new members of Congress in November, deserve to know where the candidates stand.

So I sent her video to the major party candidates for Florida's U.S. Senate seat as well as the people running for the three congressional districts here in Central Florida.

And I asked them all whether or not they supported a ban on military-style assault weapons.

Here are their responses:

•U.S. Senate

Marco Rubio (R): No. "Banning so-called assault weapons would not prevent mass shootings, but would infringe upon the Second Amendment rights of law-abiding citizens from across the country."

Patrick Murphy (D): Yes. "I support [the Pulse families'] commonsense proposal, which would keep military-style weapons of war out of our communities and out of the hands of criminals and terrorists."

Paul Stanton (LPF): No. "The Pulse shooting was indeed a horrible tragedy, but only solidifies my resolve that self defense is a basic human right. We must stop evil, not disarm good people to stop it."

•Congressional District 7

John Mica (R): No. "We must increase gun violation prosecution, which has declined. Most gun murders are committed with stolen or illegally-obtained weapons."

Stephanie Murphy (D): Yes. "For too long Congress has listened to the gun lobby instead of using common sense."

•Congressional District 9

Wayne Liebnitzky (R): No. "My prayers are for those victims of all crimes, either by guns, pressure cookers or other means. But our constitution must endure."

Darren Soto (D): Yes. "The Second Amendment provides an individual right to bear personal arms such as handguns and shotguns, but not military-style weapons."

•Congressional District 10

Thuy Lowe (R): No. "When elected to Congress, I will lead an initiative to find real solutions to end the senseless killings while protecting upstanding American citizens' constitutional right to bear arms."

Val Demings (D): Yes. "Military-style assault weapons have no place in our neighborhoods or on our streets, they were designed for the battlefield. The families and survivors of the Pulse shooting, and the countless number of other victims, deserve real change."

For the candidates' full, unedited responses go to OrlandoSentinel.com/BethKassabBlog.

As for Jorge Reyes, an audiology technician who lives in Michigan with her husband, she wants people to know that Javier was "super talented."

Last year she visited him in Orlando.

"I stayed at his house," she said. "One day we spent a few hours just sitting on the bed and just talking and joking. We had a very long conversation. It was wonderful."

That's a memory she holds on to now that his life has been cut short at just 40. And she wants to see Congress act on an assault weapons ban.

"I want action," she said. "Otherwise, it's like their deaths meant nothing."

bkassab@orlandosentinel.com