Race and Drugs
Page of PRINTED FROM OXFORD HANDBOOKS ONLINE (www.oxfordhandbooks.com). © Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a title in Oxford Handbooks Online for personal use (for details see Privacy Policy and Legal Notice). Subscriber: University of Waterloo; date: 03 June 2019

Race and Drugs

Abstract and Keywords Blacks are arrested on drug charges at more than three times the rate of whites and are sent to prison for drug convictions at ten times the white rate. These disparities cannot be explained by racial patterns of drug crime. They reflect law enforcement decisions to concentrate resources in low income minority neighborhoods. They also reflect deep-rooted racialized concerns, beliefs, and attitudes that shape the nation’s understanding of the “drug problem” and skew the policies chosen to respond to it. Even absent conscious racism in anti-drug policies and practices, “race matters.” The persistence of a war on drugs that disproportionately burdens black Americans testifies to the persistence of structural racism; drug policies are inextricably connected to white efforts to maintain their dominant position in the country’s social hierarchy. Without proof of racist intent, however, US courts can do little. International human rights law, in contrast, call for the elimination of all racial discrimination, even if unaccompanied by racist intent. Keywords: race, drugs, discrimination, arrests, incarceration, structural racism

Millions of people have been arrested and incarcerated on drug charges in the past 30 years as part of America’s “war on drugs.” There are reasons to question the benefits—or even rationality—of that effort: the expenditure of hundreds of billions of dollars has done little to prevent illegal drugs from reaching those who want them, has had scant impact on consumer demand, has led to the undermining of many constitutional rights, and has helped produce a large, counterproductive, and expensive prison system. But perhaps the single most powerful indictment is that war has been waged overwhelmingly against black Americans who have been disproportionately arrested and incarcerated on drug charges as a result. Racial disparities generated or deepened by public policies should always be cause for concern. But such disparities in the criminal justice system are particularly troubling. The choice of arrest and imprisonment as the primary antidrug strategy has thwarted efforts to improve the opportunities and living standards of black Americans, deepened the disadvantages of poverty and social marginalization, and threatened hard-fought civil rights progress. In addition to losing their liberty, prisoners endure the rigors of living in harsh, tense, overcrowded, barren, and often dangerous facilities. Maintaining contact with their families is extremely difficult; family stability and well-being are jeopardized when a breadwinner or parent is taken away. The consequences of a criminal conviction last far longer than the time spent in jail or prison. People with criminal records experience what can be a lifetime of stigma and legal discrimination in employment, housing, education, public benefits, jury service, and the right to vote. Families and communities are injured by these policies as well (Mauer and Chesney-Lind 2003; Western 2006; Clear 2007). A number of conclusions leap from readily available data: • Black Americans are much more likely than white Americans to be arrested and incarcerated for drug crimes.

• Depending on the substance, the differences between black and white rates of self-reported drug use are small.

• In absolute numbers, many more whites than blacks use illicit drugs.

(p. 195) • The best available evidence indicates that blacks are no more likely than whites to sell drugs. In absolute numbers, there are many more white than black drug dealers. In short, racial disparities in arrest and imprisonment for drug crimes cannot be explained by racial patterns of drug crime. There are operational reasons for the disparities; most importantly, drug law enforcement activities are concentrated in inner city areas with high minority populations. But law enforcement’s strategic choices in turn reflect the longstanding influence of race on how the United States has defined the drug problem. In short, racial disparities in arrest and imprisonment for drug crimes cannot be explained by racial patterns of drug crime. There are operational reasons for the disparities; most importantly, drug law enforcement activities are concentrated in inner city areas with high minority populations. But law enforcement’s strategic choices in turn reflect the longstanding influence of race on how the United States has defined the drug problem. Section I of this article discusses and documents the role of race in the development of drug control efforts in the United States and presents statistics revealing that black Americans have been and continue to be arrested, convicted, and incarcerated on drug charges at rates far higher than those for whites.1 Blacks are arrested on drug charges at three times the rate for whites and are sent to state prison on drug charges at 10 times the rate for whites. The net result is that more black than white Americans are doing time for drug offenses in a country in which only 12.6 percent of the population is black. The arrest and incarceration disparities cannot be explained by racial differences in drug offending because there are far more white than black drug offenders. Section II discusses research findings on racial and ethnic patterns in drug use and sales. Overall, slightly larger percentages of black people have used illegal drugs in the past year or month, although a higher percentage of white people have used drugs in their lifetime. In absolute numbers, however, the numbers of white users of illicit drugs—even crack—dwarf black numbers because there are five to six times as many white as black Americans. Evidence of racial patterns in drug trafficking is less strong than concerning use, but what there is suggests that black drug-selling rates are little or no higher than white rates and, accordingly, that there are many more white than black sellers. Section III discusses racial patterns of drug arrests. Arrest rates are much higher for blacks than whites largely because police focus drug law enforcement on places, principally inner cities, with high minority populations and target their resources where drug arrests are easiest—on the streets, rather than in private home or office buildings. Section IV discusses racial disparities in imprisonment for drug crimes and the reasons for them. Imprisonment disparities are even worse than arrest disparities with blacks more likely to be sentenced to prison for drug offenses and to receive longer sentences than whites. To some extent, longer sentences for black drug offenders reflect federal and some state drug laws that mandate especially severe penalties for crack offenses for which blacks are disproportionately arrested. They also reflect the fact that black drug arrestees are more likely to have prior convictions that lead to sentence enhancements. Section V discusses the war on drugs from a human rights perspective. Racial disparities in drug law enforcement result from the combined effects of many social, geographic, and political factors operating at federal, state, and local levels, but they also reflect the influence of racialized considerations and concerns in the decisions of legislators, police, prosecutors, and judges. Overt racial prejudice may not be at work, but (p. 196) extensive research and analysis over the past few decades leave little doubt that antidrug efforts are rooted in and reflect the unconscious racial bias of whites against blacks as well as race relation dynamics that benefit whites to the detriment of blacks. In the war on drugs, race matters. Under human rights law, in contrast to U.S. constitutional law, unwarranted racial disparities even in the absence of racist intent violate the rights to equal protection of the law and freedom from discrimination. The United States has a human rights obligation to end such disparities, but it cannot do so until it acknowledges how deeply racial discrimination has permeated its antidrug efforts.

III. Why Such Large Disparities in Arrests? The answer is fairly straightforward. Drug offending cuts across all racial, socioeconomic, and geographic boundaries, but police do not enforce drug laws equally across those boundaries. Most (61.7 percent) drug arrests occur in metropolitan areas. That is not surprising, given that people, crime, and law enforcement resources are concentrated there, and drug offending rates are higher in metropolitan than nonmetropolitan areas. But these factors do not explain why within urban areas African Americans are arrested in numbers far out of line with their proportion in the urban population or the urban drug using or selling population. In the 75 largest counties in the United States, in 2006, non-Hispanic blacks accounted for 49 percent of drug offense arrests, even though they represented only 16.3 percent of the population (Cohen and Kyckelhahn 2010). In (p. 210) New York City, between 1997 and 2006, blacks were arrested for misdemeanor marijuana possession at five times the rate for whites. Even though whites constituted a greater percentage of the population (35 percent) than blacks (27 percent), three and a half times as many blacks (185,000) as whites (53,000) were arrested for possessing small quantities of marijuana (Levine and Small 2008). Because drug purchase and use are consensual, drug arrests are not a response to victim complaints but result from police decisions about resource allocation. In practice, police have focused on low-income, predominantly minority neighborhoods and have ignored other more upscale and white areas even though there is no evidence that drug use is less prevalent there. Police and prosecutors say increased attention to the poor minority neighborhoods is necessary to combat higher rates of violent crime and disorder in those communities and to respond to community complaints about drug trafficking. Some see low-level drug arrests, including arrests for marijuana possession for personal use, as justified by the “broken windows” theory of law enforcement. The circumstances of life and the public nature of drug dealing in poor minority neighborhoods make drug arrests there less difficult and less time-consuming than in middle- or upper-class neighborhoods. In the former, drug transactions are more likely to take place on the streets, in public spaces, and among strangers (Beckett et al. 2005; Beckett, Nyrop, and Pfingst 2006; Tonry 2011). In white neighborhoods, drug transactions are more likely to occur indoors, in bars and clubs, private homes, and offices, and between people who already know each other. Here is how former New York City Police Commissioner Lee Brown explained the police concentration in minority neighborhoods and the consequent racial impact: In most large cities, the police focus their attention on where they see conspicuous drug use—street-corner drug sales—and where they get the most complaints. Conspicuous drug use is generally in your low-income neighborhoods that generally turn out to be your minority neighborhoods.…It’s easier for police to make an arrest when you have people selling drugs on the street corner than those who are [selling or buying drugs] in the suburbs or in office buildings. The end result is that more blacks are arrested than whites because of the relative ease in making those arrests. (Bertram et al. 1996, p. 41) But even in mixed-race outdoor venues, blacks are at disproportionate risk of drug arrests. In a mixed-race drug market in Seattle, Beckett and her colleagues found that 4 percent of drug deliveries involved a black seller, but 32 percent of drug delivery arrestees were black ( But even in mixed-race outdoor venues, blacks are at disproportionate risk of drug arrests. In a mixed-race drug market in Seattle, Beckett and her colleagues found that 4 percent of drug deliveries involved a black seller, but 32 percent of drug delivery arrestees were black ( Beckett, Nyrop, and Pfingst 2006 ). Disproportionate drug arrests of minority suspects also reflect political and legal considerations. Street arrests are less complicated legally. William Stuntz observed, “the law of search and seizure disfavors drug law enforcement operations in upscale (and hence predominantly white) neighborhoods: serious cause is required to get a warrant to search a house, whereas it takes very little for police to initiate street encounters” (Stuntz 1998, p. 1823). Residents of middle- and upper-class white neighborhoods would (p. 211) also most likely object vigorously if they were subjected to aggressive drug law enforcement and, unlike low-income minority residents, they possess the economic resources and political clout to force politicians and the police to pay attention to their concerns. The bottom line is that it is “much more difficult, expensive, and politically sensitive to attempt serious drug enforcement in predominantly white and middle-class communities” (Frase 2009, p. 243). A self-fulfilling prophecy may be at work. If police target minority neighborhoods for drug arrests, the drug offenders they encounter will be primarily black or Hispanic. Darker faces become the faces of drug offenders, which may also contribute to racial profiling. Extensive research shows that police are more likely to stop black drivers than whites, and they search more stopped blacks than whites, even though they do not have a valid basis for doing so. Similarly, blacks have been disproportionately targeted in “stop and frisk” operations in which police searching for drugs or guns temporarily detain, question, and pat down pedestrians (Fellner 2009). Although police generally find drugs, guns, or other illegal contraband at lower rates among the blacks they stop than the whites, the higher rates at which blacks are stopped result in greater absolute numbers of arrests (Tonry 2011). According to Stuntz, “racial profiling is almost inevitable. Race becomes one of the readily observable visual clues to help identify drug suspects, along with age, gender, and location. There is a certain rationality to this—if you are in poor black neighborhoods, drug dealers are more likely to be black” (1998, p. 1829). Katherine Beckett and her colleagues showed that drug arrests in Seattle reflected racialized perceptions of drugs and their users (Beckett et al. 2005; Beckett, Nyrop, and Pfingst 2006). Although the majority of those who shared, sold, or transferred serious drugs were white, almost two-thirds (64.2 percent) of drug arrestees were black. Black drug sellers were overrepresented among those arrested in predominantly white outdoor settings, in racially mixed outdoor settings, and even among those who were arrested indoors. Three-quarters of outdoor drug possession arrests involving powder cocaine, heroin, crack cocaine, and methamphetamines were crack-related even though only one-third of the transactions involved that drug. Among indoor drug possession arrests, 69.6 percent involved crack even though only 25 percent of the transactions involved crack. The disproportionate pattern of arrests resulted from the police department’s emphasis on the outdoor drug market in the racially diverse downtown area of the city, its lack of emphasis on outdoor markets that were predominantly white, and, most important, its emphasis on crack. Crack was involved in one-third of drug transactions but three-quarters of drug delivery arrests; blacks constituted 79 percent of crack arrests. The researchers could not find racially neutral explanations for the police emphasis on crack in arrests for drug possession or sale, or for the concentration of enforcement activity in the racially diverse downtown area rather than predominantly white outdoor areas or indoor markets. These emphases did not appear to be products of the frequency of crack transactions compared to other drugs, public safety or public health concerns, crime rates, or citizen complaints. The researchers concluded that the choices reflected ways in which race shapes police perceptions of who and what constitutes the most (p. 212) pressing drug problems. Blacks are disproportionately arrested in Seattle because of “the assumption that the drug problem is, in fact, a black and Latino one, and that crack, the drug most strongly associated with urban blacks, is ‘the worst’” (Beckett et al. 2005, p. 436; Beckett, Nyrop, and Pfingst 2006). In 2010, as Table 7.4 shows, cocaine (including crack) and heroin arrests accounted for 22.5 percent of drug arrests nationwide even though, as Figure 7.3 shows, only a very small percentage of drug users (white or black) report using cocaine in any form. In a recent survey of the prevalence and frequency of heroin use, SAMHSA (1999) found that 1.1 percent of persons aged 12 and older reported using heroin in their lifetime, and 0.1 reported using it in the preceding year. Blacks were more likely than whites to report using heroin, but the percentages are quite low: 1.9 of non-Hispanic blacks reported ever using heroin and 0.2 reported using it in the past year. The proportion of drug arrests for cocaine and heroin thus seem to bear only a slight relationship to the prevalence of their use. In 2010, of all black drug arrests, 30.7 percent were for cocaine and heroin; (p. 213) 19 percent of white drug arrests were for these drugs. Boyum, Caulkins, and Kleiman (2011) observe that the enforcement of laws criminalizing cocaine accounts for “about 20 percent of the nation’s law enforcement, prosecution, and corrections” (p. 377). Table 7.4 Arrests by type of offense, drug, and race, 2010 White Black Native American Asian Total Sales Cocaine/Heroin 34,787 45,635 346 351 81,119 42.9% 56.3% 0.4% 0.4% 100% Marijuana 50,196 30,210 582 838 81,826 61.3% 36.9% 0.7% 1.0% 100% Other 60,015 11,369 480 703 72,567 82.7% 15.7% 0.7% 1.0% 100% Total 144,998 87,214 1,408 1,892 235,512 61.6% 37.0% 0.6% 0.8% 100% Possession Cocaine/Heroin 132,466 74,107 772 1,410 208,755 63.5% 35.5% 0.4% 0.7% 100% Marijuana 392,127 187,577 4,806 4,906 589,416 66.5% 31.8% 0.8% 0.8% 100% Other 207,809 41,004 2,009 2,718 253,540 82.0% 16.2% 0.8% 1.1% 100% Total 732,402 302,688 7,587 9,034 1,051,711 69.6% 28.8% 0.9% 0.9% 100% Total 877,400 389,902 8,996 10,926 1,287,223 68.2% 30.3% 0.7% 0.8% 100% (*) Includes manufactured narcotics that can cause true drug addiction (Demerol and Methadone) and other dangerous non-narcotic drugs (barbiturates and Benzedrine). Source: Data provided by Federal Bureau of Investigation to author.