2016 Presidential Candidates Sign Americans for Tax Reform Pledge
As of Sept. 1, ten candidates have signed the ATR pledge: Paul - Cruz - Rubio - Fiorina - Perry - Santorum - Carson - Christie - Gilmore - Jindal .

Additionally Huckabee signed a pledge of his own devising.



Jeb Bush is not signing any pledges. Kasich intentions unclear; see: John Harwood. "10 questions with Ohio Gov. John Kasich." CNBC , July 14, 2015.



Bobby Jindal Signs Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American People

Jim Gilmore Signs Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American People

If You’re Running for President, Do You Really Want This Endorsement?

Chris Christie Signs Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American People

Norquist Statement on Walker Tax Record

Ben Carson Signs Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American People

Lindsey Graham Calls for $3.3 Trillion Tax Hike

Rick Santorum Signs Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American People





Rick Perry Signs Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American People





Mike Huckabee: Tax Hikes Are Off the Table



I, Mike Huckabee, pledge allegiance to God, the Constitution, and the citizens of the United States:

I will adhere to the Constitution of the United States.

I will oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.

I will advocate for a complete overhaul of our tax system. This means passing the FairTax and abolishing the IRS.

I will support a Balanced Budget Amendment to the Constitution.

I will now, and will for the duration of my presidency, promote and sign all measures leading to Obamacare’s defunding, deauthorization, and repeal.

I will oppose amnesty and government benefits for illegal immigrants who violated our laws, repeal President Obama's unconstitutional executive orders, and secure our borders.

I will stand for the sanctity of all human life from the moment of conception until the grave. Taking this unequivocal stand includes fighting to defund Planned Parenthood.

I will stand for the Institution of Marriage and vigorously oppose any redefinition.

I will defend our 2nd Amendment rights and oppose gun control legislation.

I will fight for the United States military to be the most feared, respected, and capable fighting force the world has ever known. I will restore our military infrastructure after years of abuse and neglect.

I will stand with our friend and ally Israel in our shared fight against Radical Islam.

I will do everything in my power to prevent Iran from obtaining nuclear capability.

I will end the national disgrace of failing to properly care for our veterans.

I will protect Social Security and Medicare and never rob seniors of the benefits they were promised and forced to pay for.

I will fight to kill Common Core and restore common sense. Education is a family function - not a federal function.

I will support the elevation of none but faithful constitutionalists as judges or justices. They must be committed to restraint and applying the original meaning of the Constitution, not legislating from the bench.

I will fight for term limits for members of Congress and judges.





September 1, 2015Governor Bobby Jindal (R-La.), a candidate for the presidency of the United States, has signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people. The pledge is a written commitment to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.”“I commend Governor Jindal for signing the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the hard working taxpayers of this country,” said Grover Norquist, President of Americans for Tax Reform. “Governor Jindal understands that government should be reformed so that it takes and spends less of the taxpayers’ money, and will oppose tax increases that paper over and continue the failures of the past."Of the 17 GOP Presidential candidates, nine have experience serving as chief executive of a state. A study by Dan Clifton, head of policy research at Strategas Research Partners, provides an apples-to-apples comparison of their record on government spending. The chart below compares the average annual increase in general fund spending during each Governor’s term. During his time in office, Gov. Jindal has the most aggressive anti-spending record:ATR has shared the Pledge with all candidates for federal office since 1986. In the 114th Congress, 49 U.S. Senators and 218 members of the U.S. House of Representatives have signed the Pledge. Pledge signers include Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, House Speaker John Boehner, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, and GOP Conference Chair Cathy McMorris Rodgers. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch and House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan are also pledge signers. On the state level, 13 incumbent governors and approximately 1,000 incumbent state legislators have signed the Pledge.Though it is still early in the 2016 nominating process, most of the GOP candidates have already made a written commitment to the American people that they will oppose and veto any tax increase in the event they are elected to the White House. Along with Jindal, these candidates include Marco Rubio, Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, Chris Christie, Rick Perry, Carly Fiorina, Dr. Ben Carson, Rick Santorum, Mike Huckabee, and Jim Gilmore.In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman. Huntsman finished seventh in Iowa and third in New Hampshire before dropping out of the race.August 27, 2015Former Governor Jim Gilmore (R-Va.), a candidate for the presidency of the United States, has signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people. The pledge is a written commitment to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.”“By signing the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, Governor Gilmore continues his commitment to the taxpayers of this country,” said Grover Norquist, President of Americans for Tax Reform. “Governor Gilmore understands that government should be reformed so that it takes and spends less of the taxpayers’ money, and will oppose tax increases that paper over and continue the failures of the past."Gilmore recently outlined The Growth Code, an aggressive pro-growth tax reform plan that includes a single 15 percent tax on all business income, three individual income tax rates of 10, 15, and 25 percent, immediate expensing of business investment, and a territorial tax system that allows American business earnings abroad to be returned to the U.S. without penalty.Gilmore served as governor of Virginia from 1998 to 2002. He led a successful campaign to phase out the state’s much-loathed car tax, saving Virginia families millions of dollars. As soon as he left office, the legislature froze the phase out before it fully took effect. (The Tax Foundation has a nice summary here.)Though it is still early in the 2016 nominating process, most of the GOP candidates have already made a written commitment to the American people that they will oppose and veto any tax increase in the event they are elected to the White House. Along with Gilmore, these candidates include Marco Rubio, Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, Chris Christie, Rick Perry, Carly Fiorina, Dr. Ben Carson, Rick Santorum, and Mike Huckabee.ATR has shared the Pledge with all candidates for federal office since 1986. In the 114th Congress, 49 U.S. Senators and 218 members of the U.S. House of Representatives have signed the Pledge. Pledge signers include Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, House Speaker John Boehner, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, and GOP Conference Chair Cathy McMorris Rodgers. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch and House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan are also pledge signers.On the state level, 13 incumbent governors and approximately 1,000 incumbent state legislators have signed the Pledge. The pledge-signing governors include Scott Walker (R-Wis.), John Kasich (R-Ohio), Rick Scott (R-Fla.), and Nikki Haley (R-S.C.).In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman. Huntsman finished seventh in Iowa and third in New Hampshire before dropping out of the race.August 18, 2015Yesterday morning, presidential hopeful John Kasich joined Alabama Governor Robert Bentley at the Alabama Sports Hall of Fame in Birmingham, where Gov. Bentley announced his endorsement of the Ohio governor’s presidential bid. In his statement following the announcement, Gov. Kasich touted the endorsement as an honor given Bentley’s “incredible record.”“What’s also significant to me is that Gov. Bentley reached out to our campaign, unsolicited, to offer his support,” he went on to say.This makes Gov. Bentley the third Republican governor to offer an endorsement to a presidential candidate—both Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan and Maine Gov. Paul LePage are throwing their support behind Chris Christie, who served as the chairman for the Republican Governors Association during their 2014 gubernatorial elections.An endorsement of this nature, particularly so early in a primary campaign with such a wide field, is unusual. Kasich’s camp highlighted the handful of topics on which he and Bentley disagree in an effort to prove that this endorsement represents the governor’s leadership as a consensus builder.However, the similarity that they conveniently glossed over is the governors’ weak fiscal records. Both Kasich and Bentley have been at odds with their Republican legislatures during budget negotiations over the last several months. Fortunately for Ohio taxpayers, the Republican House leadership was able to pass real tax relief that saved Ohioans over $3 billion more than would have been enacted by Kasich’s proposal. This contradiction has not stopped the governor from flaunting his fiscal record on the campaign trail as he attempts to win over the Republican base.With this goal in mind, it begs the question why would Kasich want Gov. Bentley’s endorsement? Despite being a Taxpayer Protection Pledge signer, and subsequent pledge-breaker, Bentley’s fiscal record is abysmal. He reneged on his promise of “No New Taxes” and has called for a second special session in another attempt to strong arm the legislature into adding $300 million in new taxes. In a primary race where moderate candidates are vying for support from the conservative base, Gov. Kasich is hitching his horse to the wrong wagon.Some early responders warned that Bentley’s endorsement is a blow to other governors, particularly fellow southerners such as Bobby Jindal or Jeb Bush, because Alabama is one of a handful of southern states holding an early primary—becoming known as the “SEC primary.” But Bentley’s endorsement will likely make no difference for Kasich in the early primaries. Not all endorsements are created equal, and when it comes to Gov. Bentley’s flagging reputation the unsolicited endorsement is irrelevant at best, and at worst an association Kasich’s team should be hesitant to embrace.August 12, 2015Governor Chris Christie (R-N.J.), a candidate for the presidency of the United States, has signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people. The pledge is a written commitment to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.”Governor Christie has consistently vetoed $1.6 billion in annual tax hikes passed by the Democrat-run legislature. Their attempt to create a new top tax bracket of 10.75 percent has been included in each of the five budgets sent to Christie. Democrats also sought to impose a 15 percent corporate tax surcharge in each of the last two budgets. Each time, the Governor's veto pen has been the only thing standing in the way of those taxes passing in the Garden State.“Governor Chris Christie has vetoed more tax hikes than any other Governor in modern American history,” said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform. “And he made those vetoes stick. Without the Christie governorship, New Jersey would be somewhere between Detroit and Greece.”Though the 2016 nomination contest is just getting underway, most of the GOP candidates have already made a written commitment to the American people that they will oppose and veto any tax increase in the event they are elected to the White House. These candidates include Marco Rubio, Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, Rick Perry, Carly Fiorina, Rick Santorum, Dr. Ben Carson, and Mike Huckabee.“By signing the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people, Governor Christie continues his commitment to protect American taxpayers,” said Norquist. “Governor Christie understands that government should be reformed so that it takes and spends less of the taxpayers’ money, and will oppose tax increases that paper over and continue the failures of the past."ATR has shared the Pledge with all candidates for federal office since 1986. In the 114th Congress, 49 U.S. Senators and 218 members of the U.S. House of Representatives have signed the Pledge. Pledge signers include Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, House Speaker John Boehner, House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy, House Majority Whip Steve Scalise, and GOP Conference Chair Cathy McMorris Rodgers. Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch and House Ways and Means Committee Chairman Paul Ryan are also pledge signers. On the state level, 13 incumbent governors and approximately 1,000 incumbent state legislators have signed the Pledge.In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman. Huntsman finished seventh in Iowa and third in New Hampshire before dropping out of the race.July 13, 2015ATR president Grover Norquist issued the following statement today on the occasion of Governor Scott Walker’s entrance into the 2016 Presidential race:“Walker signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge when he first ran for governor. He has kept that pledge. He has cut taxes repeatedly and significantly. He has seen every challenge as an opportunity to reform government to cost less rather than as an excuse to dig deeper into the pockets of taxpayers.”July 8, 2015 [signed July 7 in Exeter, NH]Dr. Ben Carson, a candidate for the presidency of the United States, has signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people.The pledge is a written commitment to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.”“By signing the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people, Ben Carson pledges to protect American taxpayers against higher taxes,” said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform. “Dr. Carson understands that government should be reformed so that it takes and spends less of the taxpayers’ money, and will oppose tax increases that paper over and continue the failures of the past."Though still early in the GOP presidential contest, most formally declared candidates have made a written commitment to the American people to oppose and veto tax hikes. Carson joins Marco Rubio, Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, Carly Fiorina, Rick Perry, Rick Santorum, and Mike Huckabee in making this promise.ATR has shared the Pledge with all candidates for federal office since 1986. In the 114th Congress, 49 U.S. Senators and 218 members of the U.S. House of Representatives have signed the Pledge. On the state level, 13 incumbent governors and approximately 1,000 incumbent state legislators have signed the Pledge.In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman. Huntsman finished seventh in Iowa and third in New Hampshire before dropping out of the race.June 17, 2015Senator Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), a candidate for President of the United States, recently called on Congress to pass the Simpson-Bowles budget plan during an interview on CNN’s “State of the Union.” Simpson-Bowles would raise taxes by as much as $3.3 trillion over ten years, but has failed to gain traction in Congress since being released in 2010.If Senator Graham has his way, taxes will be $3.264 trillion higher over the next ten years, and already-overtaxed businesses and families will be taxed a total of $5.8 trillion in 2025. Under current law, taxes as a percentage of GDP are projected to reach 18.3 percent by 2025. But if Simpson-Bowles goes into effect, taxes as a percentage of GDP will spike to 21 percent.Senator Graham’s support for Simpson-Bowles places him at odds with rival GOP Presidential candidates, many of whom have come out against new tax hikes. Already, a number of Graham’s rivals have made firm commitments not to raise taxes if elected President. This list includes Senators Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, and Marco Rubio; Former Governors Mike Huckabee, and Rick Perry; Former Senator Rick Santorum, and Carly Fiorina.Read more: http://www.atr.org/lindsey-graham-calls-33-trillion-tax-hike#ixzz3kiOpZj00Follow us: @taxreformer on TwitterJune 11, 2015Former Senator Rick Santorum (R-Pa.), a candidate for the presidency of the United States, has signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people.The pledge is a written commitment to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.”“By signing the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people, Senator Santorum continues his tradition of protecting American taxpayers against higher taxes,” said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform. “Senator Santorum understands that government should be reformed so that it takes and spends less of the taxpayers’ money, and will oppose tax increases that paper over and continue the failures of the past."ATR has shared the Pledge with all candidates for federal office since 1986. In the 114th Congress, 49 U.S. Senators and 218 members of the U.S. House of Representatives have signed the Pledge. On the state level, 13 incumbent governors and approximately 1,000 incumbent state legislators have signed the Pledge.Senator Santorum signed and kept the Taxpayer Protection Pledge as a Senator for Pennsylvania and as a candidate for President in 2012.In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman. Huntsman finished seventh in Iowa and third in New Hampshire before dropping out of the race.June 8, 2015Former Governor Rick Perry (R-Texas), a candidate for the presidency of the United States, has signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people.The pledge is a written commitment to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.”“By signing the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people, Governor Perry continues his tradition of protecting American taxpayers against higher taxes,” said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform. “Governor Perry understands that government should be reformed so that it takes and spends less of the taxpayers’ money, and will oppose tax increases that paper over and continue the failures of the past."ATR has shared the Pledge with all candidates for federal office since 1986. In the 114th Congress, 49 U.S. Senators and 218 members of the U.S. House of Representatives have signed the Pledge. On the state level, 13 incumbent governors and approximately 1,000 incumbent state legislators have signed the Pledge.Governor Perry signed and kept the Taxpayer Protection Pledge as the Governor of Texas and as a candidate for President in 2012.“Governor Rick Perry led Texas for 14 years. He has kept taxes low, fought the trial lawyers and regulators -- both in Texas and Washington -- and created a pro-growth environment that made it possible for Texans to create new jobs and opportunities faster than in other states," said Norquist.In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman. Huntsman finished seventh in Iowa and third in New Hampshire before dropping out of the race.May 14, 2015Former Arkansas Governor Mike Huckabee (R), a candidate for the presidency of the United States, has made a written pledge to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to raise taxes.”“Governor Huckabee has pledged in writing to the American people that he will oppose and veto any and all tax increases,” said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform. “His public commitment makes it clear that he will fight to reform government to cost less rather than paper over and continue past failures with higher taxes."Governor Huckabee also ruled out tax hikes as a candidate for President in 2008. Among declared 2016 GOP presidential candidates, Huckabee joins Marco Rubio, Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, and Carly Fiorina in pledging to oppose any and all tax increases.In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president pledged to oppose tax hikes with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman. Huntsman finished seventh in Iowa and third in New Hampshire before dropping out of the race.

May 7, 2015



Carly Fiorina Signs Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American People



Carly Fiorina, a candidate for the presidency of the United States, has signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people.



The pledge is a written commitment to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.”



Previously, Fiorina signed the Pledge as a U.S. Senate candidate from California in 2010. “Carly has a long history of supporting and defending taxpayers,” said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform.



Among declared 2016 GOP presidential candidates, Fiorina joins Marco Rubio, Rand Paul, and Ted Cruz in signing the Pledge.



ATR has shared the Pledge with all candidates for federal office since 1986. In the 114th Congress, 49 U.S. Senators and 218 members of the U.S. House of Representatives have signed the Pledge. On the state level, 13 incumbent governors and approximately 1,000 incumbent state legislators have signed the Pledge.



In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman.



“By signing the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people, Carly Fiorina continues to protect American taxpayers against higher taxes,” said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform. “Fiorina understands that government should be reformed so that it takes and spends less of the taxpayers’ money, and will oppose tax increases that paper over and continue the failures of the past."



Senator Marco Rubio Signs Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American People

Senator Ted Cruz Signs Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American People

Senator Rand Paul Signs Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American People

Jeb Bush Still Refuses to Rule Out Tax Hikes

The 1990 “Read My Lips” Budget Deal Scam

What was Promised:

What Actually Happened:

April 28, 2015Senator Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), a candidate for the presidency of the United States, has signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people.The pledge is a written commitment to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.”Senator Rubio signed and kept the Taxpayer Protection Pledge as the Speaker of the Florida House of Representatives. He is a Pledge signer in his current capacity as a U.S. Senator and has kept his promise to Floridians.ATR has shared the Pledge with all candidates for federal office since 1986. In the 114th Congress, 49 U.S. Senators and 218 members of the U.S. House of Representatives have signed the Pledge. On the state level, 13 incumbent governors and approximately 1,000 incumbent state legislators have signed the Pledge.In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman.“Senator Rubio is a longtime leader in the taxpayer movement. He signed and kept the Pledge as a Florida state House representative and as a United States Senator. By signing the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people, Senator Rubio continues to protect American taxpayers against higher taxes,” said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform. “Senator Rubio understands that government should be reformed so that it takes and spends less of the taxpayers’ money, and will oppose tax increases that paper over and continue the failures of the past."April 24, 2015Today, Senator Ted Cruz (R-Texas), a candidate for the presidency of the United States, signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people.The pledge is a written commitment to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.”ATR has shared the Pledge with all candidates for federal office since 1986. In the 114th Congress, 49 U.S. Senators and 218 members of the U.S. House of Representatives have signed the Pledge. On the state level, 13 incumbent governors and approximately 1,000 incumbent state legislators have signed the Pledge.In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman.Senator Cruz signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge as a Senate candidate in the 2012 cycle and has kept his pledge to the people of Texas.“By signing the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people, Senator Cruz continues to protect American taxpayers against higher taxes,” said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform. “Senator Cruz understands that government should be reformed so that it takes and spends less of the taxpayers’ money, and will oppose tax increases that paper over and continue the failures of the past."April 24, 2015Today, Senator Rand Paul (R-Ky.), a candidate for the presidency of the United States, signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people.Senator Paul is the first candidate for the 2016 Republican nomination to sign the Taxpayer Protection Pledge.The pledge is a written commitment to the American people to “oppose and veto any and all efforts to increase taxes.”ATR has shared the Pledge with all candidates for federal office since 1986. In the 114th Congress, 49 U.S. Senators and 218 members of the U.S. House of Representatives have signed the Pledge. On the state level, 13 incumbent governors and approximately 1,000 incumbent state legislators have signed the Pledge.In 2012, all candidates for the Republican nomination for president signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge, with the lone exception of former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman.Senator Paul signed the Taxpayer Protection Pledge as a Senate candidate in the 2010 cycle and has kept his pledge to the people of Kentucky.“By signing the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people, Senator Paul continues to protect American taxpayers against higher taxes,” said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform. “Senator Paul understands that government should be reformed so that it takes and spends less of the taxpayers’ money, and will oppose tax increases that paper over and continue the failures of the past."March 19, 2015Jeb Bush has enthusiastically endorsed a "grand bargain" tax increase with Democrats, says his father's 1990 "Read My Lips" tax increase "created the spending restraint of the 90's," (false -- see details below) and refuses to sign the Taxpayer Protection Pledge to the American people.And today, as reported in a piece by The Daily Beast's Tim Mak, the Jeb Bush camp refuses to even answer the question of whether Jeb will make any general statement promising not to raise taxes:Pressed regarding Jeb Bush’s positions on taxes, his aides did not directly respond to a question about whether Jeb Bush might make a general promise to voters more broadly not to raise taxes.Meanwhile, as governors, Scott Walker, Bobby Jindal, and Rick Perry have all signed — and kept — the Taxpayer Protection Pledge. As Senators, Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, and Marco Rubio have all signed — and kept — the pledge.As president, George W. Bush kept his tax promise to the American people.George H.W. Bush, reflecting upon his "Read My Lips" tax hike, deemed it the greatest mistake of his presidency.Regarding Jeb's claim that the 1990 Read My Lips tax hike created spending restraint, let's take a look at what actually happened:Starting in May of 1990, President George H.W. Bush huddled with Democrat House and Senate members at Andrews Air Force Base.Congressional Democrats convinced a number of Republicans to join them in a bipartisan deal promising $2 in spending cuts for every $1 in tax increases. President Bush signed the deal on November 5, 1990.Every penny of the tax increases ($137 billion from 1991-1995) went through. Not only did the Democrats break their promise to cut spending below the CBO baseline by $274 billion—they actually spent $23 billion above CBO’s pre-budget deal spending baseline. Thirty-four House Republicans broke their own Taxpayer Protection Pledges and went along with this one-sided “deal.” As a result, Republicans lost eight seats in the 1990 Congressional midterms, and President Bush only received 38% of the vote in the 1992 Presidential election.