Bills: Pay Florida teachers $10,000 more a year
Florida state senator Joseph Abruzzo (dem-Wellington) talks with teachers gathered at Palm Beach Central High School to inform them that he wants to boost the average salaries of Florida's teachers to the national average by the year 2015. "I am proud to file Fair Teacher Pay legislation as my first bill in the Florida Senate because I recognize how fundamentally valuable our educators are." said Abruzzo. (Allen Eyestone/The Palm Beach Post)

After years of feeling neglected and underpaid by their state Legislature, a classroom of local teachers was shown some love Monday by two Palm Beach County legislators in the form of twin bills that would give the average Florida teacher a $10,000 raise starting in two years.

“It’s terrible. It’s disgusting to state that (Florida) teachers make far less than the national average, and nobody ever does anything about it,” said state Rep. Kevin Rader, D-Delray Beach, who joined state Sen. Joe Abruzzo, D-Wellington, in telling a group of teachers at Palm Beach Central High School about the bills the pair sponsored this month.

Abruzzo said the bills would put a state constitutional amendment on the November ballot. The amendment, if approved by voters, would require that all beginning and experienced Florida teachers be paid at least the national average salary for teachers in their same position. Abruzzo estimated that the national average salary for all teachers is about $56,000, and the average salary for all Florida teachers is about $46,000.

“We’re paying our teachers $10,000 less than the rest of the nation,” he said. “To me, that’s wrong.”

The lawmakers’ announcement came less than a week after Gov. Rick Scott, not previously thought of as a fan of teachers, introduced his own plan calling for $480 million in state money to give every teacher a $2,500 raise. Abruzzo’s teacher raise bill actually was filed on Jan. 8, long before Scott’s announcement; and Rader said when the two lawmakers came up with the bills they had no idea of the governor’s proposal.

Longtime teachers Don Persson and Dana Drummond said they felt like the bills were finally giving them hope after years with little or no raises, with increases in health insurance, pension payments and the cost of living taking more out of their paychecks.

“When you’re shackled with debt and shackled with fear, it is hard,” Persson said. “Hearing some of these bills kind of takes the shackles off.”

Still others, like Kaylynn Knapp and Jackie Moran, asked where the money would come from every year to pay for those raises. They said funding will be the biggest obstacle.

“I’m hopeful, but I’m leery again,” Moran said.

Abruzzo couldn’t provide an answer to the funding question. Nor could he give an estimate of how much it would cost to give tens of thousands of public schoolteachers raises that would average $10,000 each. But he did say that the proposed raises would not take effect until 2015, so the Legislature had two years to find the money.

That action could come much quicker, however. With the state’s 2014 gubernatorial election year approaching, neither side of the political aisle seems willing to cede the teacher vote to the other.

Rader, for example, claimed that his and Abruzzo’s bills do far more to improve teacher pay than Scott’s proposal. But Rader and several teachers on Monday believe the fact that the Republican governor is even calling for teacher raises is a good sign that the proposals could get support enough to pass the Republican-led Legislature.

Still, teachers at Monday’s news conference said they had no illusions as to why they were suddenly getting a warm and fuzzy feeling from state politicians. “They are finally looking at the numbers and saying there are a lot of voters out there,” Knapp said.

Rader told the teachers that the teacher unions will need to call and email legislators to push the bills through.

Moran said she thought state voters may not approve $10,000 raises but probably would vote for some lesser amount.

After six years, she said, she actually takes home less pay than when she started because of insurance and pension cost increases. She both works a second job and drives a school activity bus after hours to make ends meet.

“The time of beating teachers to death is over,” Moran said.

Meanwhile, Palm Beach County School Board member Mike Murgio, himself a former teacher, cautioned that the state money used for raises should not come from other areas of education funding.