Editorial: Is Rick Scott really ready to take his medicine?
By Randy Schultz

Editor of the Editorial Page

As a private citizen, Gov. Rick Scott campaigned against President Barack Obama’s attempt to pass health care reform. As governor, Rick Scott has refused to let Florida implement any key part of the law, even after the Supreme Court in June declared the law constitutional.

This week, however, the governor declared that he finally may be dropping his opposition to the Affordable Care Act, which he told The Palm Beach Post a year ago would “never become the law of the land.” He is ready to negotiate with Washington, the governor told the Associated Press: “The election is over, and President Obama won. I’m responsible for the families of Florida … If I can get to yes, I want to get to yes.”

Gov. Scott is right that an election caused this belated attempt at cooperation. The election in question, though, is the one in November 2014, when the governor will be on the ballot. Despite the supposed baggage of the health care law and Republican charges that the law “steals” $716 billion from Medicare to cover some of the currently uninsured, President Obama carried Gov. Scott’s state.

For all the criticism of the Affordable Care Act, polls before the election indicated that most Americans believe that it will be implemented, with any changes being minor. Interestingly, some of the criticism has been that the law isn’t transformational enough. True enough. But most Americans like the idea of being able to keep children on their parents’ policies until age 26 and forbidding insurance companies from denying coverage to people with preexisting conditions.

The current issue is the exchanges that the health care law creates and are designed to help individuals and owners of small businesses purchase insurance. They have the least bargaining power in the existing health insurance market, but on the exchanges they could become business that companies can compete for.

Like other Republican governors, Gov. Scott has refused to create an exchange on its own. The state missed Friday’s deadline, set by the federal government, to create its own exchange. Tallahassee’s new Senate and House leaders have expressed interest in a state-federal exchange. The deadline to submit plans for such an exchange is Feb. 15. The exchange is supposed to open in January 2014, when all the other major provisions of the law take effect.

Florida has lost valuable time because Gov. Scott and legislative leaders continued to insist that the Supreme Court would strike down the health care law. Now, the state has to rush, and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services must make sure that a state-federal exchange offers health plans with adequate coverage.

Since the Affordable Care Act became law in March 2010, The Post has advocated improvement of the law, not repeal. Gov. Scott and other Republicans, though, have offered no alternative during their many months of putting politics over helping Floridians obtain health insurance. Given the results on Nov. 6, Gov. Scott now believes that he has no political alternative but to make nice. But will be make good on his promise of cooperation?

Randy Schultz

for The Post Editorial Board