Schultz: With immigration reform, Putnam ready on the right
Wherever you stand on illegal immigration, Florida Agriculture Commissioner Adam Putnam offers a tempting target.

If you're on the anti-capitalist far left, and believe that anyone associated with agriculture wants only to exploit foreign workers, Adam Putnam is the good-ol'-boy citrus farmer who now is the chief booster for every farmer in Florida. If you're on the nativist far right, and believe that the only solution is to ship the illegals back to whatever Hispanic country they came from, Adam Putnam is the corporate stooge who wanted Congress to grant amnesty.

And if you're in the middle, Adam Putnam is the bright, young congressman who supported immigration reform but couldn't pass it, and thus left the problem to fester.

Indeed, Mr. Putnam is a tough guy to stereotype. His conservative credentials are beyond dispute. In the U.S. House, he rose to a top leadership position when the GOP ran things. He was a tax-cutting, gun-owning, abortion-banning lawmaker.

But Mr. Putnam also voted in 2008 for the financial bailout that the tea party hates, and can explain in fingernails-on-a-blackboard detail the doom that then-Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson foretold if Congress didn't throw that $700 billion Hail Mary pass. All the Troubled Asset Relief Program did, of course, was stave off a second depression, at what probably will be no net cost to the taxpayers.

Mr. Putnam also supported the sort of comprehensive immigration reform that some talk-show hosts live off by chastising. If President Bush had had enough Adam Putnams in the Republican House and Senate caucuses in 2005 or 2006 or even 2007 - with the Democrats in charge - he might have pulled off that political triumph. As a fallback, Mr. Putnam backed a bill that would have granted legal status just to farmworkers. That failed, too.

This year, Mr. Putnam didn't testify when the Legislature debated immigration. But he opposed bills that would have allowed police to arrest someone who, as the result of an investigation, was found to be here illegally, and forced employers to use the federal E-Verify system to check legal status.

E-Verify, he said, "is unreliable." Deputizing local law enforcement as Border Patrol agents "won't work." Like Sen. J.D. Alexander, also a citrus farmer, Mr. Putnam dismisses simplistic ideas on immigration. "This is one issue," he said, "where the far left and the far right come together" and block any compromise.

One article of faith among critics of such legislation is that illegal immigrants take jobs from Americans. When it comes to farm jobs, Mr. Putnam said, that assumption is "demonstrably false," though all he could offer in an interview was a conversation with the president of the Florida Fruit and Vegetable Association. The Florida Agency for Workforce Innovation supposedly advertised for native farmworkers, and almost none of those who showed up lasted more than 30 days.

It would be no surprise. Two generations ago, when Edward R. Murrow filmed his Harvest of Shame documentary in the Glades, poor American blacks filled the migrant stream that stocked the country's pantry. Their descendants want more, so most of today's farmworkers are unskilled, often illegal Latinos. "If you read the history of immigration in this country," Mr. Putnam said, "you see that it was always somebody being discriminated against. In the 19th century, it was bringing the Chinese in to build the railroads."

The most reliable studies have concluded that illegal immigrants take some jobs from Americans who don't have a college education. The debate over "stolen" jobs gets dicier when you move up from farm work to the tourism industry and higher still to construction.

We are here because in 1986 Ronald Reagan signed the Simpson-Mazzolli immigration bill that, in essence, did grant amnesty. The impact from that law and the new patterns of legal immigrations are as formal as the Pew study showing that Hispanics accounted for more than half the nation's growth in the past decade and as shirtsleeve as "Press 1 for English."

But Immigration and Customs Enforcement has a limit of 400,000 people it can remove from the country each year. The guess is that there are 11 million illegals, and that 400,000 must include those who overstay visas and have generated suspicion.

For all we talk about the problem, we do little to address it. "My position on immigration," Mr. Putnam says, "is not popular with the right wing of my party." Those who confront the extremes of their party on big issues, though, don't deserve to be targets. They need cover.