THE LATEST: NRA breaks silence on Orlando shooting
3:40 a.m. UPDATE: A GoFundMe campaign to raise funds for the victims of Sunday’s shooting is approaching the $3 million mark.

GoFundMe vice president of communications Dan Pfeiffer tweeted Monday morning that the campaign, started by LGBT rights group Equality Florida, had passed $1 million faster than any other in the history of the platform.

At 3:40 a.m. Tuesday, the campaign had raised more than $2.93 million.

Read more here.

12:50 a.m. UPDATE: The National Rifle Association has spoken for the first time since Sunday’s shooting in Orlando.

The NRA’s Twitter account had remained silent for more than 36 hours after the attack, which left 49 dead and 53 injured. But it posted a link to an opinion piece written for USA Today by the head of the organization’s Institute for Legislative Action subsidiary, Chris W. Cox.

In the piece, Cox slammed President Barack Obama and Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton for their renewed calls on gun control, saying the pair are “desperate to create the illusion that they’re doing something to protect us,” calling it a “transparent head fake” that will “do nothing to prevent the next attack.”

READ: Port St. Lucie store owner confirms Orlando shooter purchased from him

Cox said that Congress’s decade-long ban on the manufacture of semi-automatic firearms from 1994 to 2004 “had no impact” and that “radical Islam is a hate crime waiting to happen.”

The gunman, Omar Mateen, of Fort Pierce, used a .223 caliber AR-15 rifle and a 9mm Glock 17 handgun in the attack on the gay nightclub. Both weapons were legally purchased.

Read more at USA Today.

12:10 a.m. UPDATE: According to Reuters, Disney will increase the security presence at its theme parks after the mass shooting in Orlando.

The Wall Street Journal reported Monday that Omar Mateen, the gunman who killed 49 people Sunday night in Pulse nightclub, about 15 miles north of Walt Disney World, had visited the Florida theme park when looking for a possible target for the attack.

Walt Disney Co. said in email statement reported by Reuters that it would be “adding such visible safeguards as magnetometers, additional canine units, and law enforcement officers on site, as well as less visible systems.”

Read full coverage of the Orlando shootings

11:20 p.m. UPDATE: The University of Central Florida has confirmed two of the victims who died in Pulse nightclub were students of the school.

KnightNews.com, the university’s news website, reported Monday evening that Juan Ramon Guerrero and Christopher Andrew Leinonen attended the school.

Guerrero was a pre-finance student and Leinonen, graduated with a master’s degree in 2009.

UCF will hold a candlelight vigil Tuesday night in memory of the victims. Read more here.

9:20 p.m. UPDATE: Authorities have identified the 49th and final victim of the shooting as as Geraldo A. Ortiz-Jimenez, 25.

8:46 pm UPDATE: President Barack Obama will visit Orlando on Thursday, White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said Monday night.

“On Thursday, the President will travel to Orlando, Florida to pay his respects to victims’ families, and to stand in solidarity with the community as they embark on their recovery,” Earnest said. “We will have more information on the President’s trip in the coming days.”

» Video, photos, more: See full coverage of the Orlando shooting

8:35 p.m. UPDATE: All of the people injured in an attack at a gay nightclub in Orlando who still are at Orlando Regional Medical Center “currently have a positive prognosis and appear to be on the mend,” Orlando Health tweeted Monday night.

Orlando Health is the parent company of Orlando Regional Medical Center, where many of those injured in the mass shooting were taken early Sunday morning.

Earlier Monday, Orlando Health had said five patients remained in grave condition. Monday night, that was changed to five patients in critical condition.

During that earlier update at 11:44 a.m., 29 patients still were in the hospital, six had been discharged, and surgeons had performed 26 operations since the attack and six more surgeries were planned.

Eight surgeons from Orlando Regional Medical Center, along with two people injured in the shooting, will speak to the media Tuesday morning. The news conference will be streamed live here.

7:30 p.m. UPDATE: A group is urging news outlets not to use the name or photos of Omar Mateen, the gunman who shot and killed 49 people and injured 53 others at the Pulse nightclub in Orlando early Sunday morning.

The group, called No Notoriety, was founded by Tom and Caren Teves, who lost their son, Alex, in the mass shooting at an Aurora, Colorado, movie theater on July 20, 2012, according to www.nonotoriety.com.

According to the website, the group’s aim is “to reduce the amount of rampage mass killings that have escalated in both occurrence and severity over the last 15 years” by sending the message to potential killers that they will not gain fame from such acts.

Members of No Notoriety have been contacting various media outlets via its Twitter account, @NoNotoriety, since Sunday’s attack.

» Source: Arrest to made in next few days of possible accomplice in attack

On Sunday night’s episode of his show, “Last Week Tonight,” comedian John Oliver said he refused to use Mateen’s name or photo.

FBI Director James Comey said the same at a news conference Monday: “I am not using the killer’s name and I will try not to do that.”

6:20 p.m. UPDATE: The Orlando Police Department has released the names of the officers who shot at Omar Mateen, the gunman who killed 49 people and injured more than 50 others at the Pulse nightclub early Sunday morning.

Among the names is Officer Adam Gruler, a member of the Orlando Police Department since 2001, who was working an extra shift at the nightclub as security.

Also listed is police officer Michael Napolitano, who was shot in his Kevlar helmat by Mateen. Orlando Police Chief John Mina said Sunday that Napolitano was treated for minor injuries to his face.

The first patrol units on scene were Lt. Scott Smith, an OPD officer since 1992, and Sgt. Jeffrey Backhaus, an OPD officer since 2004.

The members of Orlando’s SWAT team who engaged in gunfire with Mateen were: Timothy Stanley, member of OPD since 1998; Kevin Easterling, member of OPD since 1994; Andrew Bishop, member of OPD since 1994; Sgt. James Parker, member of OPD since 1991; Det. Raul Rivas, member of OPD since 1992; Lt. Jonathan Bigelow, member of OPD since 2001; and Ricardo Duenas, member of OPD since 2014.

» PHOTOS: Orlando shooting

5:30 p.m. UPDATE: Officials now have released 48 of the 49 victims’ names in the Orlando nightclub shooting.

See the full list.

5:15 p.m. UPDATE: Steven Norsworthy, 24, was slated to move out of his parents’ house in Fort Pierce and into an apartment Sunday.

When he tried to check out his new home Sunday morning, he couldn’t get within two blocks.

Norsworthy lives in Woodland Condominium, the neighborhood where Orlando shooter Omar Mateen resided.

When Norsworthy heard about the deadliest shooting in American history, he said Mateen’s Fort Pierce address sounded familiar. Turned out they would have lived in the same complex.

Norsworthy signed the lease for his apartment Friday. The complex became a media and police hub Sunday.

“What are the odds?” he asked.

Monday morning, despite battling some media trucks, Northsworthy was able to move into the one-bedroom apartment.

He said the landlord was lucky to have just rented the apartment, noting that it will likely be hard to get new residents in the complex now.

— Olivia Hitchcock

4:25 p.m. UPDATE: Tricia Adorno, a neighbor who previously lived in the apartment above Omar Mateen in Fort Pierce, recalled seeing a woman wearing a “Muslim dress” — traditional Muslim clothing — and assumed she was Mateen’s wife.

It is not known if Mateen lived in the apartment with his second wife and child.

— Christine Stapleton

3:48 p.m. UPDATE: CNN reports Omar Mateen, the gunman who shot and killed 49 people and injured more than 50 others at an Orlando nightclub early Sunday morning, recently tried to purchase body armor.

A U.S. official reportedly told CNN that employees at the store, which CNN did not name, refused to sell Mateen Level III body armor.

3:46 p.m. UPDATE: A commonly repeated prayer from the Quran was written on a whiteboard on the refrigerator in Mateen’s apartment in Fort Pierce. The verse is the second verse of the first Surah of the Quran that is recited daily. The English translation: “All the praises be to God, the Lord of the Worlds.”

— Christine Stapleton

3:12 p.m. UPDATE: Governor Rick Scott spent time Monday at the community center in Orlando talking to grieving relatives of the victims of the Orlando nightclub shooting. “They’re devastated,” he said.

“I talked to a lady, she said she woke up (this morning) dreaming that her son had just walked into the house. Then she came to the realization that he’s not coming back. That’s going to happen to her for the rest of her life.”

He said another relative described her son recovering from a gunshot wound on his hospital bed “and his biggest worry was going back to work because he didn’t want to lose his job.”

“This is terrorism. This is evil,” Scott said.

— Joe Capozzi

As of 3:58 p.m. The names of 47 victims have been released.

One victim, Amanda Alvear, captured the shooting on Snapchat. See the video here.

Afternoon briefing in Orlando: FBI Director James Comey said there wasn’t any indication that Omar Mateen, the man identified as being responsible for the Orlando nightclub shooting, was part of a terror group.

“We are confident this killer was radicalized in at least some way via the Internet,” Comey said today in a briefing.

He added he would not use the killer’s name.

“You will notice I am not using the killer’s name and I will try not to do that,” Comey said. This is “so other twisted people don’t think this is a path to fame.”

Comey added that Mateen spoke with a 911 operator three times early Sunday. He also pledged loyalty to the Islamic State on the final call.

The FBI head confirmed that Mateen was under investigation for 10 months in 2013, and that investigators introduced him to confidential sources, followed him and reviewed communications. He also was questioned about his connection to Moner Abusalha, a Vero Beach resident who became the United States’ first suicide bomber in Syria.

Update 1 p.m. in Fort Pierce: Around mid-afternoon news crews discovered the back door to Mateen’s Fort Pierce apartment open. Some international reporters, including a foreign news correspondent were there and the photographer from Aftenposten went inside and said it was obvious a child lived there - the shower curtain was of Darth Vader, a bedroom was filled with Mickey Mouse, Captain America and Star Wars toys. It did not appear as if the FBI had tossed over the place very much, he said.

Fort Pierce Police Chief Diane Hobley-Burney returned the scene to assure residents of their safety and was alerted to the open door.

Update 11:06 a.m.: Authorities have now named 36 of the 49 victims who died in the shooting at Pulse in Orlando.

Update: 10:15 AM: In a sharp departure from his earlier statements that Omar Mateen’s Sunday shooting rampage at a gay Orlando nightclub was prompted by anger over the sight of two men kissing, Mateen’s father this morning said he now believes his son’s attack was an act of terrorism.

Seddique Mateen made his comments to reporters in his Port St. Lucie home this morning, at times putting his hand over his heart as he spoke.

Remorseful and shaken, Mateen said, “What my son did was the act of a terrorist.

Read more local and national coverage of the Orlando nightclub shooting

“My son was born in America. He went to school in America. I don’t understand why he did this,” he said, sitting on the living room couch surrounded by reporters during the 40-minute press conference.

The elder Mateen, who talked to his son the day before the shooting, said he had not noticed any change in behavior.

“If I had seen anything that showed he was thinking of doing something like this, I would have called law enforcement,” he said.

“I apologize to the families who lost loved ones. What my son did is against humanity,” he said.

Original post: More heartbreak is expected as the names of the victims in the Orlando nightclub shooting continue to be released and investigators dig deeper into the shooter’s life. This morning authorities clarified that the gunman, a 29-year-old from Port St. Lucie killed 49 people and injured 53 before he was killed,

Earlier, the death toll had been reported to be 50, but authorities clarified Monday that Omar Mateen was included in that count. Of those 49 dead, 48 have been identified and the last is pending.

As the families across the state and across the nation are contacted, their loved ones’ names are being posted on city’s website. At 8:12 a.m., 26 names had been posted.

“Our primary mission today is to continue to identify the victims,” said Danny Banks, speaking for the Florida Department of Law Enforcement.

The Investigation

Gov. Rick Scott said that he’s asked President Obama to declare a state of emergency across Florida, extending beyond what’s already in effect in Orlando, as law enforcement continue to track leads in the case.

The investigation does include a look at other people, said Lee Bentley with the U.S. Attorney’s office in Central Florida. He added that authorities do not believe those people pose an imminent danger and, he said, “We do not know yet if anyone else will be charged in this crime.”

FBI officials report they’ve processed “probably 100” leads in the case. Anyone with information about the shooter is asked to call 800-CALL FBI.

Monday, a shooting reconstruction team is inside Pulse nightclub to discern more details about what happened when Mateen opened fire, Orlando Police Chief John Mina said in a press briefing.

Mina also shared more details about the events beginning when an off-duty officer working at the gay nightclub Pulse in uniform responded when shots were fired. He fired and soon additional officers responded and entered engaging in another gun battle. Mina said the shooter then retreated to a restroom where authorities believed he had four or 5 hostages. There were 15 to 20 others in a neighboring bathroom.

With the shooter in the bathroom, authorities were able to rescue several people in the club, Mina said. And a negotiator got on the phone with the shooter.

Mina said no one was shot while Mateen was on the phone. “We were negotiating.” But there was talk of bombs and explosives that heightened police concerns that more violence was imminent and that’s when SWAT drove a tank through a club wall.

“We rescued dozens and dozens of people out of that hole. The suspect came out of that hole, engaged officers and was ultimately killed,” Mina said.

The shooter

Omar Mateen, 29, dialed 911, pledged allegiance to the ISIS terror group and then stormed the Pulse nightclub. Mateen had a house in Port St. Lucie that investigators searched Sunday.

He also had ties to an apartment in Fort Pierce. Overnight, authorities evacuated those residences and then searched the aparment, clearing the scene before sunrise Monday. The only hint of their presence is red investigation tape on the trunk of a Toyota Camry in the parking lot. Inside on the front seat, papers with Mateen’s name and a search and seizure warrant from the FBI.

The car fitted with a Marine Corps license plate sits in a “guest” space.

Veronica Beers, 28, was among the neighbors who had to clear out for authorities. After spending hours in the car with her husband and dog, they decided to spend the night in a hotel. Beers said her husband believes he may have seen Mateen before, but beyond a “hi” the residents don’t talk much, she said.

One report indicates that Mateen attended Martin County High School, and by those accounts graduated from there in 2004.

Mateen was did not isolate himself from gay people.

One of his former neighbors, Tricia Adorno, who is gay said their children played football together and that she considered him a friend. And just out of high school, about a decade ago, Samuel King, an openly gay drag queen, told The Daily Beast said the two often crossed paths when they both worked at the mall - Mateen worked at the supplement store GNC, King worked at Ruby Tuesday where Mateen stopped in to pick up lunch.

On Facebook, King posted his disbelief: “I can’t believe i knew this dude…. He worked at GNC at the treasure coast mall when i was at Ruby Tuesday’s and he Graduated from the same high school in 2004,” he wrote. “He was a jokester and at the time didn’t have an issue with the LGBT community.”

King saw no hint of homophobia. Said The Daily Beast: Quite the opposite: He said Mateen knew that he and many of his co-workers at Ruby Tuesday were gay, and didn’t seem to have a problem with it.

“That’s the thing that’s pinning me to the wall the most, that it was a gay nightclub,” King said. “Because he would come into the [the restaurant] and laugh with us. … He might’ve even sat down at the bar and had a drink and laughed with the bartenders, knowing that they were lesbians.”

A vigil is planned for Monday at 8 p.m. in Lake Worth at the downtown cultural plaza.