Don't copy Arizona immigration law, top Florida Republican warns
Meeting on immigration When: 2:45 p.m. Monday Where: Florida Senate, Tallahassee What: Second of three public meetings being led by Sen. Anitere Flores, R-Miami, who is of Cuban descent and is chairwoman of the Senate Judiciary Committee

As a fifth-generation rancher and citrus farmer, Adam Putnam has a personal stake in an immigration overhaul, one of the most heated issues in Washington and Florida.

But as the new commissioner of the state Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, he's representing the interests of Florida's entire agriculture industry.

Fresh from a decade in Congress, Putnam, a conservative Republican, has an insider's view of the issue on the state and federal levels.

Putnam is leery of a heavy-handed approach to illegal immigration. But his concerns go far beyond farmers' shared worry about a crackdown.

As the Florida Senate prepares to hold the second of three public meetings on the issue Monday, he says he is worried that Florida's adoption of an Arizona-style law such as one proposed by Rep. William Snyder could hurt the state's reputation as the regional epicenter of trade and tourism.

"Florida is the capital of the Western Hemisphere. We're a destination for investment capital, international tourists, international research and development and from Latin America in particular," Putnam said recently. "We have to be very careful about how we approach this issue."

That's a marked contrast from Gov. Rick Scott's stance on immigration reform. Scott, also a conservative Republican, campaigned on imposing an Arizona-style law in Florida and has maintained that position since his swearing-in this month.

Putnam insists that a measure like the Arizona law, which the U.S. Department of Justice is challenging in court, would harm Florida - although he acknowledges reform is necessary.

"What Arizona did in Arizona is necessarily different than what Florida should do," he said. "They are a border state. And they were attempting to solve problems that are unique to a border state."

He added: "Cutting and pasting the Arizona law is not what's right for Florida."

Ultimately, Putnam believes, a federal - not state - fix is required to address the shortcomings in the nation's immigration system. Only Congress can negotiate with foreign countries and change laws dealing with border patrol and work and student visas.

Putnam made history in 1990 when, at age 26, he became the youngest person elected to Congress.

Last year he stepped away after his fifth term to run for agriculture commissioner. Now he oversees a multibillion-dollar industry that provides more than 400,000 jobs.

In Washington, Putnam attempted unsuccessfully for years to persuade his colleagues to pass comprehensive immigration changes.

The least controversial component of the changes he sought would make it easier for foreigners to get high-tech jobs to make the U.S. "the mecca for human capital," he said.

Temporary work visas for agricultural workers also had few opponents, Putnam said, because even union leaders don't believe that illegal farmworkers are taking jobs from U.S. citizens.

"After that, oh my gosh, Katy, bar the door. It all devolves into chaos," he said. "The challenge has been trying to make an argument for a comprehensive piece versus the rifle shots. We tried the comprehensive approach when we were in the majority. The Dems tried the comprehensive approach when they were in the majority. It fell flat."

But Putnam and others were unable to get an exemption or special consideration for farmworkers passed because more powerful members of Congress "wanted to use that less controversial piece to drag all theirs across the finish line."

Driving away undocumented farm laborers would create an employment hole that no one else would fill, Putnam predicted.

"There are gaps in the workforce when the unemployment rate was 3.5 percent and that exist today with the unemployment rate at 12 percent that have to be filled, unless we want to become more dependent on foreign countries for our food as we have for our fuel," he said. "To me, that's unacceptable."

Palm Beach County grower Rick Roth agrees.

"People think that by making it illegal and fining employers, they will make us hire Americans. But Americans don't want to do this work," Roth said.

Snyder, R-Stuart, who is running for Martin County sheriff, is backing a bill similar to Arizona's that would give law enforcement officials the ability to request immigration documents and require all employers to use the federal E-Verify system to ensure that employees are eligible to work in the U.S.

With the unemployment rate so high, Floridians and other Americans should be happy to pick crops or do any other job available, Snyder said.

"In America we have values, and one of our values is that the free-market system should work," Snyder said.