Pennsylvania Manufacturers' Association
David N. Taylor

President & CEO

David N. Taylor is President & CEO of the Pennsylvania Manufacturers’ Association, the statewide trade organization representing the manufacturing sector in Pennsylvania’s public policy process. Now in his 21st year with PMA, Taylor is the association’s chief spokesman at the state Capitol in Harrisburg and in the media. He is editor of the PMA Bulletin and host of the statewide television program “PMA Perspective” on the Pennsylvania Cable Network.

A frequently-sought guest and commentator, David is regularly quoted by media outlets across the commonwealth and around the world, having been interviewed on television by NHK (Japan), ARD (Germany), and CBC News (Canada), as well as over the airwaves by BBC Radio 4 (UK) and CBC Radio Canada. He is also the host of “Capitol Watch”, a twice-monthly news and commentary program on “Lincoln Radio Journal”, which is heard on more than 90 radio stations across Pennsylvania.

David is a board member of the Pennsylvania Manufacturers’ Association, the Pennsylvania Steel Alliance, the Foundation for Free Enterprise Education, the Business-Industry Political Action Committee (BIPAC), the Pennsylvania Leadership Council, and the Lincoln Institute for Public Opinion Research. David was a member of Governor Tom Corbett’s Manufacturing Advisory Council. He is school board president of Reach Cyber Charter School, an online public school providing a broad range of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) enrichment for students.

Prior to joining PMA, David worked in the United States Senate and the Senate of Pennsylvania.

A native of Huntingdon PA, David is a graduate of Dickinson College, where he majored in History and Dramatic Arts. He is a member of the Huntingdon Presbyterian Church and Central Pennsylvania MENSA. He lives near Hershey PA with his wife and daughter.

Carl A. Marrara

Vice President, Government Affairs

Carl A. Marrara is the Vice President of Government Affairs for the Pennsylvania Manufacturers' Association (PMA), a statewide business organization representing the interests of manufacturers in Pennsylvania's public policy process since 1909.

Carl oversees the strategic external communications of the association. He acts as a writer, producer, and reporter for PMA Perspective, a weekly half-hour news program on Pennsylvania business, government, and politics. He also acts as the editor of the PMA Bulletin, a premier in-depth analysis of current issues facing Pennsylvania businesses.

Carl serves as the chief lobbyist for the association and focuses on legislative research and analysis, bill tracking, and grassroots activation through PMA's Advocacy Toolkit. He also maintains the PMA partnership with the Business Industry PAC in Washington, DC by deploying the "Pennsylvania Prosperity Project;" a toolkit for employers to engage their employees in voter registration and legislative issue education. He has successfully maintained relationships with key state legislators, legislative staff, as well as congressional members and congressional staff. To better advocate pro-growth policies, Carl focuses on building coalitions with allied stakeholders such as regional manufacturing associations, trade groups, and national advocacy organizations. He also directs PMA PAC, the affiliated political action committee of PMA.

While at Elizabethtown College, Carl served on the successful campaign of state Senator Mike Folmer (R-48). Upon graduation, he accepted a position as an Issue Manager with the Pennsylvania Business Council where he focused on the policy areas of energy, environment, health care, workforce development, and lawsuit abuse reform. Immediately prior to joining PMA in May of 2012, Marrara worked as the Manager of Government Relations for the Pennsylvania Pharmacists Association (PPA). While at PPA, he managed PharmPAC and acted as the chief lobbyist for the organization.

Carl graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in Political Science from Elizabethtown College in 2009, and obtained a Master of Arts in Public Policy from New England College in 2012. Additionally, he serves as a part-time lecturer for New England College and as a guest lecturer in a variety of educational settings. In the community, Carl serves as the President-emeritus of the Harrisburg Chapter Elizabethtown College Alumni and as a volunteer advisor for the Pennsylvania Free Enterprise Week. As a life-long Pennsylvanian hailing from Danville, Carl now calls Mechanicsburg home with his wife Kelly and daughters Abigail and Layla.