Local News: West Palm Beach, Palm Beach County, Martin & St. Lucie Counties
Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

TALLAHASSEE — The State Board of Administration, which put $1.2 billion in local government tax collections at risk of being devoured by the U.S. mortgage crisis, has paid more than $28,000 in bonuses this year to employees for their teamwork and "superior accomplishments," state records show.

Records obtained Monday by The Palm Beach Post show that 17 of the employees received awards from $371 to $2,500 for their work during an unprecedented two-week, $16 billion run of withdrawals set off by news in November that the board had invested state pensions, local taxes and insurance premiums in risky mortgage-backed securities.

Rep. Gayle Harrell, R-Stuart, said the bonuses were reason to call a meeting of the Joint Legislative Auditing Committee, of which she is a member.

A city official with money locked in the local government pool called the bonuses "astonishing." Another asked whether it was a joke.

But Bob Milligan, interim director of the board, stood by the rewards.

"These are people who went the extra mile to be responsive to the auditors who were coming in, all the questions from the media," Milligan said. "We had people from information technology, for example, who worked literally seven days a week for 10, 12, 14 hours a day."

The bonuses were given to financial operations staff, including two pool managers, and information technology staff, documents show.

Milligan also has approved bonuses, based on the performance of the state pension fund, which has easily absorbed the troubled investments, for 35 other employees totaling $239,000.

He has, however, withheld nearly $50,000 in bonuses from four top executives of the board, including former Director Coleman Stipanovich and Deputy Executive Director Kevin SigRist.

Milligan said he would decide whether to award the executive bonuses after a special audit of the agency is completed this week.

Florida CFO Alex Sink, a trustee of the State Board of Administration, said through a spokesman that she supported Milligan's decision to hand out bonuses.

"He was put in that position to make leadership decisions," Sink spokeswoman Tara Klimak said.

Attorney General Bill McCollum and Gov. Charlie Crist, also trustees of the agency, declined to comment.

The agency has been under fire since November when news broke that it had bought about $2.8 billion in asset-backed commercial paper that was downgraded almost immediately.

The securities are spread throughout the $185 billion in investments the board manages, including the state pension fund, the Hurricane Catastrophe Fund and the local government investment pool.

The investments are not expected to cause problems for the Florida Retirement System plan or the catastrophe fund, which includes payments from Citizens Property Insurance Corp.

But they have wreaked havoc on the 26-year-old local government investment pool, which more than 1,000 cities, counties and school districts have used like a high-interest checking account.

The announcement of the downgraded securities set off a panic among participants in the then-$30 billion local government pool, which Crist and other trustees stopped on Nov. 29 by temporarily shutting down the fund.

The board's CFO, Gwenn Thomas, recounted Nov. 29 as an "especially memorable day" in an interoffice memo obtained by The Palm Beach Post that sought support for the "superior achievement" bonuses.

Thomas referred to it as "the most challenging day in my professional life."

"First the phone system was overwhelmed by participant calls," Thomas wrote.

"Second, the SBA suffered a plumbing problem on the 6th floor that forced an evacuation of the building; third, the Data Center was required to shut down the computer system.

"Fourth, when participants could not access the SBA Pool website, they began to call and when all of the dedicated phone lines were occupied, they panicked and sent faxes and emails requesting withdrawals," she wrote.

"Finally, an emergency meeting of the trustees was held which resulted in the LGIP being frozen."

When the pool reopened Dec. 6, local governments were prohibited from touching nearly $2 billion.

The remaining assets, which totaled $8.5 billion Monday, were subject to withdrawal fees.

As of Monday, about two dozen cities, counties and school districts had paid about $7 million in redemption fees, according to board records.

"Cities and counties are paying the price for their (state board officials') investment policies," said Marcia Dedert, Port St. Lucie's finance director.

The city, which has asked the FBI to investigate the agency, has $268 million in the fund, more than any city in Florida.

Sunrise Deputy Mayor Roger Wishner said it was "astonishing" bonuses have been paid before investors were "made whole."

"Hopefully this is going to be corrected," he said.

State officials have struggled for five months to wrap their arms around the troubled investment fund.

A state audit committee signed a $35,000 contract with law firm Berger Singerman to assist with an audit of the board, but Crist and other trustees said last month it didn't go far enough.

That audit is expected to be completed this week.

On Tuesday, Crist acknowledged frustration that state investigators have only just started to review the investments for a possible lawsuit against the sellers, Lehman Bros. and JP Morgan.

"I don't understand why some seem to be dragging their feet," he said.

Asked who was stalling, Crist said, "I don't know."

The head of the audit committee, Kim Ferrell, was pummeled by questions Tuesday from members of the legislative auditing panel, who said they expected the audit to include a review of the sales.

"We sit here on income tax day, interestingly enough, and we're not hearing much," said audit committee Chairman Carl Domino, R-Jupiter. "We really need to understand fully what happened."

In the House, Speaker Marco Rubio approved $200,000 for a pair of consultants to probe the agency.

Lawmakers are expected to approve legislation (HB 7095) that includes some advice from the consultants, such as additional oversight.

But the top recommendation from the consultants - to scrap the local government pool and start from scratch - has been ignored.