Marni Snyder for PA State Representative
Marni believes that social justice requires equitable funding for schools across districts. The funding system must begin with standards – a determination of what kind of education we want for all children. This will not be based on standardized tests alone. From there we should determine what resources are necessary to achieve those goals and be sure all students have the same access to those resources. Marni will fight for a fair funding formula- an investment in the children across the state. With a background in special education law, any such formula she proposes will recognize that equal opportunity and equal funding are not synonymous. Students with special circumstances- learning disabilities, ESL, socio-economic disadvantages etc. – require more resources. Funding must account for that.

Marni will champion reforms in the criminal justice system so that we are spending more on our schools than we do on our prisons. After serving as an assistant defender with the Defender Association of Philadelphia for over five years, she has the experience to address issues like pretrial release for non-violent offenders, restrictions on civil forfeiture, and ending the death penalty and mass incarceration.

Marni wants a safer Philadelphia. That means keeping residents and people who come to enjoy the city safe, whether it is on public transportation, on the sidewalks, or in their homes. We need to protect the LGBT community which continues to experience hate crimes ranging from harassment to murder. It must also be a priority to get guns off of the streets and locked up at home.

Marni is a proud progressive. She will advocate for:

women to receive equal pay for equal work;

members of the LGBT community to be free from discrimination in the workplace;

police to be properly trained to serve members of the LGBT community, domestic violence and rape victims, and people suffering from mental illness;

protection of voting rights;

protection of women’s reproductive rights;

raising the minimum wage;

helping senior citizens and veterans access benefits and healthcare.

Marni will bring her legal expertise and her fresh perspective to Harrisburg.