Hurricane watches likely issued for Florida today as Irma nears
UPDATE, 2 a.m. 9/7: Hurricane Irma has maximum sustained winds of 180 mph as it remains a Category 5 storm.

The extremely dangerous core of Irma will move away from Puerto Rico this morning, pass just north of the coast of Hispaniola later today and be near the Turks and Caicos and southeastern Bahamas by this evening, according to the latest forecast from the National Hurricane Center.

Irma is expected to remain a category 4 or 5 hurricane the next couple of days.

“The threat for direct hurricane impacts in Florida over the weekend and early next week has increased,” according to the National Hurricane Center. “Hurricane watches will likely be issues for portions of the Florida Keys and the Florida peninsula on Thursday.”

﻿UPDATE, 2 a.m. 9/6: Hurricane Irma remains a Category 5 storm as it moves away from Barbuda and toward St. Martin.

As of the 2 a.m. update from the National Hurricane Center, the storm is moving west northwest at 16 mph with maximum sustained winds of 185 mph. The storm’s minimum pressure is 914 mb.

Irma is expected to turn northward, moving near or over the Florida east coast or the northwestern Bahamas.

“The chance of direct impacts from Irma beginning later this week and this weekend from wind, storm surge and rainfall continues to increase in the Florida Keys and portions of the Florida peninsula,” according to a message from the National Hurricane Center. “It is too soon to specify the timing and magnitude of these impacts.”



UPDATE, 11 p.m.: As Irma makes its way west, the Caribbean braces for a “potentially catastrophic” Category 5 , according to the National Hurricane Center’s latest update.

In the 11 p.m. update, forecasters said the maximum sustained winds remained at 185 mph as the “extremely dangerous core” of Irma is expected to move over the northern Leeward Islands Tuesday night.

The storm will make its way near or over the Virgin Islands and get close to Puerto Rico Wednesday, according to the hurricane center.

As far as rainfall, Irma is expected to drop anywhere from 8 inches to 12 inches of rain as it passes over the Leeward Islands Tuesday night into Wednesday, with isolated instances of 20 inches. Hurricane-strength winds will extend 50 miles from the center while tropical-storm-force winds will extend 175 miles.

As in previous updates, the storm is expected to keep a western path until it makes a slight west-northweste turn in the coming days.

The next update from the hurricane center is expected at 2 a.m.

HURRICANE IRMA: LATEST DEVELOPMENTS AT A GLANCE

Federal: Donald Trump approved emergency declarations for Florida, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands Tuesday evening ahead of Hurricane Irma that has sustained winds of 185 mph as it continues west. This declaration gives federal assistance to supplement state and local response to the storm.

According to Florida U.S. Sen. Bill Nelson, the Federal Emergency Management Agency is positioning people and supplies around the state and the Coast Guard is positioning ships and aircraft to come in right after the storm hits. Nelson also said the Florida National Guard is positioned.

The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers announced Tuesday evening they will release water from Lake Okeechobee in advance of Irma.

Palm Beach County government: Officials declared a state of emergency effective at midnight, but no evacuations have been ordered at this time.

Water Management: The South Florida Water Management District is lowering water levels in canals.

Price Gouging: Florida Attorney General Pam Bondi opened the state’s price gouging hotline.

Customers walk past empty water isles inside the Publix supermarket in Palm Beach Gardens off of Northlake Boulevard during preparation for hurricane Irma on September 5, 2017. (Richard Graulich / The Palm Beach Post) Palm Beach Post Staff Writer

Sports: All Palm Beach County high school games for the week are canceled. The Miami Dolphins NFL game versus the Tampa Bay Buccaneers that would have been played at the Hard Rock Stadium Sunday will be postponed to a later date or a neutral site.

Hospitals: As medical centers prepare for the storm, facilities in the area only plan to evacuate in a worst-case scenario. Other hospitals are on standby in case the county or the state mandates moving patients.