The University of New Haven Disinvited Me to Speak on FORENSICS, because of #BlackLivesMatter
The cult-like demands of #BlackLivesMatter have extended all the way into the Henry C. Lee College of Criminal Justice and Forensic Sciences. This program, established by Dr. Henry C. Lee of University of New Haven, is one of the foremost academic forensic programs in the world. (He’s worked on the JonBenét Ramsey case, the O.J. Simpson and Laci Peterson cases, the post-9/11 investigations, and has reinvestigated the assassination of John F. Kennedy.) I was honored to have been invited to speak this month at their 25 th Annual Markle Symposium October 24 and 25 2016.

On June 24, 2016, Mark Solomon forwarded a kind request from Senior Lecturer Patrick Malloy. (I’d met Mark when I spoke at the International Association of Financial Crime Investigators-Connecticut Chapter, Spotlight on Fraud IV Training Conference.) Malloy had taken some students to hear me speak and was so impressed that I got this invitation:

This year the Lee Institute is stepping over the traditional boundary of forensic science and criminal investigations, into the opaque world of the “forensics” of financial and cybercrime. This year’s Symposium highlights the vision and mission through mixed panel discussions of current issues in financial and cybercrime, the impact of these crimes on society, and to change the misconception that these are ‘victimless’ crimes. Through sponsorships, the Lee Institute has traditionally kept tuition for the Symposium very low, and has allowed students to attend at a minimal fee. We would like to invite Sheriff David Clarke to be our keynote speaker this year. A dinner can be arranged the night before (Sunday October 23 rd) with Dr. Henry Lee and select guests. All fees and expenses will be covered. Please let me know if you need additional information. Thank you in advance for your assistance. Regards Patrick Malloy DBA, Senior Lecturer – Investigations – Director MS Investigations Henry C Lee College of Criminal Justice & Forensic Science

We accepted, began planning for the trip — my assistant exchanged over a dozen emails in July about booking flights and hotel. Then a lull — nothing. No communication, no hotel room reserved, no flights booked.

On August 3, my assistant had a conversation with Mr. Malloy, who was extremely apologetic and embarrassed to have to rescind the offer. Apparently, the higher-ups did not want me to speak on campus due to my remarks about #BlackLivesMatter.

What did I say that was so controversial? I’m not sure what specific remarks drove them to uninvite me, but anyone who listens to me for five seconds knows I prefer to drop the “v” and call them #BlackLIESMatter. They terrorize the police, lie about their true mission, promote anarchy like the old Black Liberation Army, and released a list of “demands” that included releasing known cop killers.

So, yeah — I’m going to keep speaking out against #BlackLIESMatter — but apparently that means I’m not going to be speaking about forensics at the University of New Haven anytime soon.

This is just the latest example of the assault on different points of view by these fascist, liberal indoctrination factories we call colleges.

I was going to be talking about forensics, not social issues — but apparently the University of New Haven believes its students are incapable of handling debate… or even my presence.

It’s time for those in higher education to grow a spine. Whatever happened to the marketplace of ideas?

UPDATE: The University Responds in a Less-Than-Honest Fashion. Read my response HERE.