MPGV Launches TV Campaign to Celebrate Firearms Safety Act • Marylanders to Prevent Gun Violence
MPGV Launches TV Campaign to Celebrate Firearms Safety Act

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

Contact: Vincent DeMarco, 410-591-9162

MARYLANDERS TO PREVENT GUN VIOLENCE LAUNCHES PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN

NEW TV AD – “MARYLAND STOOD UP” – FEATURES MOM, HUNTER AND BISHOP IN SUPPORT OF COMMON SENSE SOLUTIONS TO REDUCE GUN VIOLENCE

TOUTS MARYLAND SOLUTION AS A MODEL FOR OTHER STATES

Annapolis, MD (May 20, 2013) – Marylanders to Prevent Gun Violence launched a public education campaign today aimed at educating Marylanders about the life-saving impact of the Firearm Safety Act signed into law last week by Governor Martin O’Malley. The campaign begins with an ad touting Maryland’s law as a model for other states and the nation.

The new TV ad entitled “Maryland Stood Up” will begin running in the Baltimore media market today and features a mom, a bishop, and a hunter, discussing the law’s common sense solutions to reduce gun violence.

Contribute to the public education campaign

“Fingerprint licensing is one of the most effective solutions we have to reduce gun violence and Marylanders overwhelmingly support it,” said Vincent DeMarco, President of Marylanders To Prevent Gun Violence. “We believe this law can be a model for other states and the nation. The ad depicts everyday Marylanders — a hunter, a mom, a bishop — representing Marylanders from across our state who stood up with the General Assembly to pass common-sense solutions to reduce gun violence.”

The ad educates Marylanders about the effectiveness of the fingerprint licensing provision in the new law. In the five states where fingerprint licensing is currently required for handgun purchases, gun death rates are among the lowest in the nation. According to experts at the Johns Hopkins Center for Gun Policy and Research, cities in states with handgun purchaser licensing laws have much lower rates of within-state illegal gun trafficking than those without licensing.

According to the Center, “Research suggests that, once implemented, Maryland’s handgun purchaser licensing law will reduce gun trafficking, gun crime, and gun homicides, and can serve as a national model for other states.”

Contribute to the public education campaign

Marylanders to Prevent Gun Violence Education Fund, Inc. is a non-profit organization whose mission is to educate Maryland policy makers and citizens about the effectiveness of reasonable measures to prevent gun violence such as fingerprint licensing of handgun purchasers.

Marylanders to Prevent Gun Violence Education Fund, Inc. will also work to make sure that Maryland’s new Firearms Safety Act of 2013 is fully and properly implemented, to insure that it saves as many lives as possible from gun violence.