George Soros’ Secret Plan To Have Sean Hannity Fired Just Blew Up In His Face
Fox News host Sean Hannity has been in hot water this week when it was confirmed that he was the mystery third client of Donald Trump’s personal lawyer Michael Cohen.

Liberal billionaire George Soros has been trying to take Hannity down for years, and he thought this was finally his chance to get rid of him for good. Unfortunately for Soros, however, his plan just blew up in his face big time.

Mad World News reported that Hannity was revealed to be Cohen’s third client in court during the lawyer’s hearing, in which he went before Judge Kimba Wood. It has since been revealed that Wood has a close relationship with Soros and even officiated his 2013 wedding to his 42 year-old wife Tamiko Bolton. This wedding was attended by numerous wealthy liberals, including U2 frontman Bono and House Minority Leader California Rep. Nancy Pelosi.

Wood also has other ties to Democrats, as she was former President Bill Clinton’s failed nominee for U.S. Attorney General in 1993. Like Clinton’s first nominee Zoe Baird, Wood had hired an illegal alien and failed to pay taxes on the employee.

Of course, the mainstream media is ignoring the fact that this was a clear attempt for Wood and her fellow Democrats to finally take Hannity down. The Fox News host himself, however, is not about to let that happen.

“I tell you why they’re going nuts,” he said of the liberal media. “They’re assuming – because I guess he did some type of work for some Republican guy – they’re figuring, ‘Oh, he must’ve done a big settlement case for Hannity.’ That’s not – no, that’s not what happened. Ever. Not one of any issue I ever dealt with Michael Cohen on ever — ever — involved a matter between me and any third party.”

Fox News has also stood by Hannity despite the calls to fire him.

“While FOX News was unaware of Sean Hannity’s informal relationship with Michael Cohen and was surprised by the announcement in court yesterday, we have reviewed the matter and spoken to Sean and he continues to have our full support,” the statement said.

Network statement: While FOX News was unaware of Sean Hannity’s informal relationship with Michael Cohen and was surprised by the announcement in court yesterday, we have reviewed the matter and spoken to Sean and he continues to have our full support. — HowardKurtz (@HowardKurtz) April 17, 2018

SHARE this story if you still stand by Sean Hannity!