Katie McGinty may return to Washington with U.S. Senate bid
PHILADELPHIA -- Katie McGinty seldom goes off message in her campaign for the U.S. Senate, but the playful Irish-Catholic girl in her still shines through.

When asked to turn in front of the plate glass window at the Service Employees International Union office, she faces City Hall with her back to the photographer. Then she looks over her shoulder and flashes a mischievous grin.

"How's this?"

This is, of course, the same Katie McGinty who clapped and shimmied along to a gospel choir at Gov. Tom Wolf's inaugural address last January. Her pink scarf bobbed along as she waved Republican legislative leaders over to join her. They stood back and watched mirthlessly.

A similar dynamic would play out months later as Wolf's team -- including McGinty, a former rival turned chief of staff -- and the General Assembly engaged in a pitched battle over the state budget. McGinty made her frustration with the Republicans known publicly and the Republicans bristled over what they saw as political opportunism.

"Most chiefs of staff aren't out in front, going to press clubs and giving public speeches," says Senate Majority Leader Jake Corman, R-Centre County. "Their job is behind the scenes -- to make sure the train stays on the track."

But that battle is over.

McGinty, 52, has set her sights a bit higher and the road to Washington appears to be rising up to meet her. In addition to the network of power brokers she built during her tenure as a top environmental adviser inside the Clinton White House, she's tapped former Gov. Ed Rendell to chair her campaign. Civil rights watchdogs, environmentalists, labor unions and even Barack Obama have all thrown their support behind her.

Of course, those connections cut both ways.

In an election dominated by outsider candidates, McGinty trails retired Navy Admiral and former congressman Joe Sestak in the Democratic primary race. Fellow candidate John Fetterman, known as much for his tattoos as his work in a resurgent steel town, joined Republican operatives in criticizing McGinty's participation in the revolving door of regulators who go on to work in the energy industry. Meanwhile, the GOP has made hay -- in the form of an Federal Election Commission complaint -- of off-the-cuff remarks Rendell made about ad spending.

McGinty rejects the establishment label, pointing to her immigrant roots in Northeast Philadelphia. She's running, she says, to rebuild the middle class from which she emerged.

"When my mom and dad worked as hard as they did every day, they had every confidence they were building a good, solid life and putting each of us kids on a trajectory where we could chase and realize our dreams," she says. "That's what's motivating me."

Personal is political

McGinty's campaign stops define the '60s political mantra "the personal is political."

She ties her policies designed to strengthen the social safety net to her own family stories: The terminally ill brother who the family rallied around, the ex-Marine brother who struggled with alcoholism, the working mom who went 20 years without a new dress and the dad who walked the streets of Philly as a beat cop to support Katie and her nine siblings. There's a confessional style to these exchanges, as McGinty lets her audience in on her life off the campaign trail.

"It would have broken his heart to ever have to turn to one of us to take care of him or my mom," she told a group of service employees in Philadelphia, who nodded along. "He put his head on the pillow for the last time three years ago, at 94, and he did it with dignity because he earned a pension, he had the pension and the FOP [police union] helped make sure people honored that pension.

"I'm coming from a place," she added, "when someone earns retirement security, I'm going to be one to make sure they get it."

McGinty's "big, loud, Irish Catholic family" set her on the winding path toward advocacy and, eventually, a career in politics. In a family that large, she said, everything was a negotiation. At any given time, a dozen or more people could be found at the McGinty family's three-bedroom, one-bath home near Philadelphia's Pennypack Park.

At home, Katie created her own privacy with the help of noise-muffling headphones her father used on the shooting range. With her schoolbooks arrayed in front of her, the headphones would go on and for a few hours the cacophony -- the raucous basement card games and the Johnny Cash records -- melted away.

"I would sit in the middle of the swirl in my house," she says. "I'd have these big things on my head and that was my library."

From the eighth grade, McGinty was determined to go to the college -- she would become the first in her family to graduate a 4-year school -- but she also knew she couldn't rely on her parents to finance her future.

John McGinty, her older brother, says many had figured she was on track to become a nun like several other family members, but his sister had other ambitions. In high school, he says, she talked about becoming president, like John F. Kennedy.

"Her concern has always been poverty, always, and the environment and education and a healthy lifestyle," John says. "She didn't want to do it for control. She just believed she could do good."

Katie's decision to study chemistry at St. Joseph's University -- on a full scholarship -- was both a personal and a practical one.

"I had to make clear to my parents that this was not just a flight of fancy," she says. "I was going to do something serious that would set me up in a practical way for a solid, good-paying job."

Her mother had also told the McGinty children the story of her father's path to police work. His teachers, convinced that he had a "terrific scientific mind," advocated for his continuing on to college.

"From a traditional Irish perspective, book learning was not necessarily what a man would do," she says. "And it was the depression [era], so he didn't get a chance to do that."

A career in science, Katie says, seemed like a way to honor her father's sacrifice.

The face of climate change

It's difficult to imagine today, but there was a time in the not-too-distant past when the words "global warming" or "greenhouse gases" would elicit blank stares instead of kneejerk reactions.

Explaining the complex science behind climate change -- while also threading the needle of growing jobs in a nation still recovering from economic recession -- became McGinty's job as the first woman to head the White House Council on Environmental Quality under Bill Clinton. At 31, she was one of the president's top advisers.

"It's jobs and the environment," asserted a fresh-faced McGinty in a 1994 press conference, one of many she'd lead from the West Wing briefing room.

McGinty's path to the White House began with a congressional fellowship she won, in part, due to a strategy she developed to bring jobs back to America from overseas. Her position back then, incidentally, is her position today: The United States needs to improve science and technology education, strengthen intellectual property laws and provide more funding for job training and apprenticeship programs. After the fellowship was over, then-Sen. Al Gore offered her a job and it wasn't long until she followed her boss to the White House.

In that post, she was at the forefront of plans to restore the Everglades, strengthen timber regulations and create the Grand Staircase-Escalante National Monument in Utah, the latter of which proved a far more challenging task than it sounds due to grazing rights issues.

"Every single issue that came across our office was controversial," said Beth Viola, who worked under McGinty for much of the Clinton administration. "By the time it got to the White House, it was controversial."

In 1997, McGinty was part of the group that worked to negotiate the Kyoto Protocol and then sell it to lawmakers skeptical of climate change and wary of the potential economic impacts of limiting greenhouse gas emissions.

"We have 170,000 years worth of data," McGinty told Al Roker on The Today Show in the mid-'90s, "and what they're going to tell you is we're now changing the climate more dramatically than [scientists] have seen in the last 10,000 years."

The climate change fight would also allow McGinty to practice the art of the bully pulpit.

"They say a beast when cornered becomes more violent," she told The Boston Globe in 1998, "and I think legislators who do the bidding of polluters become aggressive when cornered with the reality that the pollution must be cleaned up."

But Viola, who now works as a policy adviser and lobbyist, says McGinty ran the best, most productive, meetings that she'd ever seen.

"Katie has an incredible knack for it," she says. "She's passionate, energetic and a great listener. Everyone walks away from the table believing they were heard and also recognizing that there are specific tasks to do."

And that didn't happen by accident.

Viola says the White House staffers would get in at 7:30 a.m. and often wouldn't leave until 8 p.m. or later. If McGinty had to stay up late to understand some complex policy issue before a morning meeting, she'd do it.

More than anything, Viola says, it was McGinty's personal touch that helped move issues forward. If she saw a press clipping from a lawmaker questioning a policy proposal or decision, she'd be on the phone to explain it in short order.

"It's really hard not to like Katie," she says. "She genuinely likes people. That's who she is and, I'll tell you, it's hard not to respect somebody when you've been going back and forth with them."

The unflappable Katie McGinty

In her last year at the White House, she took leave to be with her older brother, Franny, as he battled lung cancer. One month at a time, she split the responsibility with her other siblings.

"I just saw a person I had never seen before," says John, who went with his sister to help Franny's family in Wyoming. "I'd never seen her before in that role."

Caring for a terminally ill patient is stressful enough, but John says his sister also took the lead in comforting their parents. In between doctors' visits and chemotherapy, the three siblings traveled to the beautiful scenic places within driving distance from the one-horse town where Franny lived. Katie sent photos of the siblings, happy together in nature, to their parents before her brother became too frail.

"That's really Katie," John says. "She's multifaceted, so full of energy and she really wants to do a good job for people."

While John remembers his sister as a grounding influence at that time, Katie describes it simply as "a very sad and challenging time" without delving too deeply into the emotional fallout. Franny died in May 1998 and Katie left the White House that November to spend a year in India with her husband Karl Hausker, another environmental policy wonk, working to rally international interest in alternative energy.

McGinty and her husband had previously considered adopting a child, but the idea took a back seat amid Franny's illness. The impulse, however, remained.

"For two years, I had been having a dream about my husband and I with two pink bundles in our arms," she remembers.

A bit of miscommunication with a Calcutta cabbie breathed new life into that dream.

They asked to go to "Mother Teresa's," but the building the cab pulled up to looked more like a factory.

"We walked over, opened the doors and inside we saw a thousand beautiful pink bundles like I had been seeing in my dream," she recalls. "It turned out it was Mother Teresa's orphanage, not her convent."

Katie turned to her husband and said, "Hon, we're adopting twins."

In the span of about a year, McGinty had lost a brother, left a high-powered D.C. job, moved halfway round the world and gained twin daughters. Two years later, McGinty would give birth to a third daughter.

"My life seems to be like that," she says. "Never a dull moment -- and wouldn't that be a waste if there was?"

In Pennsylvania

That unflappability would prove to be McGinty's greatest asset in 2003 when, after several years in the private sector, she was tapped as Pennsylvania's environmental secretary. Her reputation for selling politically divisive ideas -- back then, it was cleaning up coal plants and attracting renewable energy projects to the state -- made her the obvious choice, Rendell says.

"She has passion and an enthusiasm for her ideas," he says. "It makes it easy for people to buy in. That's an important quality for a legislator to have."

McGinty faced a fractious confirmation process due, in large part, to concern about her years in the Clinton administration and a perception that she would be too aggressive on enforcement.

"She and I are in parallel universes," says former state Sen. Mary Jo White, a Venango County Republican who was one of McGinty's most vocal critics. "We don't see the world the same way: she's articulate and she's smart and I think she believes the ends justify the means."

But White says she never considered McGinty to be an enemy and, in the case of a mine safety bill, the environmental secretary turned out to be an ally.

"It was a difficult and protracted negotiation and she personally decided it was important enough hat she sat in the room with us," White recalls. "I think that sent a good message."

http://www.pennlive.com/midstate/index.ssf/2015/11/john_fettermans_senate_braddoc.html

Corman had similar cooperative experiences with McGinty when she was environmental secretary, but says that goodwill largely dissipated when he worked with her as Wolf's chief of staff. From his perspective, what exacerbated the rift were her tactics and the public statements she made outside of budget negotiations. After McGinty spoke out about a Senate pension reform plan at a Pennsylvania Press Club event, Corman says he refused to have her at the meetings.

"You have to be able to speak freely in those meetings," he says. "We didn't trust her there to speak freely."

McGinty, like other members of the Wolf administration, places the blame squarely at the feet of the Republicans.

"The drama that has unfolded around this is overblown in the sense that it's really just been a couple holdouts who've held up the whole deal," she says.

McGinty's private-sector experience between leaving the Rendell administration in 2008 and joining Wolf's staff in 2015 has also drawn scrutiny. In 2008, she joined the board of NRG Energy, an electric utility that owns generating facilities across the state. SEC filings show that she received about $1.1 million in cash and stock during her five years on the board.

In 2009, she joined the board of Iberdrola USA, a Spanish wind and natural gas energy that in 2010 received a $10 million federal stimulus grant through the state. Iberdrola also briefly owned Community Energy, a renewable energy firm that sold energy to the state during the Rendell years. A 2015 financial disclosure form with the U.S. Senate showed that McGinty earned $125,000 in compensation for her position on Iberdrola's board.

McGinty says her board positions served as a continuance of the kinds of advocacy she did within government. NRG, for example, has increasingly integrated cleaner fuels into their portfolio.

"I think it's actually very important for someone who aspires to public service to not be a creature of government their whole life," she says. "It's important and valuable to have had the experience I have to see what it is to make payroll . . . and the bottom line."

Like most Pennsylvania politicians, McGinty received a significant amount of contributions from the energy sector. During her 2014 gubernatorial campaign, she received a total of $590,000 from the industry, according to FollowTheMoney.org. Individuals who listed either Community Energy or Iberdrola as their employer donated a total of $9,025.

So far, employees of those two companies have donated $19,000 to McGinty's U.S. Senate campaign. Employees for NRG donated $3,250.

For comparison, those donations are dwarfed by the nearly $59,000 from Emily's List, a Democratic group that backs female candidates. It's comparable to the nearly $20,000 donated by attorneys at the Philadelphia labor law firm of Pond Lehocky Stern Giordano.

On the trail

Campaign narratives - the stories candidates tell about themselves and the ones that are told about them - tend to distort reality.

There's a kernel of truth to McGinty's establishment narrative. She's picked up endorsements from influential unions and top officials in the Democratic Party. Campaign finance reports showed that she raised nearly $1 million compared to $550,000 by Sestak and nearly $150,000 by Fetterman in the most recent reporting period.

But this is the same McGinty who came in last place in the 2014 Democratic gubernatorial primary against Wolf, her only other campaign. Sestak leads McGinty in cash on hand and in most public opinion polls: 41-to-31 in a Harper poll last week and 31-to-14 in a Franklin and Marshall poll.

http://www.pennlive.com/news/2016/02/joe_sestak_senate_walk.html

Lack of name recognition, which dogged her in the 2014 race, continues to play a factor. According to Harper, 38 percent of respondents were unsure where McGinty stood ideologically. However, 58 percent said the Obama endorsement would make them more likely to support her campaign versus 8 percent who were less likely and 33 percent who didn't believe it would impact their decision.

Of course, Sen. Pat Toomey looms large.

The former Wall Street banker had raised $2 million through Sept. 30, 2015, according to the most recent FEC reports, and he had a total of $8.6 million in the coffers. A recent Mercyhurst University poll of 421 registered voters showed all three Democratic hopefuls trailing Toomey in a hypothetical November contest, with McGinty at 47-34 vs. 43-38 for Sestak and 49-31 for Fetterman.

Democrats, however, still have a nearly 4-to-3 registration advantage across the state. Strong voter turnout in presidential elections has historically given the party's nominee an advantage over the Republican candidate.

McGinty first needs to win the primary.

She has shuttled across the state, holding campaign events in diners and union halls, in the final weeks before the polls open on April 26. No matter where she is, the candidate starts her day -- typically at 5:30 a.m. -- at the gym.

"I don't care about anything else," she says. "They can sleep me on a cot, have nothing at all to eat, but I have to start my day that way."

Her days tend to speed along at the same place as her workout.

After an hour-long interview and another hour answering questions from union workers in Philadelphia, McGinty remains as chipper as when she walked in the door.

And she has one more confession to share.

McGinty's penchant for brightly colored clothing is well known in Harrisburg political circles. What's less known is where she gets them.

"I wear suits like sweatsuits," she says, "because you're in cars and out of cars and tromping around. Plus, I hate to shop and I hate any penny I have to spend on clothes."

Several years ago, McGinty was walking through a New York hotel lobby in one of her signature outfits -- a orange suit with big, brass buttons -- when a stranger crossed the room to inquire about it.

"Where did you get that suit? Where did you get that suit?" The woman asked. "I've been looking all over for that suit."

The woman went on to tell her husband that McGinty was wearing the very same St. John suit she'd been searching for.

"I'm thinking, 'Earth just open up and swallow me,' " McGinty remembers. "I don't want to embarrass her and tell her its second hand. I've never heard of St. John. I have no idea what it is. I just know it's an obnoxious bright orange suit and I love it."

Read about the other candidates vying for the Democratic nomination:

Wallace McKelvey may be reached at wmckelvey@pennlive.com. Follow him on Twitter @wjmckelvey. Find PennLive on Facebook.