Here's why I'm opposing Merrick Garland's Supreme Court nomination: Pat Toomey
By Pat Toomey

In 2009 and 2010, President Obama nominated two individuals who now sit on the U.S. Supreme Court. At the time, I was a Senate candidate, not a U.S. senator, but I felt an obligation to let voters know where I stood, and I did so in opinion pieces.

I supported then-Judge Sonia Sotomayor's nomination. I noted that her 17-year record as a federal judge provided much guidance about her approach, including an admirable exercise of judicial restraint.

While I expected to disagree with many of her rulings, I wrote that "objective qualifications should matter more than ideology in the judicial confirmation process."

I still believe that, which is why Sen. Bob Casey and I have worked across the aisle to fill 16 vacancies on the federal bench in Pennsylvania.

Only two states -- New York and California -- have had more federal judges confirmed during the same period.

I opposed Elena Kagan's nomination. In contrast to Sotomayor, Kagan had no judicial experience whatsoever, and aspects of her academic writings and actions raised serious concerns about her impartiality and whether she had sufficient respect for constitutional limits on federal power.

That brings us to the present nomination of Judge Merrick Garland. I met with Judge Garland for over an hour, earlier this week.

He is a pleasant man with impressive legal training and experience. Two factors, however, weigh heavily against his confirmation.

First, the balance of the Supreme Court is at stake, and we have an election right around the corner. With lifetime tenure, the next justice will determine the Court's balance for a generation.

In that light, I believe it is sensible to allow the American people to participate in the choice of Justice Scalia's successor less than seven months from now.

Second, areas of Judge Garland's record give me pause.

Under our Constitution's system of checks and balances, federal courts play an essential role in limiting executive abuses of power.

This is especially important under the current Administration, which has repeatedly exceeded its legal authority.

For example, in recent years, overreaches by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have cost Pennsylvanians thousands of jobs, and dramatically raised costs for employers, thereby preventing the hiring and decreasing the wages of countless additional workers.

All of this for practically zero environmental gains. Fortunately, federal courts have blocked some of these illegal actions, such as the EPA's attempt to impose massive regulations on landowners who have virtually any water on their property--including rainwater that has accumulated in ditches.

But Judge Garland's record raises serious doubts that he would serve as an adequate, independent legal check on the EPA and other federal agencies.

Garland has ruled on dozens of cases involving challenges to new EPA regulations, and has sided with the agency over 90% of the time.

One of the handful of times Garland ruled against the EPA, he ruled that it was not regulating enough.

Garland was the deciding vote to uphold the 2012 regulations of coal- and oil-fired power plants. Although the EPA predicted that the regulations would impose up to $2,400 in costs for every $1 of benefit, the agency stated that costs were irrelevant--a conclusion Garland upheld.

Fortunately, the Supreme Court, in a 5-4 decision authored by Justice Scalia, halted this rule.

Had Judge Garland been on the Court instead of Justice Scalia, the rule would be in effect today, killing more jobs and doing more harm to Pennsylvania's economy.

I tried to discuss these issues with Judge Garland, but he was often unresponsive--unwilling to discuss one of his own decisions, and refusing to opine on historic Supreme Court precedents.

In short, he did nothing to alleviate my concerns. The stakes are too high for error, not only with the balance of the Supreme Court, but with the futures of Pennsylvania workers, farmers, and businesses.

I also raised with Judge Garland his approach to terrorist detainee cases. He authored an opinion that resulted in the release of 17 Guantanamo Bay prisoners who were part of a group of violent Islamist extremists the State Department had designated as terrorists.

They were captured after fleeing an Afghanistan training camp funded by al Qaeda and the Taliban. Judge Garland overruled a military tribunal's unanimous finding that these detainees were enemy combatants.

He second-guessed the military finding, contrary to federal statute. And his conclusion left the military with the choice of either jeopardizing the safety of intelligence informants or releasing enemy combatants.

As a result of Garland's decision, the detainees were ordered released into the United States. Fortunately, another panel of judges on the D.C. Circuit halted this, and the detainees were instead released into other countries.

In our discussion, Judge Garland again did not allay my concerns.

In an era in which terrorists are actively using every weapon at their disposal to kill innocent Americans, we cannot afford to appoint a Supreme Court justice who fails to understand these dangers.

In sum, while Judge Garland is highly credentialed, areas of his legal thinking deeply concern me, particularly his excessive deference to overreaching agency regulations and his approach to the War on Terror.

These concerns, in addition to my preference for giving the American people a voice in November about the long-term balance of the Court, lead me to oppose his nomination at this time.

Pat Toomey, a Republican, is Pennsylvania's junior United States Senator. He writes from Washington D.C.