Why is a Philly cyclists' group trying to make life harder for drivers?: Tom McCarey
By Tom McCarey

On Wednesday, an organization called the Bicycle Coalition of Greater Philadelphia will hold a rally at the state Capitol.

There, they will try to exploit the death of Jamal Morris, a bicyclist killed by a hit-and-run driver.

In unfairly turning this tragedy into an indictment of all drivers, they will call for red-light cameras, speed cameras , and arming municipal police with radar.

None of this would have stopped a cyclist from being hit, and this technology makes highways more dangerous.

The Harrisburg politicians will respond favorably to this tripe, because they have been working hard to install automated traffic enforcement statewide for a long time, seeking the millions of dollars it funnels into government, stolen from safe drivers.

The bicycle coalition benefits from grant money provided by the Automated Red Light Enforcement Transportation Enhancement (ARLE) grants which uses the revenue generated by the Philadelphia's red light cameras for bicycle projects in the city. This is a clear conflict of interest for the coalition.

No wonder they want red light cameras, speed cameras and radar everywhere.

This will generate more grant for the bicycle coalition's projects. That they get grant money is in Philly city documents and ARLE project listings and is easy to confirm.

Cyclists who have problems with traffic don't know how to ride a bike.

Bicycles are vehicles, and bicyclists are charged with all the duties and responsibilities of operating a vehicle.

The problem is, they don't see it that way. Incompetence behind the handlebars is the reason for close calls and accidents.

The bicycle coalition would have everyone believe that motorists are out to mow down every bike on the road. That is patently false. Drivers mean business. Cyclists should, too.

When motorists are frustrated with cyclists it's because they dart in and out of lanes, run stop signs and lights, and generally behave as if they own the road.

It's not a ride in the park, it's traffic! They should be given training wheels and not allowed to ride unless their parents are walking beside them.

What the bicycle coalition wants is to rid the highways of cars, period.

Short of that they are demanding that the speed limit be reduced to a crawl, that driving lanes be reduced to accommodate defined bike lanes, that red light cameras be installed at every intersection; that speed cameras be installed everywhere, and that radar be given to local police.

In short, make driving as inconvenient and uncomfortable as possible.

Never mind that no red light camera, no speed camera, nor any radar gun has ever stopped one accident from occurring.

Enforcement of these types makes the highways more dangerous and only generates revenue for the government. I'm sure that is the coalition's aim: so that there is more grant money to spend on bike projects.

The coalition insists that 100 percent of its manifesto be enacted.

They are unwilling to engage in any debate: they might have their talking points refuted, and we can't have that.

If you post comments on their website that they do not like, then the posts are removed.

People who care about driving issues have tried to talk to the bike coalition. But they refuse any discussion.

The coalition admits that if red light and speed cameras and widespread RADAR were legal, they likely would have no effect on preventing accidents or deaths.

Every time something happens, they blast the media to blame drivers and call for draconian laws and stepped-up enforcement.

The BCGP needs a dose of reality. They need to wake up and realize that they are part of a minority who is trying to bully the rest of us into submission, and we don't want any part of it.

Tom McCarey writes from Berywn, Pa. He is a member of a local chapter of the National Motorists Association, a drivers' advocacy group. Readers may email him at tom_mccarey@yahoo.com