Florida Gov. Rick Scott invites Pennsylvanians to move south for lower taxes: PennLive letters
While it's cold and snowy in Pennsylvania, it's clear and sunny in Florida, and there isn't a better time to move to the Sunshine State. Next week, I will be coming to Pennsylvania to meet with businesses and job creators to urge them to move, expand and grow in Florida.

Pennsylvania Gov. Tom Wolf has proposed increasing taxes and implementing regulations that will hurt businesses. While Florida does not have a state income tax, Gov. Wolf wants to increase the income tax in Pennsylvania. Additionally, Florida's business tax is nearly half of Pennsylvania's, and 70 percent of our businesses already don't have to pay it. This year we are proposing to reduce our business tax even further.

Read More: 'Of course you know, this means war' - PennLive's response to Scott's trade trip.

In Florida, we have cut taxes 40 times in the last four years, including $500 million last year and we are proposing $673 million in tax cuts this year.

The results of our business friendly policies have been clear in Florida. Over the past four years, our private sector has created over 728,000 jobs, our unemployment rate has dropped in half, we have reduced our debt by $7.5 billion, and this year our budget surplus is $1.8 billion. Our focus on cutting taxes and expanding economic opportunity has also allowed us to make records investments in education so today's students are prepared to become tomorrow's leaders. Florida is also at 43 year crime low, which means our businesses, communities and families are safer. It's working in Florida because we are creating an environment where businesses can grow and create opportunities for our families to prosper.

I will be meeting with businesses from February 23 - 24 in Philadelphia. If you are interested in setting up a meeting to discuss why Florida is the best place for your business, please contact my office at 850-488-7146. I look forward to discussing your move to more sunshine, lower taxes and better opportunities for your business!

GOV. RICK SCOTT, Tallahassee, Fla.