9 News AGAIN Reveals Lies Behind Latest Attack Ad on Perlmutter

Today, KUSA-9News called the new attack ad by the American Action Network against Ed Perlmutter FALSE. The ad lies about Perlmutter voting to support a provision in the new health insurance law that would let convicted rapists access Viagra. This is completely false. There is no provision in the new health insurance reform law to allow this, and Perlmutter never voted for such a provision. The Perlmutter campaign is asking all the TV stations and the Denver Post to pull this false advertising.



Click Here for the Truth Test



“This shady outside group of Wall St. executives and national Republican operatives completely ‘jumped the shark’ on this one,” said Perlmutter spokeswoman Leslie Oliver. “Their allegations are blatant lies, and Ryan Frazier should denounce these tactics by shady outside groups and call on the American Action Network to pull this ad. It’s so illogical it would be like saying the bill allows Martians masquerading as humans to see a proctologist.”



Here is the entire Truth Test from Adam Schrager at 9 News:

TRUTH TEST QUICK HIT: Viagra and Rapists?

Christina Dickinson written by: Adam Schrager



DECISION 2010 SECTION

KUSA - Throughout the 2010 political season, 9NEWS will hold those who run political ads on our networks accountable for what they say.

In this analysis, we'll look at a claim being made by the American Action Network which describes itself on its website as "a 501(c)(4) 'action tank' that will create, encourage and promote center-right policies based on the principles of freedom, limited government, American exceptionalism, and strong national security" (Source: American Action Network website: http://americanactionnetwork.org/content/about).

The 501(c)(4) status means the group is registered with the IRS as a non-profit that is registered as a "social welfare tax exempt organization." It can raise unlimited amounts of money from donors who will remain private.

The organization is run by Fred Malek, who served under President George H.W. Bush and as the National Finance Chairman for John McCain's 2008 Presidential Campaign. On its board are also two former Republican senators: Norm Coleman (R-Minnesota) and George Allen (R-Virginia). It is running a series of commercials around the country targeting Democratic members of Congress.

In this particular case, the ad attacks Rep. Ed Perlmutter (D-Colorado) in the state's 7th Congressional District. His opponents are Ryan Frazier (R-Colorado) and Buck Bailey (L-Colorado).

The scene is with a woman chatting online with a friend.

QUOTE: "Hey, what's up. Hey - you have to check out the article I just sent you. Apparently, convicted rapists can get Viagra paid for by the new health care bill. Are you serious? Yep. I mean, Viagra for rapists? With my tax dollars? And Congressman Perlmutter voted for it. Perlmutter voted for it?"

TRUTH: This is false. Perlmutter never voted for it.



The new health law treats sex offenders who are not incarcerated the same way the old law did. They can buy any health plan they choose. Some might cover drugs like Viagra, some might not. The new law doesn't say anything about these types of drugs.

As for the new health care law, the exchanges the government will be setting up as a low-cost alternative have not yet been set up, so no one knows what medications they will cover (Source: FactCheck.org: http://www.factcheck.org/2010/10/angles-shocking-and-misleading-viagra-claim/, http://www.factcheck.org/2010/04/more-malarkey-about-health-care/index.html).

There was a specific amendment offered in the U.S. Senate to prevent this from happening and it failed. Perlmutter is a Representative, not a Senator, and thus, did not vote on this specifically (Source: Fox News, April 6: http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2010/04/06/gop-senator-health-care-law-permit-sex-offenders-viagra/).

Coincidentally, when he was arguing against the amendment offered by Sen. Tom Coburn (R-Oklahoma), Sen. Max Baucus (D-Montana) said, "This is a serious bill. This is a serious debate. The amendment offered by the senator from Oklahoma makes a mockery of the Senate, the debate and the American people. It is not a serious amendment. It is a crass political stunt aimed at making 30-second commercials, not public policy" (Source: Politico, March 24: http://www.politico.com/livepulse/0310/Dems_reject_amendment_to_ban_Viagra_for_sex_offenders.html).