United States Senate Periodical Press Gallery
The Floor Log is for reference purposes only. For official information, please visit https://www.congress.gov/congressional-record

SENATE FLOOR PROCEEDINGS

THURSDAY, MAY 23, 2019

The Senate will convene at 9:30 AM. Time for the two leaders will be reserved for use later in the day.

The Senate convened and proceeded to a period of Morning Business.

At 12:45 PM, the Senate will proceed to a Legislative Session to vote on passage of S. 151 (Telephone Robocall Abuse Criminal Enforcement and Deterrence Act), as amended.

The Senate recessed from 10:56 AM-12:00 PM.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

S. 151 (Telephone Robocall Abuse Criminal Enforcement and Deterrence Act). Under a previous Unanimous Consent agreement, the Committee-reported substitute amendment is agreed to.

S. 151 (Telephone Robocall Abuse Criminal Enforcement and Deterrence Act), as amended. Yeas and nays ordered. The bill, as amended, passed by a vote of 97-1.

The Senate proceeded to a period of Morning Business.

Motion to Proceed to H.R. 2157 (An act making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30th, 2019 – Disaster Aid). The Motion to Proceed was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

H.R. 2157 (An act making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30th, 2019 – Disaster Aid).

Shelby/Leahy substitute amendment agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

Motion to Waive the Budget Act with respect to H.R. 2157 (An act making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30th, 2019 – Disaster Aid), as amended. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Waive the Budget Act was agreed to by a vote of 84-9.

H.R. 2157 (An act making supplemental appropriations for the fiscal year ending September 30th, 2019 – Disaster Aid), as amended. Final passage. Yeas and nays ordered. The bill as amended passed by a vote of 85–8.

Motion to Proceed to S. 1332 (A bill to set forth the congressional budget for the United States Government for fiscal year 2020 and setting forth the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal years 2021 through 2029). Leader McConnell filed cloture on the Motion to Proceed.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session to consider Cal. #157. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #157, Andrew M Saul to be Commissioner of Social Security for the term expiring January 19, 2025. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session to consider Cal. #224. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #224, David Schenker to be an Assistant Secretary of State (Near Eastern Affairs). Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session to consider Cal. #162. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #162, Heath P. Tarbert to be Chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #163, Heath P. Tarbert to be Commissioner of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session to consider Cal. #198. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #198, Susan Combs to be an Assistant Secretary of the Interior. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session to consider Cal. #39. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #39, Ryan T. Holte to be a Judge of the United States Court of Federal Claims for a term of fifteen years. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session to consider Cal. #40. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. # 40, Rossie David Alston, Jr. to be United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Virginia. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session to consider Cal. #56. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #56, Richard A. Hertling to be a Judge of the United States Court of Federal Claims for a term of fifteen years. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

The following nominations were agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

ARMY

Cal. #247, Col. Edward S. Smith to be Brigadier General.

MARINE CORPS

Cal. #248, the following to be Brigadier General:

Col. Marcus B. Annibale

Col. Melvin G. Carter

Col. Robert C. Fulford

Col. Joseph A. Matos, III

Col. Jason L. Morris

Col. Thomas B. Savage

Col. Daniel L. Shipley

Col. James B. Wellons

Col. Brian N. Wolford

ARMY

Cal. #249, Maj. Gen. Duane A. Gamble to be Lieutenant General.

NAVY

Cal. #250, Rear Adm. Scott D. Conn to be Vice Admiral.

ARMY

Cal. #251, Gen. James C. McConville to be General.

AIR FORCE

Cal. #253, Maj. Gen. Marc H. Sasseville to be Lieutenant General.

Cal. #254, Maj. Gen. Eric T. Fick to be Lieutenant General.

ARMY

Cal. #255, Lt. Gen. Joseph M. Martin to be General.

Cal. #256, Lt. Gen. Laura J. Richardson to be Lieutenant General.

Cal. #257, Maj. Gen. Robert P. White to be Lieutenant General.

NAVY

Cal. #258, Vice Adm. William R. Merz to be Vice Admiral.

Cal. #259, Rear Adm. Ross A. Myers to be Vice Admiral.

MARINE CORPS

Cal. #260, Lt. Gen. Eric M. Smith to be Lieutenant General.

AIR FORCE

Cal. #261, Lt. Gen. Arnold W. Bunch, Jr to be General.

Cal. #262, Col. David A. Harris, Jr to be Brigadier General.

NAVY

Cal. #263, Adm. William F. Moran to be Admiral.

Cal. #264, Vice Adm. Robert P. Burke to be Admiral.

MARINE CORPS

Cal. #265, Lt. Gen. Herman S. Clardy, III to be Lieutenant General.

ARMY

Cal. #266, the following to be Major General:

Brig. Gen. Peter B. Andrysiak, Jr.

Brig. Gen. Jonathan P. Braga

Brig. Gen. John W. Brennan, Jr.

Brig. Gen. Miguel A. Correa

Brig. Gen. Clement S. Coward, Jr.

Brig. Gen. Patrick J. Donahoe

Brig. Gen. Christopher T. Donahue

Brig. Gen. Scott L. Efflandt

Brig. Gen. Michael R. Fenzel

Brig. Gen. David J. Francis

Brig. Gen. Bradley T. Gericke

Brig. Gen. Neil S. Hersey

Brig. Gen. Lonnie G. Hibbard

Brig. Gen. Diana M. Holland

Brig. Gen. Omar J. Jones, IV

Brig. Gen. Stephen J. Maranian

Brig. Gen. Matthew W. McFarlane

Brig. Gen. Christopher O. Mohan

Brig. Gen. Laura A. Potter

Brig. Gen. Thomas A. Pugh

Brig. Gen. Robert A. Rasch, Jr.

Brig. Gen. John B. Richardson, IV

Brig. Gen. Kenneth T. Royar

Brig. Gen. Stephen G. Smith

Brig. Gen. Thomas H. Todd, III

Brig. Gen. Kevin Vereen

Brig. Gen. Robert F. Whittle, Jr.

Brig. Gen. David Wilson

AIR FORCE

Cal. #267, Col. Tracy D. Smith to be Brigadier General.

Cal. #268, Frank W. Roy to be Brigadier General.

ARMY

Cal. #269, Maj. Gen. Leopoldo A. Quintas, Jr. to be Lieutenant General.

Cal. #270, Big. Gen. Kenneth A. Nava to be Major General.

Cal. #271, the following to be Major General

Brig. Gen. Francis J. Evon, Jr.

Brig. Gen. David J. Mikolaities

Cal. #272, Big. Gen. Mark J. Schindler to be Major General.

Cal. #273, the following to be Major General/Brigadier General:

Brig. Gen. John F. Hussey (MG)

Brig. Gen. Andrew J. Juknelis (MG)

Col. Jan C. Norris (BG)

Col. Michael K. Pyle (BG)

Cal. #274, the following to be Brigadier General:

Col. Nicole M. Balliet

Col. James A. Benson

Col. Brian D. Bobo

Col. Rodney C. Boyd

Col. Andre J. Chevalier

Col. Michael N. Cleveland

Col. Amy F. Cook

Col. Timothy D. Covington

Col. Ronald A. Cupples

Col. Jamie J. Dailey

Col. Ronnie B. Delfin

Col. Thomas C. Friloux

Col. Kevin A. Fujimoto

Col. Doyle Gillis, Jr.

Col. Charles D. Hausman

Col. Cindy H. Haygood

Col. Lynn M. Heng

Col. Larry L. Henry

Col. Scott W. Hiipakka

Col. Christine L. Hoffmann

Col. Bryan M. Howay

Col. Jack A. James

Col. Nick Johnson

Col. Robert J. Larkin

Col. John A. Leblanc

Col. David A. Lopina

Col. Corwin J. Lusk

Col. Roger D. Lyles

Col. Thomas H. Mancino

Col. Timothy S. Mclaughlin

Col. Alberto L. Miranda

Col. Jennifer R. Mitchell

Col. Jesse M. Morehouse

Col. Alan B. Naugher

Col. John T. Oakley

Col. Douglas A. Paul

Col. John A. Pelleriti

Col. John J. Perkins

Col. Dean A. Preston

Col. Stephen L. Rhoades

Col. Christopher S. Sandison

Col. Stephen E. Schemenauer

Col. Matthew D. Smith

Col. Wallace E. Steinbrecher

Col. Robin B. Stilwell

Col. Craig W. Strong

Col. Blair E. Tinkham

Col. Michael A. Tougher, III

Col. Michael E. Wegscheider

Col. Brian F. Wertzler

Col. Richard A. Wholey

Col. Richard D. Wilson

Col. John J. Wojcik

Col. James A. Zollar

Cal. #275, the following to be Brigadier General:

Col. Bradley J. Cox

Col. Carl C. Danberg

Col. Daniel H. Dent

Col. Ralph R. Robovsky

Col. Adam C. Volant

Cal. #276, the following to be Brigadier General:

Col. Andrew C. Diefenthaler

Col. James M. Jones

NAVY

Cal. #277, Rear Adm. Sean S. Buck to be Vice Admiral

MARINE CORPS

Cal. #278, Lt. Gen. John J. Broadmeadow to be Lieutenant General.

Cal. #279, Lt. Gen. Brian D. Beaudreault to be Lieutenant General.

Cal. #280, Lt. Gen. George W. Smith, Jr. to be Lieutenant General.

Cal. #281, Lt. Gen. Robert F. Hedelund to be Lieutenant General.

ARMY

Cal. #282, the following to be Major General:

Brig. Gen. Rodney L. Faulk

Brig. Gen. Deborah L. Kotulich

Brig. Gen. Frederick R. Maiocco

Brig. Gen. Gregory J. Mosser

Brig. Gen. John H. Phillips

Brig. Gen. Joe D. Robinson

Brig. Gen. Alberto C. Rosende

Brig. Gen. Richard C. Staats, Jr.

Brig. Gen. Kevin C. Wulfhorst

Cal. #282 (cont’d) the following to be Brigadier General:

Col. Timothy E. Brennan

Col. Cary J. Cowan, Jr.

Col. Christopher J. Dziubek

Col. Jeffrey M. Farris

Col. Robert E. Guidry

Col. Michelle A. Link

Col. Laurence S. Linton

Col. Pamela L. McGaha

Col. Steven B. McLaughlin

Col. Joseph A. Papenfus

Col. Joseph A. Ricciardi

Col. Patricia R. Wallace

Col. David P. Warshaw

Col. Stuart E. Werner

Col. Wanda N. Williams

AIR FORCE

Cal. #283, Maj. Gen. David S. Nahom to be Lieutenant General.

Cal. #284, Lt. Gen. Marshall B. Webb to be Lieutenant General.

ARMY

Cal. #285, the following to be Brigadier General:

Col. Jack M. Davis

Col. Paula C. Lodi

Col. Mark W. Thompson

Cal. #286, Brig. Gen. Jeffery D. Broadwater to be Major General.

(and all nominations on the Secretary’s Desk in the Air Force, Army, Marine Corps, and Navy)

The Senate proceeded to the consideration of the following nominations en bloc:

Cal. #226, Michael G. Bailey to be United States Attorney for the District of Arizona.

Cal. #227, Brent R. Bunn to be United States Marshal for the District of Idaho.

Cal. #228, Eric S. Gartner to be United States Marshal for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

Cal. #235, Timothy J. Downing to be United States Attorney for the Western District of Oklahoma.

Cal. #236, William Travis Brown, Jr. to be United States Marshal for the Middle District of Louisiana.

Cal. #237, Michael Blaine East to be United States Marshal for the Eastern District of North Carolina.

The nominations were confirmed by Voice Vote en bloc.

The Senate proceeded to the consideration of the following nominations en bloc:

Cal. #112, William Bookless to be Principal Deputy Administrator, National Nuclear Security Administration.

Cal. #124, Christopher Fall to be Director of Office of Science, Department of Energy.

The nominations were confirmed by Voice Vote en bloc.

At a time to be determined, the Senate will proceed to a vote on confirmation of Cal. #122, Rita Baranwal to be an Assistant Secretary of Energy (Nuclear Energy).

The Senate proceeded to the consideration of the following nominations (and all nominations on the secretary’s desk in the Foreign Service) en bloc

Cal. #177, Michael J. Fitzpatrick to be Ambassador to the Republic of Ecuador

Cal. #220, Katie Marie Byrnes to be Ambassador the Republic of North Macedonia.

Cal. #289, Bridget A Brink, to be Ambassador to the Slovak Republic.

Cal. #290, John Jefferson Daigle, to be Ambassador to the Republic of Cabo Verde.

Cal. #291, Matthew S. Klimow to be Ambassador to Turkmenistan.

Cal. #179, Jeffrey Ross Gunter to be Ambassador to the Republic of Iceland.

Cal. #218, James Gilmore, to be U.S. Representative to the Organization of Security and Cooperation in Europe.

The nominations were confirmed by Voice Vote en bloc.

The Senate proceeded to the consideration of the following nominations en bloc:

Cal. #187, John Barsa to be Assistant Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development.

Cal. #215, Richard Parker to be an Assistant Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development.

The nominations were confirmed by Voice Vote en bloc.

The Senate proceeded to a Period of Morning Business.

S. Res. 213 (A resolution designating the week of May 19 through May 25, 2019, as “National Public Works Week”). The resolution was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

The Senate proceeded to the following Resolutions.

S. Res. 222

S. Res. 223

S. Res. 224

S. Res. 225

S. Res. 226

The resolutions were agreed to by Voice Vote.

S. Con. Res. 3 (A concurrent resolution recognizing the rich history, heritage, and strategic importance of the Republic of the Marshall Islands and the Marshallese population residing in the United State) The concurrent resolution was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. 886 (Indian Water Rights Settlement Extension Act) was discharged from the Committee on Energy and National Resources and referred to Indian Affairs by Unanimous Consent.

S. 1693 (Reauthorize the National Flood Insurance Program). The bill passed by Voice Vote.

The Senate will convene for Pro Forma sessions only on the following dates and times:

Friday May 24th at 9:45AM

Tuesday May 28th at 11:30 AM

Friday May 31st at 10:30 AM

The Senate will next convene on Monday, June 3rd at 3:00 PM and resume consideration of the Motion to Proceed to S. 1332 (A bill to set forth the congressional budget for the United States Government for fiscal year 2020 and setting forth the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal years 2021 through 2029).

At 5:30 PM on Monday, June 3rd the Senate will proceed two roll call votes:

1. Motion to Invoke Cloture on the Motion to Proceed to S. 1332 (A bill to set forth the congressional budget for the United States Government for fiscal year 2020 and setting forth the appropriate budgetary levels for fiscal years 2021 through 2029)

2. (If cloture is not invoked on S. 1332) Motion to Invoke Cloture on Cal. #157, Andrew Saul to Commissioner of Social Security for the term expiring January 19, 2025.

The Senate adjourned at 6:34 PM.

WEDNESDAY, MAY 22, 2019

The Senate will convene at 9:30 AM and will proceed to Leader remarks. The Senate will then proceed to an Executive Session and resume consideration of Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson, Jr. to be United States District Judge for the District of Utah, post-cloture. At 4:30 PM, the Senate will proceed to the following votes:

Confirmation of Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson, Jr. to be United States District Judge for the District of Utah. Confirmation of Cal. #35, Stephen R. Clark to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Missouri. Confirmation of Cal. #37, Carl J. Nichols to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Columbia. Confirmation of Cal. #38, Kenneth D. Bell to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of North Carolina.

The Senate convened and proceeded to Leader remarks.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson, Jr. to be United States District Judge for the District of Utah. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 51-47.

Cal. #35, Stephen R. Clark to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Missouri. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 53-45.

Cal. #37, Carl J. Nichols to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Columbia. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 55-43.

Cal. #38, Kenneth D. Bell to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of North Carolina. Yeas and Nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 55–43.

The Senate will convene at 9:30 AM on Thursday, May 23, 2019. Time for the two leaders will be reserved for use later in the day.

The Senate stands in recess until 9:30 AM tomorrow.

TUESDAY, MAY 21, 2019

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM on Tuesday, May 21, 2019. Following Leader remarks, the Senate will proceed to an Executive Session and will resume consideration of Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, post-cloture. The Senate will recess from 12:30 PM to 2:15 PM for the weekly party caucus lunches. At 2:15 PM, the Senate will proceed to two roll call votes:

Confirmation of Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. Motion to Invoke Cloture on Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson, Jr., of Utah, to be United States District Judge for the District of Utah.

The Senate convened and proceeded to Leader remarks.

S. 1370 (Gold Star Family Tax Relief Act). Agreed to by Unanimous Consent. Under a Unanimous Consent order, the papers will be held at the desk and if the House passes the bill identical to the text of S. 1370 (Gold Star Family Tax Relief Act), the bill be considered read a third time and passed, and upon passage of the House bill, S. 1370 (Gold Star Family Tax Relief Act) will be indefinitely postponed

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, post-cloture.

The Senate recessed from 12:30-2:15 PM for weekly party caucus luncheons.

Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, post-cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 53-46.

Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson, Jr., of Utah, to be United States District Judge for the District of Utah. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 52-47.

Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson, Jr., of Utah, to be United States District Judge for the District of Utah, post-cloture.

At 3:45 PM today the Senate will proceed to 3 roll call votes:

Cloture on Cal. #35, Stephen R. Clark to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Missouri Cloture on Cal. #37, Carl J. Nichols to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Columbia Cloture on Cal. #38, Kenneth D. Bell to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of North Carolina

The Senate recessed from 3:08 until 3:45 PM.

The Senate reconvened at 3:45 PM and resumed an Executive Session.

Cal. #35, Stephen R. Clark to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Missouri. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 53-45.

Cal. #37, Carl J. Nichols to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Columbia. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 55-42.

Cal. #38, Kenneth D. Bell to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of North Carolina. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 56-42.

The Senate proceeded to a period of Morning Business.

S. Res. 216 (Recognizing the contributions made by the men and women of the Air Force who are responsible for operating and maintaining the global positioning system). Agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

The Senate will convene at 9:30 AM on Wednesday, May 22nd and will proceed to Leader remarks. The Senate will then proceed to an Executive Session and resume consideration of Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson, Jr. to be United States District Judge for the District of Utah, post-cloture. At 4:30 PM, the Senate will proceed to the following votes:

Confirmation of Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson, Jr. to be United States District Judge for the District of Utah. Confirmation of Cal. #35, Stephen R. Clark to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Missouri. Confirmation of Cal. #37, Carl J. Nichols to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Columbia. Confirmation of Cal. #38, Kenneth D. Bell to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of North Carolina.

The Senate adjourned at 6:41 PM.

MONDAY, MAY 20, 2019

The Senate will convene at 3:00 PM on Monday, May 20, 2019. Following Leader remarks, the Senate will proceed to an Executive Session and will resume consideration of Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. At 5:30 PM, the Senate will vote on the Motion to Invoke Cloture on the Collins nomination (if cloture is invoked, there will be 30 hours of post-cloture debate, absent a unanimous consent agreement).

The Senate convened and proceeded to Leader remarks.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. Motion to Invoke Cloture on the nomination. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture on the nomination was agreed to by a vote of 51-43.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

The following bills were read for the second time, en bloc.

H.R. 312 (Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe Reservation Reaffirmation Act).

H.R. 2578 (National Flood Insurance Program Extension Act of 2019).

Further consideration of the bills were objected to en bloc. The bills were placed on the Calendar.

S. 163 (Alaska Remote Generator Reliability and Protection Act). The bill passed by unanimous consent.

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM on Tuesday, May 21, 2019. Following Leader remarks, the Senate will proceed to an Executive Session and will resume consideration of Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, post-cloture. The Senate will recess from 12:30 PM to 2:15 PM for the weekly party caucus lunches. At 2:15 PM, the Senate will proceed to two roll call votes:

Confirmation of Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. Motion to Invoke Cloture on Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson, Jr., of Utah, to be United States District Judge for the District of Utah.

The Senate adjourned at 6:55 PM.

THURSDAY, MAY 16, 2019

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM on Thursday, May 16, 2019 and proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #24, Wendy Vitter to be a United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Louisiana.

At Noon, the Senate will proceed to two roll call votes:

Confirmation of Cal. #24, Wendy Vitter to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Louisiana. Confirmation of Cal. #221, Brian J. Bulatao to be an Under Secretary of State (Management).

Additionally, at 1:45 PM, the Senate will proceed to a vote on confirmation of Cal. #230, Jeffrey A. Rosen to be a Deputy Attorney General.

The Senate convened and proceeded to Leader remarks.

S. 1208 (Protecting America’s First Responders Act). Committee-reported amendment agreed to by Unanimous Consent. The bill, as amended, was agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #24, Wendy Vitter to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Louisiana.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

H.R. 2379 (To reauthorize the Bulletproof Vest Partnership Grant Program). Agreed to by Voice Vote.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #24, Wendy Vitter to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Louisiana. Yeas and Nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 52-45.

Cal. #221, Brian J. Bulatao to be an Under Secretary of State (Management). Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 92-5.

Cal. #230, Jeffrey A. Rosen to be a Deputy Attorney General. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 52-45.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by voice vote.

Motion to Proceed to Executive Session to consider Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. Agreed to by voice vote.

Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by voice vote.

Motion to Proceed to Executive Session to consider Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Utah. Agreed to by voice vote.

Cal. #23, Howard C. Nielson to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Utah. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by voice vote.

Motion to Proceed to Executive Session to consider Cal. #35, Stephen R. Clark to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Missouri. Agreed to by voice vote.

Cal. #35, Stephen R. Clark to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Missouri. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by voice vote.

Motion to Proceed to Executive Session to consider Cal. #37, Carl J. Nichols to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Columbia. Agreed to by voice vote.

Cal. #37, Carl J. Nichols to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Columbia. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by voice vote.

Motion to Proceed to Executive Session to consider Cal. #38, Kenneth D. Bell to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of North Carolina. Agreed to by voice vote.

Cal. #38, Kenneth D. Bell to be U.S. District Judge for the Western District of North Carolina. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

The Senate confirmed the nominations en bloc by voice vote:

Cal. #189, Jane L. Corwin to be Commissioner on the part of the United States on the International Joint Commission, United States and Canada.

Cal. #192, Robert C. Sisson, to be Commissioner on the part of the United States on the International Joint Commission, United States and Canada.

Cal. #194, Lance V. Yohe to be Commissioner on the part of the United States on the International Joint Commission, United States and Canada.

The Senate confirmed the following Coast Guard Promotions by consent:

Cal. #172 – The following to be Rear Admiral (Lower Half): Capt. Brendan C. McPherson, Capt. Douglas M. Schofield, Capt. Andrew M. Sugimoto, Capt. Richard V. Timme, Capt. Todd C. Wiemers.

Cal. #185, Matthew H. Tueller, of Utah, to be Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary of the United States of America to the Republic of Iraq. The nomination was confirmed by voice vote.

The Senate proceeded with a Legislative Session.

S. 1208 (Protecting America’s First Responders Act), w/committee-reported amendment. Passed by voice vote.

H.R. 2379 (Reauthorizing the Bulletproof Vest Partnership Grant Program). Passed by voice vote.

S. 820 (Debbie Smith Act of 2019). Passed by unanimous consent.

S. 998 (Supporting and Treating Officers In Crisis Act of 2019). Passed by unanimous consent.

S. 744 (Effective Prosecution of Possession of Biological Toxins and Agents Act of 2019). Passed by unanimous consent.

The following bills were read for the first time, en bloc.

H.R. 312 (Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe Reservation Reaffirmation Act).

H.R. 2578 (National Flood Insurance Program Extension Act of 2019).

The second reading of the bills were objected to en bloc.

The Senate will convene at 3:00 PM on Monday, May 20, 2019. Following Leader remarks, the Senate will proceed to an Executive Session and will resume consideration of Cal. #201, Daniel P. Collins to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. At 5:30 PM, the Senate will vote on the Motion to Invoke Cloture on the Collins nomination (if cloture is invoked, there will be 30 hours of post-cloture debate, absent a unanimous consent agreement).

The Senate adjourned at 5:04 PM.

WEDNESDAY, MAY 15, 2019

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM and will proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be a United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, post-cloture. At 5:30 PM, the Senate will vote on the following:

Confirmation of Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be a United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. Cloture on Cal. #24, Wendy Vitter to be a United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Louisiana. Cloture on Cal. #221, Brian J. Bulatao to be an Under Secretary of State for Management. Cloture on Cal. #230, Jeffrey A. Rosen to be a Deputy Attorney General.

The Senate convened and proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be a United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, post-cloture.

The Senate proceeded to a Period of Morning Business.

The following bills were read for a second time, en bloc:

H.R. 986 (Protecting Americans with Preexisting Conditions Act of 2019)

H.R. 2157 (Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2019)

Further readings of the bills were objected to and the bills were placed on the calendar, en bloc.

S. Res. 178 (A resolution recognizing and supporting the goals and ideals of National Sexual Assault Awareness and Prevention Month.). The resolution was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be a United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, post-cloture. Yeas and Nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 52–45.

Cal. #24, Wendy Vitter to be a United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Louisiana. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and Nays ordered. The Motion was agreed to by a vote of 51–45.

Cal. #221, Brian J. Bulatao to be an Under Secretary of State for Management. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and Nays ordered. The Motion was agreed to by a vote of 90–5.

Cal. #230, Jeffrey A. Rosen to be a Deputy Attorney General. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and Nays ordered. The Motion was agreed to by a vote of 52–44.

The Senate proceeded to a Period of Morning of Business.

The Chair announced that the President Pro Tempore and the Speaker of the House of Representatives have appointed Phillip Swaggle as Director of the Congressional Budget Office effective June 3, 2019 for the term expiring January 3, 2023.

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM on Thursday, May 16, 2019 and proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #24, Wendy Vitter to be a United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Louisiana.

At Noon, the Senate will proceed to two roll call votes:

Confirmation of Cal. #24, Wendy Vitter to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Louisiana. Confirmation of Cal. #221, Brian J. Bulatao to be an Under Secretary of State (Management).

Additionally, at 1:45 PM, the Senate will proceed to a vote on confirmation of Cal. #230, Jeffrey A. Rosen to be a Deputy Attorney General.

The Senate adjourned at 7:29 PM.

TUESDAY, MAY 14, 2019

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM. Following Leader remarks, the Senate will proceed to an Executive Session and will resume consideration of Cal. #25, Michael J. Truncale to be United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas, post-cloture. At 10:45 AM, the Senate will proceed to two roll call votes:

Confirmation of Cal. #25, Michael J. Truncale to be a United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas. Motion to Invoke Cloture on Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be a United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit.

The Senate will recess from 12:30 to 2:15 PM for the weekly party caucus lunches.

The Senate convened and proceeded to Executive Session.

Cal. #25, Michael J. Truncale to be United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 49-46.

Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be a United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 50-45.

Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be a United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, post-cloture.

The Senate stands in recess from 12:30 – 2:15 PM.

The Senate reconvened at 2:15 PM.

The Senate stands in recess subject to the call of the chair.

The Senate reconvened and resumed an Executive Session.

Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be a United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, post-cloture.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session for a period of Morning Business.

The following bills were read for the first time, en bloc:

H.R. 986 (Protecting Americans with Preexisting Conditions Act of 2019).

H.R. 2157 (Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2019).

Further readings were objected to, en bloc, and the bills will receive their second reading on the next legislative day.

S. Res. 209 (National Police Week). Agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. Res. 210 (National Senior Fraud Awareness Day). Agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. 1231 (Reauthorizes the Bulletproof Vest Reauthorization Program). Committee-reported amendments agreed to by Unanimous Consent. The bill, as amended, is agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM on Wednesday, May 15th and proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be a United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. Post-cloture time is scheduled to expire on the Lee nomination at approximately 5:45 PM on Wednesday.

The Senate adjourned at 6:20 PM.

MONDAY, MAY 13, 2019

The Senate will convene at 3:00 PM and will proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #25, Michael J. Truncale to be United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas. At 5:30 PM, the Senate will vote on the Motion to Invoke Cloture on the Truncale nomination.

The Senate convened.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by voice vote.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by voice vote.

Motion to Proceed to Cal. #230, Jeffrey A. Rosen to be a Deputy Attorney General. The Motion to Proceed was agreed to by voice vote. Leader McConnell filed cloture on the nomination.

Cal. #25, Michael J. Truncale to be United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas. Motion to Invoke Cloture on the nomination. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 49-43.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

S. Res. 202 (Congratulating the students, parents, teachers, and leaders of charter schools across the United States and so forth). Adopted by unanimous consent.

S. Res. 203 (Recognizing the 80th anniversary of the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association). Adopted by unanimous consent.

S. 1436 (A bill to make technical corrections to the computation of average pay up – Public Law 110-279). The bill passed by unanimous consent.

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM on Tuesday, May 14, 2019. Following Leader remarks, the Senate will proceed to an Executive Session and will resume consideration of Cal. #25, Michael J. Truncale to be United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas, post-cloture. At 10:45 AM, the Senate will proceed to two roll call votes:

Confirmation of Cal. #25, Michael J. Truncale to be a United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas. Motion to Invoke Cloture on Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be a United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit.

The Senate will recess from 12:30 to 2:15 PM for the weekly party caucus lunches.

The Senate adjourned at 6:29 PM.

THURSDAY, MAY 9, 2019

The Senate will convene at 9:30 AM on Thursday, May 9th and proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #117, Michael H. Park, of New York, to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit. At 1:45 PM, the Senate will vote on confirmation of the Park nomination.

The Senate convened and proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #117, Michael H. Park, of New York, to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 52-41.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Cal. #25, Michael J. Truncale to be United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas. Senator McConnell filed a Motion to Invoke Cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Cal. #202, Kenneth Kiyul Lee to be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit. Senator McConnell filed a Motion to Invoke Cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Cal. #24, Wendy Vitter to be United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Louisiana. Senator McConnell filed a Motion to Invoke Cloture on the nomination.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Cal. #221, Brian J. Bulatao to be an Under Secretary of State. Senator McConnell filed a Motion to Invoke Cloture on the nomination.

The Senate proceeded to a period of Morning Business.

S. Res. 199 (Honoring the life and legacy of Judge Damon Jerome Keith). Agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. Res. 200 (Authorizing the taking of a photograph in the Senate Chamber). Agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

The Senate will convene at 3:00 PM on Monday, May 13th and will proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #25, Michael J. Truncale to be United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas. At 5:30 PM, the Senate will vote on the Motion to Invoke Cloture on the Truncale nomination.

The Senate adjourned at 3:45 PM.

WEDNESDAY, MAY 8, 2019

The Senate will convene at 9:30 AM and proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit, post-cloture.

At 10:00 AM, the Senate will proceed to five roll call votes on the following:

Confirmation of Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit. Confirmation of Cal. #95, Kimberly A. Reed to be President of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Confirmation of Cal. #89, Spencer Bachus III to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Confirmation of Cal. #94, Judith DelZoppo Pryor to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Motion to invoke cloture on Cal. #100 Janet Dhillon to be a Member of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.

Further votes are expected during Wednesday’s session.

The Senate convened and proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 54-42.

Cal. #95, Kimberly A. Reed to be President of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 79-17.

Cal. #89, Spencer Bachus III to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 72-22.

Cal. #94, Judith DelZoppo Pryor to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 77-19.

Cal. #100 Janet Dhillon to be a Member of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and Nays ordered. The motion was agreed to by a vote of 52–44.

Cal. #100 Janet Dhillon to be a Member of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 50-43.

Cal. #117, Michael H. Park, of New York, to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 51-43.

Cal. #117, Michael H. Park, of New York, to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session for a period of Morning Business.

S. Res. 196 (American Peanut Shellers Association). Agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. Res. 197 (Recognizing the contributions of the teachers of the United States). Agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

The Senate will convene at 9:30 AM on Thursday, May 9th and proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #117, Michael H. Park, of New York, to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit. At 1:45 PM, the Senate will vote on confirmation of the Park nomination.

The Senate adjourned at 7:00 PM.

TUESDAY, MAY 7, 2019

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM. Following Leader remarks, the Senate will proceed to an Executive Session and will resume consideration of Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit, post-cloture. All time during recess, adjournment, morning business, and leader remarks will count post-cloture on the Bianco nomination. The Senate will recess from 12:30 PM until 2:15 PM for the weekly party caucus luncheons.

The Senate convened and proceeded to Leader remarks.

The following bills were read for the second time, en bloc:

S. 1332 (A bill to set forth the Congressional budget for the United States government).

H.R. 9 (An act to direct the President to develop a plan for the United States to make its nationally determined contribution under the Paris Agreement).

Further readings of the bills were objected to, en bloc.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit, post-cloture.

The Senate recessed from 12:30-2:15 PM for weekly party caucus luncheons.

At 4:00 PM, the Senate will proceed to the following votes:

Motion to Invoke Cloture on #95, Kimberly A. Reed to be President of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Motion to Invoke Cloture on #89, Spencer Bachus III to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Motion to Invoke Cloture on #94, Judith DelZoppo Pryor to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States.

The Senate reconvened at 2:15 PM and resumed an Executive Session.

Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit, post-cloture. Laid aside.

Cal. #95, Kimberly A. Reed to be President of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 82-17.

Cal. #89, Spencer Bachus III to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 74-24.

Cal. #94, Judith DelZoppo Pryor to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 79–19.

The Senate proceeded to a Period of Morning Business.

S. Res. 192 (To authorize testimony and representation in State of Nevada v. LaQamara) The resolution was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. Res. 193 (Designating May 18, 2019 as the Kids to Parks Day). The resolution was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. Res. 96 (A resolution commending the Government of Canada for upholding the rule of law and expressing concern over actions by the Government of the People’s Republic of China in response to a request from the United States Government to the Government of Canada for the extradition of a Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd. executive.). The resolution was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

The Senate will convene at 9:30 AM on Wednesday, May 8, 2019, and proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit, post-cloture.

At 10:00 AM on Wednesday, the Senate will proceed to five roll call votes on the following:

Confirmation of Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit. Confirmation of Cal. #95, Kimberly A. Reed to be President of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Confirmation of Cal. #89, Spencer Bachus III to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Confirmation of Cal. #94, Judith DelZoppo Pryor to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Motion to invoke cloture on Cal. #100 Janet Dhillon to be a Member of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.

Further votes are expected during Wednesday’s session.

The Senate adjourned at 6:41 PM.

MONDAY, MAY 6, 2019

The Senate will convene at 3:00 PM and proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit.

At 5:30 PM, The Senate will proceed to a vote on the Motion to Invoke Cloture on Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit.

The Senate convened and proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit. Motion to Invoke Cloture on the nomination. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 51-40.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

S. Res. 162 (Designating April 2019 as National Donate Blood Month). Adopted by unanimous consent.

S. Res. 190 (Promoting minority health awareness). Adopted by voice vote.

S. Res. 191 (Designating May 5th through May 11th as National Small Business Week). Adopted by unanimous consent.

The following bills were read for the first time, en bloc:

S. 1332 (A bill to set forth the Congressional budget for the United States government).

H.R. 9 (An act to direct the President to develop a plan for the United States to make its nationally determined contribution under the Paris Agreement).

The second readings of the bills were objected to, en bloc.

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM on Tuesday, May 7, 2019. Following Leader remarks, the Senate will proceed to an Executive Session and will resume consideration of Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit, post-cloture. All time during recess, adjournment, morning business, and leader remarks will count post-cloture on the Bianco nomination. The Senate will recess from 12:30 PM until 2:15 PM for the weekly party caucus luncheons.

The Senate adjourned at 6:53 PM.

THURSDAY, MAY 2, 2019

The Senate will convene on Thursday, May 2, 2019 at 9:30 AM. Following Leader remarks the Senate will proceed to an Executive Session and will resume consideration of the Ruiz nomination, post-cloture. At 10:30 AM, the Senate will proceed to three roll call votes on the following nominations:

Confirmation of Cal. #33, Rodolfo Armando Ruiz II to be a United States District Judge for the Southern District of Florida. Confirmation of Cal. #34, Raul M. Arias-Marxuach to be a United States District Judge for the District of Puerto Rico. Confirmation of Cal. #36, Joshua Wolson to be a United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

Also on Thursday, May 2 at 1:45 PM, the Senate will proceed to a roll call vote relative to the Presidential veto message for S. J. Res.7 (A joint resolution to direct the removal of United States Armed Forces from hostilities in the Republic of Yemen that have not been authorized by Congress).

The Senate convened and proceeded to Leader remarks.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #33, Rodolfo Armando Ruiz II to be a United States District Judge for the Southern District of Florida. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 90–8.

Cal. #34, Raul M. Arias-Marxuach to be a United States District Judge for the District of Puerto Rico. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 95–3.

Confirmation of Cal. #36, Joshua Wolson to be a United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. Yeas and Nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 65–33.

The Senate proceeded to a Legislative Session.

Presidential veto message for S. J. Res.7 (A joint resolution to direct the removal of United States Armed Forces from hostilities in the Republic of Yemen that have not been authorized by Congress). Yeas and nays ordered. The joint resolution on reconsideration fails to pass over the President’s veto by a vote of 53-45.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit. Senator McConnell filed a Motion to Invoke Cloture.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Cal. #95, Kimberly A. Reed to be President of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Senator McConnell filed a Motion to Invoke Cloture.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Cal. #89, Spencer Bachus III to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Senator McConnell filed a Motion to Invoke Cloture.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Cal. #94, Judith DelZoppo Pryor to be a Member of the Board of Directors of the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Senator McConnell filed a Motion to Invoke Cloture.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Cal. #100, Janet Dhillon to be a Member of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. Senator McConnell filed a Motion to Invoke Cloture.

Motion to Proceed to a Legislative Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Motion to Proceed to an Executive Session. Agreed to by Voice Vote.

Cal. #117, Michael H. Park to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit. Senator McConnell filed a Motion to Invoke Cloture.

The Senate proceeded to a Period of Morning Business.

S. Res 160 (A resolution recognizing the contributions of defense laboratories to the technological dominance of the United States Armed Forces and supporting the designation of April 25, 2019, as “Department of Defense Laboratory Day 2019”). The resolution was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. Res. 144 (A resolution designating May 5, 2019, as the “National Day of Awareness for Missing and Murdered Native Women and Girls”.). The resolution was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. Res. 185 (Commending the Northwest Missouri State University Bear Cats Men’s Basketball for Another Collegiate Athletic Association Division II National Championship Victory). The resolution was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. Res. 186 (Recognizing April 30, 2019 as Celebrating Young Americans). The resolution was agreed to by Unanimous Consent.

S. Res. 187 (Recognizing the cultural and historical significance of the Cinco de Mayo Holiday). The resolution was agreed to by Voice Vote.

S. 693 (National POW/MIA Flag Act). The bill was passed by Unanimous Consent.

The Senate will next convene at 3:00 PM on Monday, May 6, 2019 and proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit.

At 5:30 PM, The Senate will proceed to a vote on the Motion to Invoke Cloture on Cal. #116, Joseph F. Bianco to be United States Circuit Judge for the Second Circuit.

The Senate adjourned at 4:42 PM.

WEDNESDAY, MAY 1, 2019

The Senate will convene at 10:00 AM on Wednesday, May 1st and will proceed to an Executive Session to resume consideration of Cal. #26, J. Campbell Barker to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas. The Senate will vote on confirmation of the Barker nomination at 11:45 AM.

The Senate convened and proceeded to Leader remarks.

The Senate proceeded to an Executive Session.

Cal. #26, J. Campbell Barker to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Texas. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 51–47.

Cal. #29, Andrew Lynn Brasher to be a United States District Judge for the Middle District of Alabama. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and Nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 52-47.

Cal. #29, Andrew Lynn Brasher to be a United States District Judge for the Middle District of Alabama.

At 3:00 PM, the Senate will proceed to the following roll call votes:

Confirmation of Cal. #29, Andrew Brasher to be U.S. District Judge for the Middle District of Alabama. Motion to Invoke Cloture on Cal. #33, Rodolfo Ruiz II to be U.S. District Judge for the Southern District of Florida. Motion to Invoke Cloture on Cal. #34, Raul Arias-Marxuach to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Puerto Rico. Motion to Invoke Cloture on Cal. #36, Joshua Wolson to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

On Thursday, May 2nd at 10:30 AM, the Senate will proceed to the following roll call votes:

Confirmation of Cal. #33, Rodolfo Ruiz II to be U.S. District Judge for the Southern District of Florida. Confirmation of Cal. #34, Raul Arias-Marxuach to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Puerto Rico. Confirmation of Cal. #36, Joshua Wolson to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

A vote on the veto override of S.J. Res. 7 (Yemen Resolution) is expected after lunch on Thursday, May 2nd.

Cal. #29, Andrew Lynn Brasher to be a United States District Judge for the Middle District of Alabama. Yeas and nays ordered. The nomination was confirmed by a vote of 52-47.

Cal. #33, Rodolfo Armando Ruiz II to be U.S. District Judge for the Southern District of Florida. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 89-10.

Cal. #34, Raul M. Arias-Marxuach to be U.S. District Judge for the District of Puerto Rico. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 94-5.

Cal. #36, Joshua Wolson to be U.S. District Judge for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania. Motion to Invoke Cloture. Yeas and nays ordered. The Motion to Invoke Cloture was agreed to by a vote of 64-35.

S. Res. 180 (Expressing the Sense of the Senate that during Public Service Recognition Week, public servants should be commended for their dedication and continued service to the United States). Passed by unanimous consent.

S. Res. 181 (Supporting the designation of the week of April 8 through April 12, 2019, as National Specialized Instructional Support Personnel Appreciation Week). Passed by voice vote.

The Senate will convene on Thursday, May 2, 2019 at 9:30 AM. Following Leader remarks the Senate will proceed to an Executive Session and will resume consideration of the Ruiz nomination, post-cloture. At 10:30 AM, the Senate will proceed to three roll call votes on the following nominations:

Confirmation of Cal. #33, Rodolfo Armando Ruiz II, to be a United States District Judge for the Southern District of Florida. Confirmation of Cal. #34, Raul M. Arias-Marxuach to be a United States District Judge for the District of Puerto Rico. Confirmation of Cal. #36, Joshua Wolson to be a United States District Judge for the Eastern District of Pennsylvania.

Also on Thursday, May 2 at 1:45 PM, the Senate will proceed to a roll call vote relative to the Presidential veto message for S. J. Res.7 (A joint resolution to direct the removal of United States Armed Forces from hostilities in the Republic of Yemen that have not been authorized by Congress).

The Senate adjourned at 6:19 PM.

Back to top