Personhood USA calls on Romney to back Akin in support of GOP Platform
Submitted by jennifer on Wednesday, August 22, 2012

in

WASHINGTON, Aug. 22, 2012 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ — Personhood USA is calling on Governor Romney and Congressman Ryan to support Congressman Todd Akin following his apology for misspeaking about abortion in cases of rape.

A day after his insensitive misstatement regarding the tragedy of rape in regards to abortion, Congressman Akin apologized for the comment on his website, stating, “I made a mistake. I used the wrong words in the wrong way. What I said was ill-conceived and it was wrong and for that I apologize.”

On Monday Governor Romney disavowed the Republican platform on abortion, supporting the death penalty for children conceived in rape, then called for Congressman Akin to drop out of his Senate race, despite Akin’s conservative voting record and apology after his misstatement.

Conceived in rape, Personhood USA spokeswoman Rebecca Kiessling criticized Akin’s comment as a “faux pas”, but noted that Akin is a prolife politician, who correctly does not compromise on the lives of preborn children, no matter the circumstances of their conception. “Rape exceptions serve to perpetuate the injustice against rape victims…it further leaves the majority of impregnated rape victims wholly unprotected under the law.”

Kiessling, who was featured on CNN’s Piers Morgan Tonight last night stated “I owe my life to prolife advocates and legislatures who saw that mine was a life worth saving.”

“In calling for Congressman Akin’s exit of the Senate race, Governor Romney and Congressman Ryan are throwing a prolife Congressman under the bus over a blunder, and it seems they are doing so because they disagree with his no exceptions position on abortion – a position that is an integral part of the Republican Party platform, the same position that was held by President Ronald Reagan,” explained Jennifer Mason, Personhood USA spokesperson. “We are left with Reagan Republicans, who agree with the Republican Party platform on abortion, and Romney Republicans, a fringe group of liberals who compromise on human life.”

“Governor Romney and Congressman Ryan now have the opportunity to stop their opposition to the Republican Party platform,” continued Mason. “By withdrawing their call for Akin to quit the race, and retracting their anti-life position on the death penalty for children conceived in rape, Romney and Ryan would at the very least be in agreement with the Republican Party’s position on abortion.”

www.personhoodusa.com

PR Newswire (http://s.tt/1ltEp)