Congressman Michael McCaul : HIDDEN SECTION : Latest Developments with the Healthcare Reform Laws
7/16/2010 Obama Appointment of Dr. Berwick

Over the July 4th recess, President Obama appointed Dr. Donald Berwick to head the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), one of the largest agencies in the federal government. The CMS will disburse $803 billion in benefits this fiscal year, which makes it larger than all but 15 of the world’s economies. The White House has received bipartisan criticism for this appointment because a hearing was never held on Dr. Berwick’s nomination. Both sides of the aisle have also expressed deep concerns about Dr. Berwick based on his statements and writings which seem to support the rationing of care, the redistribution of wealth, and a single-payer system. He has been quoted as saying, “the decision is not whether or not we will ration care—the decision is whether we will ration with our eyes open,” as well as, “a single-payer mechanism [is] the only sensible approach to health care finance.”

7/8/2010 High Risk Pool Problems Threaten Coverage of Pre-existing Conditions



The Democrats’ health bill included $5 billion for high risk pools as a stop-gap provision for those with pre-existing conditions until the Health Exchanges come into effect in 2014. These high risk pools have encountered a number of problems already. For example, 20 states have decided to let the federal government run the high risk pools in their states as opposed to running the pools themselves—this was mainly due to concerns about funding and the possibility of high additional costs. Additionally, the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act ordered the high risk pools to be established no later than 90 days after enactment—which would have been June 23, 2010. However, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) has said that some states will have to wait until August 1st or later for coverage to be available. Finally, the $5 billion which the bill allots for these pools has been recognized by many, including Democrats who voted for the bill, to be insufficient. Both the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) and President Obama’s chief actuary have come out to say that the money will not be enough to pay for all eligible individuals and that HHS will be forced to limit enrollees. Recently, Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions (HELP) Committee Chairman Harkin was asked if he thought high risk pools would require additional funding, and he responded with a quick “oh, yes.”

On the other hand, the Republican Alternative to the Democrats’ health bill, H.R. 4038, provided $25 billion for high risk pools. Furthermore, according to CBO, H.R. 4038 is completely paid for by reforming medical malpractice junk lawsuits, and does not raise taxes or include any cuts to Medicare as Obamacare does.

7/1/2010 1st ObamaCare Tax Starts Today - Tax on Tanning Costs $2.7 Billion

ObamaCare’s first tax increase-a 10 percent tax-starts today. This $2.7 billion tax is the first of ObamaCare’s $569 billion tax increase.

The new tax adds 10 percent to the cost of tanning services businesses provide. Some 30 million Americans visit a tanning salon at least once a year and 75 percent of the employees and customers are women, according to industry sources.

Out of the approximately 19,000 professional indoor tanning salons, more than 50 percent are owned by women and employ approximately 160,000 workers.