About Pew Research Center
Pew Research Center is a nonpartisan fact tank that informs the public about the issues, attitudes and trends shaping the world. We conduct public opinion polling, demographic research, content analysis and other data-driven social science research. We do not take policy positions.

Our mission

We generate a foundation of facts that enriches the public dialogue and supports sound decision-making. We are nonprofit, nonpartisan and nonadvocacy. We value independence, objectivity, accuracy, rigor, humility, transparency and innovation.

Read more

Our research

We study U.S. politics and policy; journalism and media; internet, science and technology; religion and public life; Hispanic trends; global attitudes and trends; and U.S. social and demographic trends. Read more

Our methods

We’re committed to meeting the highest methodological standards — and to exploring the newest frontiers of research. Read more

Our people

We are led by Michael Dimock and have a staff of more than 160 people. Our experts combine the observational and storytelling skills of journalists with the analytical rigor of social scientists. Pew Research Center is stewarded by a nine-member volunteer board.

Our funding

We are a subsidiary of The Pew Charitable Trusts, our primary funder. We partner strategically with philanthropists and institutional funders who share our commitment to impartial research and data that drive discussion. Read more about our funding. Learn more about supporting Pew Research Center and making a contribution on the Center’s behalf.

In February 2019, the Pew Charitable Trusts and the Pew Research Center created Living Facts, a place that brings facts about Americans to life – who we are, how we live and what we do.

Our history

We originated in a research project created in 1990 called the Times Mirror Center for the People & the Press. In 2004, The Pew Charitable Trusts established the Pew Research Center as a subsidiary to house its information initiatives. Read more