Obama’s $3.8 trillion spending plan includes numerous tax changes On Feb.13, 2012, President Obama presented his proposed budget for fiscal year 2013, which begins on Oct. 1, 2012. The proposal includes numerous tax changes for corporations and individuals. Although the president proposes a budget annually, Congress has not passed a budget since the fiscal 2010 budget passed on April 29, 2009. The president's budget proposes to reduce spending (or the anticipated growth of spending) and to increase revenues. If the budget were passed, and the projections in the proposed budget proved accurate, the deficit would be reduced to 2.8 percent of GDP by 2022 from a deficit of approximately 8.5 percent of GDP in 2012. The proposed budget includes some tax proposals designed to raise revenue, and others intended to push policy goals, such as job creation. Many of the tax proposals were foreshadowed in the president's State of the Union Address on Jan. 24, 2012, which emphasized themes of "fairness" and "equity." The proposed budget contains both new initiatives and many plans that the administration has advanced unsuccessfully in the past. Following are some of the major tax proposals: Business changes Eliminating the domestic manufacturing deduction for oil and gas companies

Doubling the domestic manufacturing deduction to 18 percent for certain industries

Repealing other tax benefits for the oil and gas industry, including depletion allowances, expensing of intangible drilling costs, and deductions for tertiary recovery costs

Extending 100 percent bonus depreciation on certain tangible property

Reducing the corporate tax rate to make it more competitive globally, although a specific rate was not proposed

Expanding and making permanent the Research and Development Credit

Ending tax deductions for moving expenses for companies moving domestic jobs overseas

Creating a tax credit of 20 percent for moving operations back to the U.S.

Imposing a minimum tax on overseas profits

Establishing a Manufacturing Communities Tax Credit to help communities that have suffered a major job loss event

Eliminating special depreciation rules on corporate aircraft

Including certain income from intangibles used abroad in subpart F income, making that income subject to current U.S. taxation

Adding $5 billion in tax credits for investments in advanced energy manufacturing, pursuant to the provisions of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009

Providing tax credits for advanced technology vehicles and certain alternative fuel commercial vehicles

Extending and modifying other energy incentives

Eliminating capital gains tax on investments in small business stock, making permanent the current 100 percent exclusion under Section 1202, which is generally applicable to corporations with less than $50 million in assets

Doubling the deduction for start-up expenditures expense, so as to make the current $10,000 maximum permanent

Expanding the credit for small employers' health insurance contributions to include employers with up to 50 employees, making the phase-out more gradual, and eliminating the requirement to make uniform contributions on behalf of all employees

Modifying the New Markets Tax Credit by allocating $5 billion to this credit annually and allowing the credit to offset the alternative minimum tax, and extending this credit to 2013

Reforming the Low-Income Housing Tax Credit by adding area median income criteria designed to spur development of more mixed-income housing, rather than just low-income housing.

Using "pooling" to determine foreign tax credits

Disallowing the deduction for non-taxed reinsurance premiums paid to affiliates Individual changes Allowing the Bush tax cuts to expire for joint returns with annual adjusted gross incomes of more than $250,000 and single filers with more than $200,000. (The Bush tax cuts are those originally included in the Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 and the Job Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003).

Limiting itemized deductions, phasing out personal exemptions, and taxing qualified dividends at ordinary tax rates for the same filers listed above (in addition to the 3.8 percent tax to fund the President's health care reforms) among other provisions listed below.

Taxing carried interest at ordinary tax rates. Carried interest is income earned by many hedge fund managers, private equity partners, real estate investment managers and other managers in partnerships who currently receive lower capital gains tax rates on their income.

Replacing the current Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT) system with the widely discussed "Buffett Rule." The new rule would impose a minimum 30 percent tax on households with incomes of more than $1 million.

Increasing the highest individual income tax bracket to 39.6 percent, in addition to the 3.8 percent Medicare tax.

Increasing the capital gains tax rate to 20 percent, in addition to the 3.8 percent Medicare tax.

Returning the estate tax rate to 45 percent, with a $3.5 million exemption.

Extending the payroll tax cut and unemployment benefits for the remainder of 2012.

Extension of certain tax credits including making the American Opportunity Credit permanent, providing a higher Earned Income Tax Credit for workers with three or more qualifying children, and expanding the Child and Dependent Care Tax Credit by increasing the adjusted gross income threshold for phase-out of the credit so that phase-out will begin at $75,00.

Providing additional debt forgiveness exclusions for mortgage debt through Jan. 1, 2015, and for student loans forgiven at the end of the repayment period for loans using the income-contingent repayment option or the income-based repayment option. Many of these proposals have been discussed for years. Passage of most of these items is unlikely, especially during a presidential election year, although some of the less controversial items, such as the payroll tax cut extension, are likely. Congressman Dave Camp (R-MI), Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, released a statement opposing most of these proposals, arguing that "the President is filling the tax code with even more special interest lobbyist loopholes, instead of joining Republicans in job-creating tax reform." One other tax item of note is a proposal to increase IRS funding by approximately 8 percent in order to improve enforcement and modernize business systems. This increase would fund added positions in enforcement, taxpayer services and operations. The budget proposal also aims to improve tax debt collection, noting that the U.S. is owed more than $2 billion in outstanding taxes. Under the proposed budget, funding to the Department of the Treasury would be cut by 2.7 percent. We will provide a detailed analysis of the tax reforms addressed in the budget in early March. In addition, our first quarter webcast on March 21 will cover important aspects of the president's proposed 2013 budget, including discussion or movement on the proposals between now and then. For specific inquiries related to proposed tax reforms, please contact our Washington National Tax office. Additional Resources Read the president’s full 2013 budget proposal

Read the White House summary fact sheet

2013 budget – general explanations

House of Representatives Committee budget statement

Reference the Obama Administration 2012 Budget Proposals