Old misinformation about the Affordable Care Act doesn't die... it just gets recycled
Below I've posted an email forwarded this morning from our editorial editor who asked me to investigate. It didn't talk long to find some answers.

Clearly old misinformation - in this case it appears to circa-2009 - BEFORE the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act was written into law.

Sigh. Guess I'll be doing a lot of this in 2012?

I am not revealing the name of the email sender to protect his privacy, but he is from Feasterville, according to the email.

If this is true and I would like a reply, "What the hell is our supposedly protective government, namely the U.S. House of Representatives and U.S. Senate doing to us. It I don't get a reply from my representatives quickly they will not have my vote and if a response is not received and printed in the Bucks County Courier Times my subscription will also be cancelled.

Subject: Fw: This is chilling and will effect every one of us !!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!.....

I've tried to read the Health Care bill, so I am sending this along in

good faith assuming it is the right info (however according to Scope.com, this excerpt was dated way back in Jan. 2011 It could have been changed to better , or WORSE.0

Judge Kithilof Marble Falls,

TX - highlighted the most egregious pages of HB3200 He is the second

judge to highlight this, so let's pay attention. Or read it ourselves,

and publicize it.

YOU ARE NOT GOING TO LIKE THIS... At age 76 when you most need it, you

are not eligible for cancer treatment

What Nancy Pelosi didn't want us to know until after the healthcare bill

was passed. Remember she said, "pass it and then read it!!." Here it

is!

Obama Care Highlighted by Page Number THE CARE BILL HB 3200

Please read this........ especially the reference to pages 58,59,

65/section 164,

JUDGE KITHIL wrote:

** Page 50/section 152: The bill will provide insurance to all non-U.S.

residents, even if they are here illegally.

** Page 58 and 59: The government will have real-time access to an

individual's bank account and will have the authority to make electronic

fund transfers from those accounts.

Ummm, robbing us electronically without consent?

** Page 65/section 164: The plan will be subsidized (by the government)

for all union members, union retirees and for community organizations

(such as the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now -

ACORN).

** Page 203/line 14-15: The tax imposed under this section will not be

treated as a tax. (How could anybody in their right mind come up with

that?)

Read the sentence again:

"The tax..... will not be treated as a tax."

Hello?...... Is there anybody out there???,,,,,,???

** Page 241 and 253: Doctors will all be paid the same regardless of

specialty, and the government will set all doctors' fees.

** Page 272. section 1145: Cancer hospital will ration care according to the patient's age.

Cancer patient's AGE is the determining factor for this "rationing"? and not determined at all by the severity of cancer conditions???

** Page 317 and 321: The government will impose a prohibition on

hospital expansion; however, communities may petition for an exception.

** Page 425, line 4-12: The government mandates advance-careplanning

consultations. Those on Social Security will be required to attend an

"end-of-life planning" seminar every five years. (Death counseling)

I can envision they serve Kool-aide laced with something deadly for the "end-of-life-planning party". Spare the death counseling please. This government is certifiably insane and irrational. This government wants elderly people DEAD!

** Page 429, line 13-25: The government will specify which doctors can write an end-of-life order. HAD ENOUGH????

I had never heard of anyone would be "ordered" to die!! Have You?

Judge Kithil then goes on to identify: "Finally, it is specifically

stated that this bill will not apply to members of Congress. Members of

Congress are already exempt from the Social Security system,and have a

well-funded private (US GOVT FUNDED) plan that covers their retirement needs. If they were on our Social Security plan, I believe they would

find a very quick 'fix' to make the plan financially sound for their

future."

How about fixing the program to meet all US Citizens (only) ?

- Honorable David Kithil of Marble Falls, Texas. All of the above

should give you the ammo you need to support your opposition to

Obamacare. Please send this information on to all of your email contacts.

http://www.snopes.com/politics/medical/kithil.asp

My ANSWER:

In response to this email, I sent our editorial page editor this link ("Twenty-six lies about HR3200") to forward to the email writer: http://www.factcheck.org/2009/08/twenty-six-lies-about-hr-3200/

To summarize, Factcheck.org examined 48 email claims and found 26 were lies; 18 were misleading or partly true or partly false. Only four of the 48 were accurate.

Oh, and the Factcheck.org response is dated Aug. 28, 2009. You may recall the Patient Protection and Affordable Health Care Act was signed into law in March 23, 2010.