3.12 Medication Procedures for Students, Pre-K through 12, Adult Handicapped

(1) Intent: Some students attending Leon County Schools are taking prescription medication on a regular basis or for a short period of time and shall be provided supervision for assistance with medication administration. This policy regulates assistance with the administration of prescription medication for elementary and secondary students. Assistance with administration of prescription medications shall be provided during school hours, including any occasion when the student is away from school property on official school business, when deemed absolutely necessary by the prescribing physician. A written parental order is required. Additional requirements may include Individual Education Plan (IEP), or Section 504 Plan. Other alternative time schedules shall be considered first. For those times when prescription medication must be taken during school hours, the district shall designate an appropriate place(s) at the school for assistance with administration of prescription medication. The school administrator shall designate personnel who will assist with any medication administration.

(2) School personnel designated to administer or supervise the administration of medication to students shall be:

(a) Licensed personnel employed to serve students through Leon County School District (Registered Nurse, Licensed Practical Nurse, Advanced Registered Nurse Practitioner or other authorized licensed personnel).

(b) Unlicensed Assistive Personnel (School Health Assistant) who provide patient care services under the supervision of the LCS nurse specialist.

(c) Other Designated School Personnel, such as school health employees of the Leon County Health Department.

(3) All Unlicensed Assistive Personnel (UAP) and Other Designated School Personnel who shall administer or supervise the administration of medications to students shall be required to:

(a) Attend regular Medication Administration Training under the direction of the office of Health and Nursing Services by a Registered Nurse or other licensed personnel authorized by state statutes to train on medication administration.

(b) Document training in the personnel files and renew every two years.

(c) Attend child specific training for administration of medicines, as indicated. This includes injections, nebulizers, gastric tubes, administration of emergency seizure medicines (i.e. Diastat), and medical testing and monitoring required of students with diabetes.

(d) Be certified in CPR/First Aid.

(4) Instructional staff and other designated school personnel who administer or supervise the administration of medications to students on an occasional basis for field trips and special occasions shall be required to:

(a) Attend regular Medication Administration Training under the direction of the office of Health and Nursing Services by a Registered Nurse or other licensed personnel authorized by state statutes to train on medication administration.

(b) Document training in the personnel files and renew every two years.

(c) Attend child specific training for administration of medicines, as indicated. This includes injections, nebulizers, gastric tubes, administration of emergency seizure medicines (i.e. Diastat), and medical testing and monitoring required of students with diabetes.

(5) Intravenous medications shall only be given by a licensed medical professional with child specific training, and only in situations when administration of the medication is the only option to keep the student in school.

(6) Names of all school personnel authorized and trained to administer medication shall be posted in the school clinic.

(7) Only medications required during school hours or during authorized field trips shall be brought to school. Medication shall include ONLY FDA (Federal Drug Administration) APPROVED prescription and non-prescription medicine. These shall include:

· Prescriptions given for a specified length of time, such as antibiotics for 10 days, etc.

· Medicines given every day, such as for asthma, diabetes, seizures, etc.

· Medicines given prn (as needed) for a specific condition (for example: asthma, migraine headache, allergic condition, etc.)

(8) All medicines the student takes on a regular basis (by mouth, inhaler, injection, patch, etc.) either daily or “as needed” (prn) shall be listed on the student’s EMERGENCY AND MEDICAL INFORMATION FORM.

(9) Permission Form for Prescribed Medication. The Medication Permission Form is valid only for the current school year. A separate form shall be on file for each prescription medication.

Before any prescription medication shall be administered by school personnel, or self-administered by a student, the parent or legal guardian of the child shall file with the school principal a dated, signed permission form authorizing the school to assist in administration of medication and indicating:

Student’s name (If there is a name discrepancy, the parent/guardian must list each name used by the student).

Name of medication (trade or generic)

Reason for medication and/or (diagnosis)

Allergies

Dosage to be given

Route of medication, (by mouth, ear drops, nose drops, eye drops, injection, etc.)

Time medication is to be administered

Beginning and ending date for administration of medication

The amount of liquid or count of pills brought to school.

Name of parent

Phone number of the parent, or legal guardian during school hours

Doctor name and phone number. If a parent or legal guardian can not be reached in the event a problem should arise, the doctor who prescribed the medication shall be called.

(10) Non-prescription Medication. The Medication Permission Form is valid only for the current school year. A separate form shall be on file for each non-prescription medication.

Students requiring over-the-counter (OTC) medicine for a temporary medical condition (i.e. cough and cold medicines, pain relievers, allergy medicines, skin conditions, etc.) do not need a written health care provider order for the first five (5) days of medicine administration, although the Medication Permission Form shall be completed by the parent/guardian. If the non-prescription medicine is needed for more than five (5) days, a written health care provider’s order is required. Dosage shall not exceed recommended amount printed on the container and/or package without a written health care provider’s order. Note: A parent may not “renew” the medication for another five (5) days; again, written authorization is required from the health care provider. Only FDA-approved non-prescription (OTC) medicines will be accepted and administered.

(11) There shall be no changes in the dosage or time medication is administered without written permission from the prescribing doctor/health care provider. Only written and signed prescriptions shall be accepted as valid medication orders. Written and signed prescriptions may be faxed to the school by the health care provider’s office (doctor, dentist, etc).

(12) Prescription and non-prescription medications shall be transported to and from school by the parent/legal guardian in an original container and shall be properly labeled. Over the counter medicines shall be in the original container and labeled with the student’s name. Medications may not be transported by the student. Exceptions to this rule, due to special situations or hardships, shall be allowed only with the site administrator’s written permission. Alternate transportation arrangements must be obtained for each medication the student may require in school.

(13) Students shall not carry prescription or non-prescription medicine on their person, except medication deemed medically necessary by the health care provider. Medications to be carried and administered by the student shall require the health care provider’s written authorization and Medication Permission Form signed by the parent/guardian. The student shall demonstrate responsible behavior regarding storage and usage of the medicine. The School Health Assistant shall write “Student Carries Medicine” on the Medication Permission Form. Examples include but are not limited to:

Asthma inhalers (in accordance with Florida Statute 1002.20)

Medicine by topical patch such as nicotine patches, birth control, etc.

EpiPen

Insulin

Glucagon

(14) The following non-prescription medicines shall not require doctor’s orders or Medication Permission Form:

Eye solutions necessary for contact lenses

Sunscreen

Insect repellents

Petroleum jelly (Vaseline) for chapped lips

Students shall not share these products.

(15) ALL MEDICINES, ADMINISTRATION AND PREPARATION DEVICES SHALL BE PROVIDED BY THE PARENT/GUARDIAN FOR THE SPECIFIC STUDENT.

· Schools shall not maintain a stock of medications for “emergency” use for headaches, colds, asthma, etc.

· Schools shall not purchase or maintain nebulizers for the administration of medication.

· Schools shall not obtain pill crushers or pill splitters to prepare medicines.

· Schools shall not purchase or maintain supplies for diabetes management (such as test strips, glucometers, snacks and juices, etc.).

(16) Medication Administration Log. The purpose of this log is to document student-specific medication, dose and time. A separate medication log shall be used for each medication. Multiple doses of the same medication shall be documented on one medication log. A separate form (Form 12:8), the Medication Permission Form for Extended Day/Overnight Field Trips, shall also be used for each medication that a student receives on an extended day/overnight field trip.

The Medication Administration Log shall include the following:

Student’s name

Reason for medication/diagnosis

Name of medication (trade or generic)

Dose, amount, route, time to be given

Amount of liquid and count of pills

Date and time medication administrated

Signature and title of person assisting with administration of medication

Person responsible for assisting with administering medication shall document when a student is absent or refuses to take the prescribed dosage and the parent shall be notified. If a medication error occurs (any incident in which medication is not given or given incorrectly, as defined by the parent authorization or health care provider’s order), the parent and site administrator shall be notified and a Medication Variance Form shall be completed.

(17) Discarding medicine. Parents shall pick up any left over medicine within one week after the course of the medicine is over. Medicine left at school after this time shall be disposed according to the Guidelines for Disposal of Medication Procedure.

(18) Liability. There shall be no liability for civil damages as the result of administration of such medication or medical testing where the person administering the medication acts as a reasonably prudent person would have acted under the same or similar circumstances.

Statutory Authority: 1001.41, F.S.

Law Implemented: 1003.22 and 1006.062, F.S.

Date adopted: October 11, 1983; Draft June 24, 2002

Date amended: August 18, 1987; August 24, 1993, March 10, 1998; September 11, 2002; July 1, 2005