Plan For Iraqi Dinar
Recent years have seen debt under the spotlight like never before; the financial crisis that began because of the Collateralized Debt Obligation (CDO) problems highlighted the amount of subprime borrowing in the USA. In the subsequent years many more people had only bad credit loans as a source of finance because the repercussions of the problems were a depressed economy, unemployment rising steeply and defaults.

Credit cards had been used very liberally and the credit card companies positively encourage people to build up their debt because the rate of interest charged on monthly outstanding balances was high, and very profitable to the companies themselves.

The problems faced by many families was just one of the financial problems the Country faced; its own Federal Debt was a cause for concern with the ratio between National Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and the Debt increasingly a matter for debate.

The US Debt stands at $16 trillion a figure that is far beyond comprehension; it is at a level against GDP that is higher than all major countries other than Japan and Italy but to counter that the USA has the largest GDP in the World, more than the totals of China, Germany and Japan added together, the next three countries in GDP volume.

The decision that the USA has to make if there is a fear that its Debt is too high is about changing policy direction, increasing taxes domestically and reducing expenditure as a whole. The Republican Party has always opposed high taxation and it still has a majority in the House of Representatives.

While there is a chance that it may find it difficult for demographic reasons to take the Presidency or the Senate without a change of tack, that change is not particularly its taxation stance; the USA across the board wants low taxes and its citizens are paying 10 points below Western Europe in taxation terms.

Even though China and Japan own quite a large amount of the Federal Debt, there is no danger of their moving in. They are happy to invest.

There is a feeling that as economies recover from the recent recession then the figure will fall naturally while as the military engagements around the world reduce, there will be a further improvement. The strength of the USA economy historically, and good prospects based in the future means that the Government is still able to service the Debt. The problem comes if a country cannot do that and there are examples in the Eurozone where it is possible that will happen.

The population may listen to the economic debate from time to time but it did not result in a change of President recently. Finance companies are still offering bad credit loans so families who have had recent problems can still get finance, albeit that bad credit loans incur higher interest rates than the norm.

There are some problems on the horizon in many countries; people are living longer and the demand for services will only ever increase. That will have implications on government policy as it faces different demands on the GDP. With the assets of the USA, there is the likelihood that the country can manage its debt.

The country’s credit rating means that it does not face the problems that the individual with a poor credit score faces; bad credit loans with higher interest rates.

There is certainly pressure in that the economy must sustain its competitiveness. While there is a perception that the USA is losing its manufacturing base that is not currently borne out by the facts. There has certainly been rapid growth elsewhere, particularly in China but the GDP statistics mentioned above puts everything into perspective.

The Federal Debt has generally moved upward as a ratio of GDP in the last decades. No one seems to be losing much sleep of that at present.