MedCare Investment Funds
210.614.7051

Mr. Lyles has managed an investment portfolio for over 20 years, including both public and large private companies, and he serves as an Advisory Director of Majesty Hedge Funds. He also serves on numerous for-profit and non-profit Boards of Directors. Mr. Lyles’ primary responsibility is President of a private holding company, which oversees both strategic and operational issues for companies with Dr. Leininger. In 1991, Dr. Leininger formed a private venture investment firm known as MedCare Investment Funds, which Mr. Lyles is a co-founder of, and he has served as President since 2002. As a founding partner, Mr. Lyles was an active member of management in founding Renal Care Group along with Dr. Jacobson and the late Sam Brooks. Mr. Lyles, through his role as President of MedCare Investment Funds, has founded and established numerous healthcare companies. Examples include companies in the healthcare services sector (an ambulatory services company partnering with physicians and providing dialysis and radiation oncology services; an outpatient imaging services and management company), the medical technology sector (a medical device company with two CE Marks-approved devices and one FDA-approved device; a company developing a device to treat glaucoma and presbyopia), the healthcare information technology sector (a physician practice software company focused on women’s health; an early stage healthcare informatics company creating electronic medical records for Regional Health Information Organizations (RHIOs), large healthcare systems, hospitals and multisite practices; a benefits management company utilizing proprietary software), and the pharmaceutical sector (two pre-revenue drug discovery and development companies with one initiating Phase I clinical trial planning and a second with two promising drugs in phase III clinical trials).

Mr. Lyles has also helped found and build multiple high tech businesses primarily involving data transmission over cellular technology. From 1984 to 1989, Mr. Lyles was an attorney with the law firm of Haynes and Boone in Dallas, Texas. During 1986 and 1987, he taught Real Estate Financing at Southern Methodist University in Dallas. From 1983 to 1984, he was appointed a Briefing Attorney for the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Texas. In 1983, Mr. Lyles received his J.D., Cum Laude from SMU School of Law. Prior to attending law school, he was employed by KPMG Peat Marwick. Mr. Lyles earned an accounting degree from Texas A & M University, where he graduated Summa Cum Laude in 1979. In addition, Mr. Lyles is a Certified Public Accountant and has written material for the Texas State Bar and has been a speaker for the State Bar of Texas and the Dallas Bar.