Losing ground at midlife in America

Ellen Meara a , 1 and Jonathan Skinner a , b aThe Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy & Clinical Practice, Geisel School of Medicine , Hanover, NH 03755; bEconomics, Dartmouth College , Hanover, NH 03755

Recent decades have not been kind to those in the middle and bottom of the income distribution. From 1999 to 2013, real (inflation adjusted) per capita gross domestic product in the United States grew by 16%. During the same period, median real income for households headed by a high school graduate dropped by 19%. Despite this widening economic inequality and the additional stress of the 2007–2009 Great Recession, the continued improvement in United States life expectancy throughout this period—an increase of 2.1 y—along with better health among the elderly (1), provided at least some modicum of comfort that health was improving, even if economic standards were not. Case and Deaton, in their PNAS article “Rising morbidity and mortality in midlife among white non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st century” (2), have dashed even this cautiously optimistic view of the past several decades.

Using cause-of-death statistics from 1999 to 2013, Case and Deaton (2) demonstrate that death rates for white non-Hispanics at midlife, age 45–54 y, were rising, rather than falling as they had in the decades before 1999. Furthermore, the increased mortality from poisoning (drugs and alcohol), suicides, and related external causes (32.8 per 100,000 people) appears to fully explain the entire rise in mortality during this period (33.9 per 100,000).

The study has far-reaching implications for the financial health of the federal Medicare, Medicaid, and disability insurance programs. To the extent that this generation of baby-boomers and postbaby-boomers are approaching retirement with a higher prevalence of chronic diseases, we might expect a more rapid rise in expenditures for those newly covered by disability insurance and Medicare, and a sooner-than-expected date at which the Social Security Disability Insurance and Medicare trust funds run dry (3).

This rise in mortality rates is surprising for at least four reasons. First, …

↵1To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: ellen.r.meara{at}dartmouth.edu.