Mike McCurry Bio
What will a female moderator bring to the debates?

Interviewed by POLITICO's Andrea Drusch

Choosing moderators is a two year process. Two years ago, we began to assemble the list of dozens of people who had the experience necessary to moderate these debates. The critical factor was deciding that we wanted to remain with the single moderator format because we have found that that works best.

The most important thing to know is that the commission thinks that the debates are about the candidates and not the moderator. The moderators play a vital role, but the moderator has to be a person who will encourage the candidates to really dig into the issues and get beyond some of the platitudes you often hear during the campaign. Moderators that are more interested in their own profile and personality are less desirable than moderators that will really encourage real debate between the candidates.

In the new format, the debate is divided into large chunks of time that will be devoted to a single topic. Unlike previous debates that were heavily regimented, these debates will encourage real conversation between the candidates. But that doesn’t happen unless you have a moderator who guides them along and coaxes them into real conversation about important issues.

So our most important criteria was who has the experience, the background in broadcast and the substantive knowledge of the campaign and the issues that would allow for this kind of debate. As you go through that, the dozens of potential moderators boil down to a smaller list of people who are really capable of doing that.

Now that said, diversity, reaching new demographics and encouraging people especially to pay attention to the debates are all pretty important. So there’s a clear balance between some new faces and some experienced faces. From the long list of people we had, we settled on four very experienced, very high quality journalists who we think will be able to deliver to the American people exactly the debates we need to have this time around.

We have two very experienced, seasoned, veteran journalists who have been around and have done it, and then we have two women in between who have both distinguished themselves in their reporting and the awards that they’ve won. The balance that we have there is nice. In a perfect world we would have more ethnic diversity, we would have more age diversity, but I think this lineup is arguably one of the strongest that the debate commission has ever had in moderators and the response has been pretty positive.