Power on Obama's Iraq plan: "best case scenario"
For all the chatter about Obama adviser Samantha Power's calling Clinton a "monster," another set of remarks made on her book tour in the United Kingdom may be equally threatening to the Obama campaign: Comments in a BBC interview that express a lack of confidence that Obama will be able to carry through his plan to withdraw troops from Iraq within 16 months.

"He will, of course, not rely on some plan that he’s crafted as a presidential candidate or a U.S. Senator," she said at one point in the interview.

Power downplayed Obama's commitment to quick withdrawal from Iraq on Hard Talk, a program that often exceeds any of the U.S. talk shows in the rigor of its grillings. She was challenged on Obama's Iraq plan, as it appears on his website, which says that Obama "will remove one to two combat brigades each month, and have all of our combat brigades out of Iraq within 16 months."

"What he’s actually said, after meting with the generals and meeting with intelligence professionals, is that you – at best case scenario – will be able to withdraw one to two combat brigades each month. That’s what they’re telling him. He will revisit it when he becomes president," Power says.

The host, Stephen Sackur, challenged her:"So what the American public thinks is a commitment to get combat forces out in 16 months isn't a commitment isn't it?"



"You can’t make a commitment in March 2008 about what circumstances will be like in January of 2009," she said. "He will, of course, not rely on some plan that he’s crafted as a presidential candidate or a U.S. Senator. He will rely upon a plan – an operational plan – that he pulls together in consultation with people who are on the ground to whom he doesn’t have daily access now, as a result of not being the president. So to think – it would be the height of ideology to sort of say, 'Well, I said it, therefore I’m going to impose it on whatever reality greets me.'"



"It’s a best-case scenario," she said again.

Obama's and Clinton's have both refused to promise a firm timeline for withdrawal, even by 2013, because of the changing situation on the ground in Iraq. But Power also seemed to depart from Obama's optimism that his plan is likely to work.

Power identified herself in the interview as an "informal adviser" to Obama.

"I've never been in politics before, I've thought of being on a show like this defending a presidential candidate before, and I wouldn't do it if I didn't agree with him," she said.

You can watch the full interview here. The discussion of Iraq begins around 3:45. And thanks to the reader who sent over the link.

UPDATE: A Clinton adviser -- though, unlike Power, not a member of her campaign team, recently told The New York Sun similar things about the New York Senator's position.

comments closed

permalink