Hillary repudiates DOMA
Human Rights Campaign has released the results (.pdf) of its candidate questionnaires in the form of a spreadsheet showing that ... all the leading Democrats agree on everything.

The form -- which shows the candidates to be identical -- is probably helpful to Hillary, to whom the HRC has close institutional ties, and it also contains some substantive moves on the issue, including on-record support for a bill permitting gays and lesbians to sponsor their partners to immigrate. That's a bill most of the candidates (all but Dodd) failed to sign on to while in the Senate.

The news, though, seems to be that Hillary is repudiating her long (if tepidly) held support for the Defense of Marriage Act, which her husband signed, and which drew her criticism in New York.

Her unadvertised shift is a very big deal, and reflects, among other things, the rapidly shifting national terrain on the issue.

UPDATE: Clinton's spokesman points me to the text of her actual questionnaire (.pdf), in which she distances herself from a central plank of DOMA -- its bar on the federal recognition of same-sex marriages -- but not from the portion which allows states to refuse to recognize same-sex marriages from other states.

So this is a central, but not total, repudiation of the act.

"I support repealing the provision of DOMA that may prohibit the federal government from providing benefits to people in states that recognize same sex marriage. I strongly support ensuring people in stable, long-term same sex relationships have full equality of benefits, rights, and responsibilities," she writes.

Clinton spokeman Phil Singer adds, "Sen. Clinton backed the Defense of Marriage Act because it enabled us to fend off right wing attacks like the Federal Marriage Amendment by keeping marriage as the purview of the states. She believes DOMA served an important purpose in that respect. Marriage should be left up to the states.



"She has also long believed in the need for full equality of benefits for same sex couples, and believes the federal government should recognize civil unions. It was not until Massachusetts passed its law that it became clear that those in civil unions could receive better treatment under DOMA than gay and lesbian couples in Massachusetts who have gotten married, and therefore, that aspect of DOMA makes little sense to her. However, she still affirms the general principle of DOMA that marriage should be left up to each state. "

I'd add that the state-by-state aspect is one general principle, one that's widely supported among Democrats; but another, perhaps more important, is the bar on federal recognition of same-sex marriage. That's what Clinton just walked away from.

An advocate for same-sex marriage rights, Evan Wolfson of Freedom to Marry, emails his reaction: "She is now at the right position on the federal discrimination, and, like the rest of them, inadequate on the underlying question of truly treating same-sex couples equally (as most, if not all, say they are for)." He added that he sees basic contradictions between support for "equality" and opposition to full equality, but that "her evolving position, like the evolving position of the others, is certainly moving in the right direction, and repudiating the federal discrimination piece of the so-called 'Defense of Marriage Act' is a big step.

comments closed

permalink