Obama: 'Stem Cell'
The Obama campaign hasn't released this radio ad to the press, though readers say it's running in (at least) Colorado, Ohio, and Virginia.

But the McCain campaign sends over a copy, calling it "incredibly misleading," a conclusion Jake Tapper more or less shares.

The narrator says:

Stem cell research could unlock cures for diabetes, cancer and Alzheimer's too. But John McCain has stood in the way...he's opposed stem cell research...Picked a running mate who's against it... And he's running on a platform even more extreme than George Bush's on this vital research. John McCain doesn't understand that medical research benefiting millions shouldn't be held hostage by the political views of a few.



Though Palin and the largely irrelevant Republican platform are staunch opponents of stem cell research, McCain has historically supported the research -- the source of the McCain camp's complaints. The Obama campaign main evidence for its assertion that he "stood in the way" was a Los Angeles Times report from June that McCain had discussed the research with conservative Christian leaders.

But the story said concluded that "several participants said McCain did not offer any indication he would change his mind, but they said they were impressed that he appeared open to [a Christian scientist's] s points."

McCain did oppose the research some seven years ago, but changed his mind.

Obama has used radio ads, which get less media attention, to touch hot-button issues like this, abortion, and gun rights.



The rest of the ad is narrated by Jody Montgomery, the mother of a diabetic child.

"For Maddy and millions of others, stem cell research can unlock cures. Barack Obama understands that. But John McCain just doesn't," she says.



SEN. BARACK OBAMA: I'm Barack Obama, candidate for president, and I approve this message.







JODY MONTGOMERY: My name is Jody Montgomery and my daughter Maddy was diagnosed with Type I Juvenile Diabetes at age three. Six times a day, I take her blood. Six times a day, I pray for a cure. Researchers are working hard to do just that. Our best hope is stem cell research, and that's why we support Barack Obama.







ANNOUNCER: Stem cell research could unlock cures for diabetes, cancer and Alzheimer's too. But John McCain has stood in the way...he's opposed stem cell research. Picked a running mate who's against it... And he's running on a platform even more extreme than George Bush's on this vital research. John McCain doesn't understand that medical research benefiting millions shouldn't be held hostage by the political views of a few.







MONTGOMERY: For Maddy and millions of others, stem cell research can unlock cures. Barack Obama understands that. But John McCain just doesn't.







ANNOUNCER: Paid for by Obama for America

comments closed

permalink