Romney campaign: Personhood a state call - Ben Smith
Mitt Romney's campaign, seeking to nip a potent general election attack in the bud, says he's being falsely characterized as supporting a proposed amendment to define a fertilized egg as a "person" that was badly defeated in Mississippi yesterday.

"Romney supported passage of personhood amendments that would ban a woman's right to choose and restrict access to fertility treatments and birth control," the Democratic National Committee's Brad Woodhouse told me today.

The origin of this claim is Romney's response, picked up by ThinkProgress to a question from Mike Huckabee about whether he would have "supported a constitutional amendment that would have established definition of life beginning of life at conception?"

That's not exactly the same as a personhood amendment, obviously, and though ThinkProgress introduces some of the context of the conversation, the exact exchange makes clear that he's talking about his health care experience in Massachusetts in particular, not about the Mississippi plan:

Mike Huckabee: "Was there any way that you could have blocked [Romney's health care plan paying for abortion] administratively or through forcing the legislature to have created enabling legislation before it went into effect?" Romney: "This was something which existed exactly even before our bill was passed. They said people who are receiving care in that was in any way subsidized by government had the right to get abortion as part of that care. And they said that was constitutionally required. So the only way to we could have changed that would be to carry out a constitutional amendment to block the Supreme Court's decision." Mike Huckabee: "Would you have supported the constitutional amendment that would have established the definition of life at conception?" Mitt Romney: "Absolutely."

Romney is obviously not a model of clarity and consistency on the question of abortion. But I'm also not sure the DNC can support the claim that he supports the Mississippi law or others like it, given that "personhood" wasn't really the topic here. The Mississippi proposal would have established that "the term ‘person’ or ‘persons’ shall include every human being from the moment of fertilization, cloning or the functional equivalent thereof." It's a new push, one that goes beyond the older battles over when life begins, which is why it's produced such fireworks.

Romney's current position? He supports, per spokeswoman Gail Gitcho, "a Human Life Amendment that overturns Roe vs. Wade and sends the issue back to the states" — which sounds like something short of a federal abortion ban.

"Mitt Romney is pro-life, and as he has said previously, he is supportive of efforts to ensure recognition that life begins at conception. He believes these matters should be left up to states to decide," she said.