Trump changes registration to 'independent'
Donald Trump, who recently pulled out of moderating a Newsmax-sponsored GOP debate that only Newt Gingrich and Rick Santorum would commit to, has switched his voter registration to "independent" as he mulls a third-party presidential run in 2012, a source confirms.



The move was made yesterday, and will make Trump a registered "blank" — an "unaffiliated" status used interchangeably with "registered independent" in New York political parlance — but not right away.

That won't impact whether Trump can run as a third-party candidate next year in the general election, something he has made clear he is considering - including mulling a play for the ballot line being created by the group Americans Elect.

A Board of Elections spokeswoman hasn't responded to a call for comment about when it would take effect, but sources familiar with the city's BoE rules say that Trump missed the cutoff allowing his registration switch to take effect for next year. This means that, while he has filed the paperwork, he can technically still vote in the GOP primary and won't become an independent until after the November 2012 general election.

However, Trump was making a clear statement by changing his registration of an intent to depart the GOP, a registration he signed up for in 2009.



Trump has not been a lifelong Republican, and in some ways his move mirrors the path that Mike Bloomberg took — Democrat to Republican to independent.



Bloomberg switched his registration in 2007, when he was considering a presidential run as a third-party hopeful — something Trump has also suggested he is open to. He cited an unwillingness to close the door on an indy run as the reason why he bowed out of the Newsmax debate, which had become something of a flashpoint for the GOP candidates — many of whom had made sojourns to Trump Tower to ask for his support.

Bloomberg switched his early enough that he was no longer able to vote in the GOP primary that cycle.

UPDATE: Trump special counsel Michael Cohen said the developer and reality TV star made the move "in order to preserve his right to run as an independent if he is (not pleased) with the GOP nominee."

He said that Trump is unhappy with Republicans nationally, especially in the wake of the payroll tax holiday impasse in Washington.

Board of Elections spokeswoman Valerie Vazquez confirmed to me that the cutoff for the filing to take effect for next year was Oct. 14.

Either way, the point Trump is clearly trying to make is that he is looking at a third-party candidacy. He weighed running for president for a few months earlier this year, and helped set a tone in the GOP primary for an electorate that found his take-the-fight-to-the-president message appealing.

Read more about: Republicans, Independents, Donald Trump