Clinton staffer on anti-Obama email chain (UPDATED)

I've obtained a copy of the email sent to Jones County, Iowa Democratic Chairman Gary Hart, by a Clinton volunteer.

[UPDATE: A Clinton staffer who also received the email responded instantly by denouncing it, but didn't forward it to campaign-higher ups, a copy of his email indicates.]

It's one of a couple Obama-Muslim-smear emails circulating widely, and one of the ones Jonathan Martin and I wrote about in October. It's probably the most vicious of them: It states the underlying hint -- that Obama is some sort of Muslim Manchurian candidate -- explicitly.

Let us all remain alert concerning Obama's expected presidential candidacy. The Muslims have said they plan on destroying the U.S. from the inside out, what better way to start than at the highest level - through the President of the United States , one of their own!!!!

The email was sent by someone identified only as "Judy" whose email address begins jcheroke. The Clinton campaign has said they are now asking a volunteer county coordinator to leave the campaign when the email came to light.

But the email thread indicates that along with Hart, a Clinton staffer named Ryan Callanan received the email back on November 21. Filings confirm that Callanan is a staffer, though I wasn't able immediately to confirm his role on the Clinton campaign, and he didn't respond to an email.

To be clear, he was a recipient of the email, like Hart, not the sender; there's no evidence he forwarded it to others on the campaign, or even read it, though I'm asking those questions.

The email, with the people's email addresses and the names of other recipients removed (by me) is below.

UPDATE: The Clinton campaign forwards Callanan's immediate response to the email which, though he didn't pass it on to the campaign, reflected his disgust at it:

From: Ryan Callanan

Sent: Wednesday, November 21, 2007 9:49 AM

To: 'Judy'

Subject: RE: Meet Barack Obama] I’ve gotten this forward before. It’s racist and ignorant. I can’t believe that people believe this stuff. Ryan

UPDATE: The email address for the sender is associated online with the name "Judy Rose," and there's a Judy Rose as one of 250 members of Clinton's Iowa Women's Leadership Council.



To: xxx xxxxx, Ryan Callanan , xxx xxxxxx,

xxxx xxxxx, Gary Hart ,

xxxx, xxxx, xxxx

Subject: Fw: Meet Barack Obama]

Date: Wed, 21 Nov 2007 01:19:38 -0600 X-MSMail-Priority: High



*Sent:* Tuesday, November 20, 2007 7:42 PM

*Subject:* Meet Barack Obama]

------------------------------------------------------------------------ *Subject:* **Who is Barack Obama?** *_Most_* of this appears to be true! *I shutter to

think!! *Scary guy!

**We checked this out on 'snopes.com'. It is factual.

Check for yourself. ***

* If you do not ever forward anything else, please forward

this to all your contacts...this is very scary to think of what lies

ahead of us here in our own United States...better heed this and

pray

about it and share it. THIS DEFINITELY WARRANTS LOOKING INTO. THIS COUNTRY WAS

FOUNDED, 'ONE NATION UNDER GOD'. ALMIGHTY GOD, NOT THE GOD OF THE

KORAN. We checked this out on 'snopes.com'. It is factual.

Check for yourself. Who is Barack Obama? Probable U. S. presidential candidate, Barack Hussein

Obama was born in Honolulu , Hawaii , to Barack Hussein Obama,

Sr., a

black MUSLIM from Nyangoma-Kogel , Kenya and Ann Dunham, a white

ATHEIST

from Wichita , Kansas . Obama's parents met at the University of Hawaii . When

Obama was two years old, his parents divorced. His father

returned to

Kenya . His mother then married Lolo Soetoro, a RADICAL Muslim from

Indonesia . When Obama was 6 years old, the family relocated to

Indonesia . Obama attended a MUSLIM school in Jakarta . He also

spent

two years in a Catholic school.

Obama takes great care to conceal the fact that he is a

Muslim. He is quick to point out that, 'He was once a Muslim,

but that

he also attended Catholic school.' Obama's political handlers are attempting to make it

appear that Obama's introduction to Islam came via his father,

and that

this influence was temporary at best. In reality, the senior Obama

returned to Kenya soon after the divorce, and never again had any

direct influence over his son's education. Lolo Soetoro, the second husband of Obama's mother, Ann

Dunham, introduced his stepson to Islam Obama was enrolled in a

Wahabi

school in Jakarta . Wahabism is the RADICAL teaching that is followed by the

Muslim terrorists who are now waging Jihad against the western

world.

Since it is politically expedient to be a CHRISTIAN when seeking

major

public office in the United States , Barack Hussein Obama has

joined the

United Church of Christ in an attempt to downplay his Muslim

background.

ALSO, keep in mind that when he was sworn into office he DID NOT

use the

Holy Bible, but instead the Koran (Their equivalency to our

Bible, but

very different beliefs) Let us all remain alert concerning Obama's expected

presidential candidacy. The Muslims have said they plan on destroying the U.S.

from the inside out, what better way to start than at the

highest level

- through the President of the United States , one of their own!!!! Please forward to everyone you know. Would you want this

man leading our country?...... NOT ME!!!

This article tagged under: Barack Obama

To: [Gary Hart]From: Judy----- Original Message -----*From:* JERRY NANCY SINN