Romney hits Dems on gay issue
UPDATED -- 2:11 p.m.



Leading the way on an issue almost certain to be resurrected during the general election, Mitt Romney issued a statement this morning condemning the Democratic candidates for their refusal at last night's debate to rule out teaching about gay issues to second-graders.



The comments, on the heels of the MoveOn.org ad controversy, are already prompting glee in Republican circles as yet more made-to-order fodder that the party and its conservatvie allies can use to paint Democrats as out of the mainstream.



Romney said that the answers proved "how out of touch the Democratic presidential candidates are with the American people."



"Not one candidate was uncomfortable with young children learning about same-sex marriage in the second grade," Romney notes. "This is a subject that should be left to parents, not public school teachers."



A spokeswoman for Fred Thompson also chimed in. "Fred wants to let kids be kids while the Democrats are trying turn them into mini Moveon.org activists," said Karen Hanretty.





Allison King of New England Cable News told the Democratic hopefuls about the case last year in Lexington, Mass., where a teacher used a book about a "prince who marries another prince" to teach young children about same-sex marriage.



"Would you be comfortable having this story read to your children as part of their school curriculum?"



John Edwards, the first to take the question, responded, "Yes, absolutely."



"What I want is, I want my children to understand everything about the difficulties that gay and lesbian couples are faced with every day, the discrimination that they're faced with every single day of their lives."



Later in his answer, Edwards did note that "second grade might be a little tough, but even in second grade to be exposed to all," he said, before being interrupted by King.



"Well, that's the point. It is second grade," she said.

"I don't want to impose my view," Edwards continued, adding that, "nobody made me God."



Questioned next about the issue, Barack Obama said, "You know, I feel very similar to John.



"One of the things I want to communicate to my children is not to be afraid of people who are different, because there have been times in our history where I was considered different, or Bill Richardson was considered different," Obama continued.



Taking her turn, Hillary Clinton was more cautious and stopped short of saying she agreed with her top two rivals.



"I really respect what both John and Barack said," Clinton said.



"With respect to your individual children, that is such a matter of parental discretion."



This is not the first time Romney has seized on teaching about gay issues to young children. In July, he took Obama to task after the Illinois senator told a Planned Parenthood conference that "it’s the right thing to do to provide age-appropriate sex education, science-based sex education in schools." A rival to Romney pointed out that the former governor himself had supported "age-appropriate" sex ed in his 2002 gubernatorial bid.



Asked to comment, representatives of John McCain and Rudy Giuliani declined to take swipes as Romney and Thompson did.



"While I don’t believe that any group should experience discrimination, I also don’t believe that public schools should enter into this sort of instruction," said McCain in a statement.



Giuliani spokeswoman Maria Comella said her boss "believes this is something that should be left to parents to handle."



None of the Democrats immediately responded to Romney's shot.



The 32-page book in question, "King & King," was written in 2002 by two Dutch authors. Per the School Library Journal on Amazon, the tale of two princes who fall in love is appropriate for grades 3 to 5. Last year, two sets of parents in Lexington sued the school district, claiming that the book amounted to teaching sex ed without parental consent. A judge dismissed the suit.

comments closed

permalink