Trump’s Cabinet by the numbers: White, wealthy and light on women
Transportation secretary nominee Elaine Chao is one of three non-white picks for President Donald Trump's cabinet. | Getty Trump’s Cabinet by the numbers: White, wealthy and light on women

President Donald Trump promised a break with precedent while in the Oval Office, and in picking his Cabinet, he delivered.

No Hispanics. A secretary of State with no government experience. Two former Generals. A host of high-powered business executives beginning their government careers at the top. And a sharp break in a decades-long trend of increasing Cabinet diversity.

The numbers don’t lie: Trump’s Cabinet is older, whiter and richer than his predecessors. Here are some figures that define Trump’s 20 Cabinet-level selections:

85 percent: So far, 17 of the 20 Cabinet-level positions Trump has named are filled by white people — 85 percent of his selections. This ensures he will have a whiter Cabinet than both of his immediate predecessors, George W. Bush and Barack Obama.

Trump’s three non-white picks for his Cabinet are Ben Carson, for the Department of Housing and Urban Development; Elaine Chao, for the Department of Transportation; and Nikki Haley, to be ambassador to the United Nations.

Meanwhile, Obama selected non-whites for 10 Cabinet level positions, including Attorney General Eric Holder, the first African-American to lead the Justice Department. Bush selected seven non-whites to Cabinet posts, including the first African-American Secretary of State, Colin Powell. Both Bush and Obama also nominated Republican men of Arab descent: Spencer Abraham, George W. Bush’s Energy Secretary, and Ray Lahood. Trump has not.

75 percent: Trump’s nominees are not just mostly white, but also predominantly male. Overall, 17 of his 20 Cabinet level picks are men, while 15 overall are white men. That means white men make up 75 percent of Trump’s Cabinet.

That’s more than twice as many white men as Obama nominated for his entire Cabinet. He only filled 30 percent of Cabinet posts with white men. It’s also a greater share of white men than Bush, who picked just 10 white men for 20 Cabinet-level posts, or 50 percent.

7: Of Trump’s secretary selections, seven have zero experience in government.

They are Rex Tillerson, the retiring CEO of ExxonMobil picked for secretary of State; Steven Mnuchin, a former Goldman Sachs partner and Hollywood financier tapped for Treasury; Ben Carson, a retired brain surgeon and GOP presidential candidate nominated for HUD secretary; Andrew Puzder, a fast-food CEO picked to lead the Labor Department; Betsy DeVos, a businesswoman and philanthropist tapped for Education secretary; former professional wrestling executive Linda McMahon, who was picked to lead the Small Business Administration; and Wilbur Ross, a billionaire investor, picked for Commerce.

The number could even be considered as high as nine because retired Gen. James Mattis — picked to lead the Defense Department — and retired Gen. John Kelly — confirmed to lead the Department of Homeland Security — have no experience in civilian posts.

$2.5 billion: That’s the reported net worth of Ross — just one of Trump’s Cabinet picks — and it’s greater than the total net worths of both Obama’s first Cabinet (worth about $115 million) and Bush’s first Cabinet (a bit less than $200 million, cumulatively, though more when adjusted for inflation) combined.

In fact, Trump has at least three Cabinet-level appointments whose net wealth is greater: Ross; DeVos, whose family wealth of more than $5 billion; and McMahon, whose wealth is $500 million and perhaps more, depending on if you include the fortune of her husband, WWE CEO Vince McMahon.

Even below the billionaire or hundred millionaire threshold, there’s still great wealth in Trump’s Cabinet.

Mnuchin’s reported net worth of more than $50 million is more than any single member of Obama’s first Cabinet. (Hillary Clinton, who had more than $31 million in assets in 2009, and then U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice, with assets worth approximately $33.5 million, come the closest.)

62 years: That’s the average age of Trump’s Cabinet-level picks, topping Obama’s Cabinet average of a little over 58.

Several of Trump’s picks are older than any of the Cabinet-level nominees of Bush or Obama: 79-year-old Ross; 70-year-old Sonny Perdue, the Agriculture nominee; 69-year-old Robert Lighthizer, who Trump picked to serve as the U.S. Trade Representative; and 69-year-old Sen. Jeff Sessions, who Trump has tapped to run the Justice Department.

His youngest Cabinet-level nominee is his pick to serve as U.N. ambassador, Nikki Haley, who just turned 45.

Bush’s Cabinet was the youngest, though not by much. The average age was 55 years old.