Cornyn, Cuellar push border bill
With just a week before lawmakers skip town for their long August recess, Sen. John Cornyn and Rep. Henry Cuellar made a last-ditch push on Sunday for their legislation aimed at improving the situation along the U.S.-Mexico border.

“A solution beats no solution, every day," Cornyn said on ABC's "This Week." "And nobody’s offered an alternative. So, I hope we will act.” He expects the House to take up a bill this week that is similar to the one proposed by him and Cuellar, he said, with the House likely to "skinny-down" the $3.7 billion supplemental funding request from President Barack Obama.

The Texas lawmakers have emerged as two of the biggest voices in Congress on the crisis along the U.S.-Mexico border, where more than 50,000 undocumented Central American children have arrived since October. Cornyn, a Republican senator, and Cuellar, a Democratic congressman, introduced a bill that would repeal the 2008 William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act to expedite the deportation of undocumented children from countries other than Mexico and Canada. The bill has curried favor with congressional Republicans, but Democrats have largely spoken out against it, including Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California. Creating an easier process to deport the children, Democrats argue, would send them back to potentially dangerous situations in their home countries.

“The American public wants us to have an orderly border," Cuellar said on Sunday. "Right now, they’re not seeing that. They’re seeing chaos at the border.” The congressman praised Homeland Secretary Jeh Johnson, whom earlier this month he said was "on the same page" with his vision.

Cuellar also said the president had supported a change to the 2008 law before congressional Democrats lined up against it, something other Republicans have said in recent days, including House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio).

Read more about: John Cornyn, Immigration, Congress, Henry Cuellar, Border Crisis