House Ethics: Jean Schmidt took improper $500K gift but not guilty of violation

GOP Rep. Jean Schmidt (R-Ohio) did improperly accept hundreds of thousands of dollars in free legal help in a long-running campaign case but "did not knowingly" violate House ethics rules on accepting an improper gift, the Ethics Committee announced today.

Schmidt will have to repay the $500,000 and revise her financial disclosure forms for the past several years to reflect the improper gift, the Ethics Committee declared. Schmidt can use campaign funds, if approved by the Federal Election Commission, or a legal-defense fund, which has been approved but never formally created, or pay from her own pocket. In the meantime, Schmidt will have to carry this debt as a liability on her disclosure forms.

The Office of Congressional Ethics, after its own probe, referred the Schmidt case to the Ethics Committee in May. OCE can review cases and make recommendations for action, but it cannot impose sanctions on any lawmaker.

The convoluted Schmidt case goes back to 2008 when a challenger claimed that Schmidt got a $30,000 bribe from the Turkish government to help suppress Armenian genocide claims going back to World War I. Schmidt filed several complaints against David Krikorian at the state level, and the two waged a legal battle in state and federal courts.

Schmidt sought advice from the Ethics Committee in 2009 about accepting legal services from the Turkish American Legal Defense Fund. Schmidt eventually got permission to set up a legal defense fund to pay her lawyer bills, but a related entity — the Turkish Coalition of America — was secretly paying Schmidt's fees.

OCE looked into the matter and referred a case in May to the Ethics Committee as a potential rules violation by Schmidt.

"The committee's review of the matter indicated that Rep. Schmidt did, in fact,

receive an impermissible gift from TCA [Turkish Coalition of America] as OCE has alleged, and therefore, the committee did not dismiss the OCE matter," the Ethics Committee said in a Friday statement.

"However, the committee has found that Rep. Schmidt's lawyers failed to inform her of their payment arrangement with TCA, and made false and misleading statements to her about their relationship with TCA and TALDF. Because Rep. Schmidt did not know she was receiving a gift from TCA, the committee has determined that no sanction is appropriate in this case."

The Ethics Committee added: "However, the gift was impermissible, and Rep. Schmidt must now disclose and repay the gift. Rep. Schmidt has worked in good faith with the Committee since September 2009 to determine the appropriate ways to pay her lawyers.

Through a letter to Rep. Schmidt issued contemporaneously with the committee's report, the committee has given her guidance on how to appropriately repay the bills which were paid by TCA. In sum, Rep. Schmidt must: 1) ensure that TCA does not pay for any further legal services on her behalf; 2) pay from a permissible source the lawyers associated with T ALDF for all legal services they performed to date; 3) amend her 2009 and 2010 financial disclosure statements to disclose the gifts from TCA; and 4) disclose any unpaid legal fees from TCA as liabilities on her future financial disclosure statements, until the lawyers associated with TALDF have been repaid in full. This remedy requires any attorney who was actually paid with TCA funds to first agree that they will repay the fees TCA originally paid to them."