Ed Klein's Obama book debuts at #1 on Times list -- knocks Caro to #2

Ed Klein, the controversial, error-prone and highly-successful author of a Hillary take-down, will snag the number one spot on the Times non-fiction and e-book lists this week when his Obama hit job, "The Amateur," debuts on June 3rd.

The book, which features a sensational (and disputed) claim from estranged Obama pastor Jeremiah Wright that an Obama pal tried to pay him $150,000 in hush money, has supplanted Robert Caro's magisterial fourth installment of LBJ's bio from the top spot, according to an advance version of the list posted on the Human Events web site.

Welcome to the United States of America in the 21st Century.

Conservative sites, including NewsMax are offering heavily discounted copies, some for $4.95, a fraction of the $27.95 hardcover price.

When asked if the book's sales might have been padded through buy-backs-- by its conservative publisher, Regnery -- as some Democrats allege, a spokesman for the company issued a denial that it's bought 'bulk' copies for the purpose of pushing the book to the top.

"Regnery Publishing categorically rejects the idea that it has bought bulk copies of Ed Klein’s The Amateur to propel the book to the #1 spot in the New York Times Bestseller list. This is just another attempt by the liberal establishment to undermine the success of a conservative publisher," said publicity director Alberto Rojas.

Klein's defenders say that he's being ignored by the mainstream media because they are in the tank for Democrats.

"[T]he media has been studiously ignoring Klein’s book. NewsBusters noted on Tuesday that none of the mainstream media networks have interviewed Klein on the air, or offered a serious discussion of his work. ABC News very briefly mentioned the “amateur” quote from Clinton on their website, but that’s about it," wrote John Hayward of HR, which is owned by Klein's publisher.

On the other hand, his Clinton book was strewn with serious factual errors, truncated and distorted quotes, and the overall themes don't gibe with any other serious accounts of Clinton's life. The disdain for Klein's previous efforts haven't necessarily broken along political lines.

A sampling of literary criticism of the "Real Hillary:" This, from conservative columnist John Podhoretz: "This is one of the most sordid volumes I've ever waded through. Thirty pages into it, I wanted to take a shower. Sixty pages into it, I wanted to be decontaminated. And 200 pages into it, I wanted someone to drive stakes through my eyes so I wouldn't have to suffer through another word."

And here is one of the most brutal author interviews ever recorded, a double-team of Klein by then-radio host Al Franken and reporter Joe Conason, in which they rummage through a score of errors -- with a contrite Klein offering strained apologies.

Glenn Thrush is senior staff writer at Politico Magazine.