For Cantor, No Amnesty on Immigration
Opinion For Cantor, No Amnesty on Immigration

The seeds of House Majority Leader Eric Cantor’s shocking primary loss may have been sown in January.

That’s when House Republican leaders insisted on floating a set of immigration principles at the party’s retreat as a gesture toward acting on the Senate Gang of Eight immigration bill. The principles — misspelled “principals” in an initial draft — were misbegotten from beginning to end. They were poorly formulated as a matter of policy and signaled a vague desire to move on an immigration bill that had looked terminally stalled.

The principles were shelved at the retreat, but they stoked the worst fears of opponents of the Gang of Eight bill — that no matter how dead the bill seemed, it still had life. It could come back after the Republican primary season, during a lame-duck session or at any other time of the leadership’s choosing.

The principles helped keep the issue of immigration alive, and in so doing, lit the long fuse on the stick of dynamite that ignited in Virginia’s 7th Congressional District this week.

Eric Cantor wouldn’t be on the top of anyone’s list of victims of an immigration backlash. He’s not John McCain or Lindsey Graham. His offense was speaking in favor of an unspecified version of the DREAM Act and making occasional favorable sounds about more far-reaching legislation, including by signing off on those January principles.

The standard for convicting Cantor, it turns out, wasn’t guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, or preponderance of evidence. It was simple suspicion. Conservatives suspected that the House leadership wanted to pass immigration reform, no matter what it might say, and suspected that Cantor would be part of it, no matter what he might say. The message of the district’s primary voters to Cantor and to the broader political class on immigration was “We don’t trust you.”

There are few issues in American life that so justify a thoroughgoing cynicism as immigration. The political elite has never cared about enforcing immigration laws; it invariably sells whatever is the latest version of “comprehensive” reform in dishonest terms by insisting there is no amnesty and touting Potemkin enforcement; and it has an ill-disguised contempt for the alleged boobs who take immigration enforcement seriously.

Anyone who thinks immigration wasn’t the driving issue in Cantor’s defeat is whistling past the graveyard. The Democratic firm Public Policy Polling got a result showing majority support for immigration reform in Cantor’s district, but only by framing the question in the most positive way possible. If it had asked people whether they want higher levels of low-skilled immigration at a time of slow-to-nonexistent wage growth for American workers — as Dave Brat did on the campaign trail — the poll would have returned an entirely different result.

Another argument is that it was Cantor’s equivocation on immigration that hurt him (he portrayed himself on fliers as a deadly earnest opponent of amnesty), not his position itself. But any equivocating surely played into the larger fears that the House GOP might move on a bill.