What Happened to Warren the Watchdog?
In The Arena What Happened to Warren the Watchdog?

The 2009 version of Elizabeth Warren wouldn’t stand for the financial shenanigans of 2014’s Elizabeth Warren. Once upon a time, you see, before joining Congress, Elizabeth Warren was a tenacious government watchdog. She charged that the Troubled Asset Relief Program, created in the wake of the 2008 recession, was exposing taxpayers to risky investments and thereby imposing costs that the feds were low-balling. She wrote letters, published reports, testified before Congress and demanded answers from tight-lipped administration officials. It was an admirable performance.

But then she became a politician, herself. In advocating for enhancing the federal student loan program, the now-senator from Massachusetts has taken the other side of her own argument, completely disregarding the cost of market risk. And she’s not alone in her inconsistency. Government accounting has become a political tool with politicians selectively hiding or exposing costs, depending on whether they support the program in question.

Story Continued Below

Under TARP, the federal government purchased “toxic” private-sector assets in an effort to stabilize the financial sector. As chair of TARP’s independent Congressional Oversight Panel, Warren pointed out that the purchases imposed significant costs on taxpayers — costs she said the government was deliberately understating. In February 2009, Warren personally warned the Senate Banking Committee about the government’s accounting sleight of hand: “Despite the assurances of then-Secretary Paulson, who said that the transactions were at par — that is, for every $100 injected into the banks the taxpayer received stocks and warrants from the banks worth about $100 — the valuation study concludes that Treasury paid substantially more for the assets it purchased under the TARP than their then-current market value.”

The valuation study was commissioned by Warren’s panel, and it showed the total market value of TARP assets to be roughly $176 billion. That was $78 billion less than what the government had paid, and the difference constituted a direct transfer of taxpayer money to banks. While no one should be surprised that a government loan program provided subsidies to borrowers, the interesting point here is the accounting method Warren used to expose those costs.

Warren was citing the value of TARP assets according to “fair value” accounting, meaning a valuation that reflects current market prices. Built into the market price of any investment are the expectations of its future value, along with the risk that those expectations may not be met. Warren wisely dismissed a competing estimate that cast the program in a far more favorable light, showing that the assets were immediately valued at $12.6 billion more than taxpayers paid. That dubious estimate, offered by the Bush administration, excludes the cost of market risk.

TARP was one of the few federal credit programs with costs officially calculated using fair value methods. But, unfortunately for taxpayers, the federal government disregards the cost of market risk in most of its credit programs. The government’s method biases cost estimates downward, sometimes to the point of showing negative costs — i.e., profits — generated by subsidized loans.

The best example is the federal student loan program, which offers below-market interest rates and other generous terms to subsidize college attendance. Because the government effectively assumes its estimate of what student loan recipients will pay back carries no risk, official cost figures show the program earning a profit of $135 billion over the next 10 years. But the idea that a government program can subsidize students and generate profits at the same time should give anyone pause. Indeed, when the Congressional Budget Office applied fair value methods to federal student loans, it found that the “profit” is actually an $88 billion loss for the taxpayers.

Jason Delisle is director of the Federal Education Budget Project at New America, a think tank in Washington.

Jason Richwine is a public policy analyst in Washington, D.C.