How Mean Old John Kasich Became Mr. Nice
Erick Trickey is a writer in Boston.

RINDGE, N.H.—Pacing the college auditorium in front of a huge U.S. flag, casual in a Navy blue sweater and open-collared shirt, the squinty, craggy-faced governor of Ohio softens his growl into a Midwestern twang. “Did you know that you were made special?” he asks the students at Franklin Pierce University here. “You’re here to make the world a better place. There’s no one like you in the whole world.”

This is the same John Kasich who, over the course of his 30-plus-year political career in Ohio and Washington, has been called some extraordinary things for a public figure. "Unpleasant." "Cranky." "A jerk." "Even worse" than Donald Trump. And that's just in headlines.

Story Continued Below

But here he is, sounding for all the world like Mr. Rogers leading a high school civics class as he urges his young audience to define idealism. “To have hope for the future?” a young woman volunteers after an awkward silence.

“Have hope for the future!” Kasich repeats. “You can never lose hope. You can never lose your idealism. I’m still as idealistic today about changing the world as I was the day I got involved in this business.”

As Kasich crisscrosses New Hampshire, he is offering himself as the sunny, folksy, fun candidate for president, the alternative to Donald Trump’s insults and rage. He’s actually calling himself, without a trace of irony, “the Prince of Light and Hope” and other candidates “the princes of darkness”—on Hugh Hewitt’s radio show, in a Boston Globe interview. It’s all part of his strategy to politely elbow aside Jeb Bush, Chris Christie and Marco Rubio as the top establishment candidate in the state’s February 9 Republican primary. Like Bush and Christie, Kasich is pitching himself as a pragmatic, experienced conservative governor who squeezes budgets, builds alliances and solves problems. Unlike them, Kasich sells his experience with an over-the-top optimism, a can-do patriotism, delivered with a horse-choking spoonful of Sunday school sweetness.

“You can live on two sides of the street,” he told the 100-strong audience in Rindge. “You can live on the dark side, where woe is us—the old Eeyore effect. Or you can actually live on the sunny side of the street, and not only believe but know that working together, as Americans, we can meet all these challenges.”

The challenge for Kasich is to overcome his legendary persona—more “Prince of Spite” than “Prince of Light,” unapologetically brusque, insensitive and even mean. Kasich once mimicked the convulsive shaking of a Parkinson’s sufferer—in his State of the State speech. He calls his own legislators “knuckleheads,” “thugs” and “bullies.” He publicly called the police officer who had given him a traffic ticket an “idiot.”

So far Kasich’s sunny pitch is working here in wintry New Hampshire. Polls show he has risen to second or third place. He’s racking up local newspaper endorsements, including the Boston Globe and the Concord Monitor last week. Betting it all on the Granite State—“If I get snuffed out in New Hampshire, ballgame over!” he said last week—means pulling off one of the hardest tricks in politics: transforming yourself into someone that people actually like.

***

Kasich made his scrappy reputation quickly. Elected to the U.S. House of Representatives in 1982 and ultimately anointed Budget Committee chairman by Newt Gingrich, Kasich stood out as a stern budget hawk who mouthed off at constituents and fellow Republicans. In 1991, he got into an argument while trying to get backstage at a Grateful Dead concert. John McCain, of all people, once criticized his “hair-trigger temper.” Kasich still brags about trashing a Republican budget and getting scolded by then-Vice President Dan Quayle. In 2000, after a brief presidential run that went nowhere, Kasich retired from Congress to become an investment banker with Lehman Brothers and a Fox News commentator who shouted along with the best of them, especially during his “Outrage of the Week” segment. His return to politics was a bruising 2010 governor’s race in which he successfully pinned recession job losses on the Democratic incumbent.

Two days after he won the governor’s race, he told lobbyists, “If you're not on the bus, we will run you over with the bus. And I'm not kidding.” The line hurt him for a while, but he has resurrected it in New Hampshire, where voters like special-interest bashing. In January 2011, Kasich dismissed protesters of his all-white Cabinet as quota supporters—“I don’t pay attention to my critics,” he scoffed—before relenting and adding two black directors to his team. In his first month as governor, Kasich chose a speech to the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency as a moment to settle an old score. He decided to complain about his three-year-old ticket for passing too close to an emergency vehicle by questioning the intelligence of the officer who had pulled him over. Kasich later apologized to the officer, but then added injury to insult a couple of months later when he signed a bill that stripped most collective-bargaining rights from police, fire and teachers unions—earning the still-simmering hatred of public employees across Ohio.

Voters shot down the anti-union law in a 2011 referendum, and a chastened Kasich tried to turn mellow and moderate. He forged an alliance with Cleveland’s mayor, a black Democrat, to reform the city’s troubled schools. Most famously, in a move that exposed him to attacks from the right, Kasich accepted Obamacare’s Medicaid expansion funding, arguing his Christian beliefs compelled him to heal the poor. His savvy shift worked. Kasich’s job approval rating among Ohio voters has climbed steadily, from an abysmal 30 percent early in his first year as governor to a high of 62 percent this past October, according to Quinnipiac University. More Ohio voters also like Kasich than they used to: Fifty-two percent of Ohioans had a favorable opinion of him in October, compared to 40 percent three years earlier.

But Kasich’s rude streak keeps resurfacing. In a 2014 endorsement interview at Cleveland’s Plain Dealer, Kasich slouched sullenly and ignored his Democratic opponent, Ed FitzGerald, even pretending not to hear a question from him until a journalist repeated it. When the interview video was posted online, Kasich’s staff successfully pressured the paper to take it down.

***

This is more or less the stormy Kasich that Andrew Smith, a political science professor at the University of New Hampshire, remembers from the 1980s and 1990s, when Smith ran the University of Cincinnati’s Ohio Poll. “My impression back in Ohio was, he was a kind of grouchy, grumpy know-it-all,” Smith recalls. So he was surprised to see the new Kasich speak in New Hampshire last year. “He was uplifting, positive, refreshing—he didn’t sound like a politician at all.”

Smith knows very well that it’s normally hard for politicians to remake their public image once it’s set. Certainly on a politician’s home turf. But just like starting over in a new city, the national stage of a presidential campaign gives Kasich a chance to reinvent himself in front of new audiences. “With Kasich, it’s not so much a matter of remaking his public image as convincing people it’s what his image was all along,” Smith says. Voters in New Hampshire and beyond may think “he’s been a positive, upbeat guy,” Smith says, “because they don’t know any better.”

There’s a deeper question at work in this personality-driven strategy. He’s trying to get voters to like him as if he were a guy buying a round for the bar. But buying somebody a drink doesn’t mean they want to drink with you, which is why the classic question, “Would you want to have a beer with the candidate?” matters a lot in politics. Just how much it matters depends on the times, Smith says. The beer factor famously helped George W. Bush (by then a nondrinker) edge out Al Gore in 2000, while the question of whether Hillary Clinton was “likable enough” helped Barack Obama slip past her in 2008.

Still, likability, or favorability in pollster-speak, is “nice to have, but not enough,” says Steve Kozcela, president of the Mass INC Polling Group in Boston.

One of the more celebrated cases of the nice guys finish last phenomenon came in the 2012 Massachusetts Senate race. Scott Brown had higher favorable ratings than Elizabeth Warren, Kozcela notes—yet Warren won handily. “People like Scott Brown,” Kozcela says. “But in that particular election, likability wasn’t what voters were after. In economic hard times, they wanted someone who’d stand up for them, who had their back.” This year, Ben Carson has high favorable ratings but is fading in the Republican race, Koczela notes, while the polarizing Donald Trump leads among Republican voters despite high unfavorable ratings. “These days, you don’t have to be well liked by everyone,” Koczela notes. Trump’s blunt and unapologetic trash-talking—not unlike the Kasich of yore—is the quality that many of his supporters find most appealing.