The Real GOP Split on Immigration
CLEVELAND, Ohio—Michigan Governor Rick Snyder, a conservative Republican, tends to fall in lock step with his political brethren on most hot-button issues. He is firmly anti-abortion and signed into law certain late-term abortions in the state. He believes strongly in gun rights and was endorsed in the last election by the National Rifle Association. But on immigration reform, Snyder dramatically parts with the GOP pack. “Our country needs a long-term, comprehensive solution to an immigration policy that everyone knows is broken,” he said recently—just before President Barack Obama provoked howls of outrage from Republicans in Washington by announcing his plan to suspend the deportation of some 5 million immigrants.

You might think that Snyder is a lonesome GOP voice on immigration, especially after the U.S. House voted this week to withhold part of the Department of Homeland Security's budget as a way of rolling back some of the provisions of the president’s executive action, and when Beltway firebrands like Sen. Ted Cruz are calling for presidential judicial and executive nominees to be held hostage to the rescinding of the presidential order. But here in the Midwest, Snyder has plenty of distinguished company. Like-minded Republicans include Ohio Gov. John Kasich, a possible presidential contender, who caused controversy within the Republican Party on Nov. 18 when he said he was open to considering Obama’s citizenship plan for illegal immigrants.

“My sense is I don’t like the idea of citizenship when people jump the line, [but] we may have to do it,” Kasich said at the Republican Governors Association meeting in Florida late last year. “Everybody in this country has to feel as though they have an opportunity.” Another possible presidential prospect from the Midwest—Indiana Gov. Mike Pence—had proposed a comprehensive immigration reform plan in 2006 when he was in Congress, though he appears to be distancing himself from that now that he finds his name mentioned in the Republican presidential talk.

What Snyder—and Kasich, to some extent—are articulating is a viewpoint on immigration from the Midwest that is different from the national debate, which tends to center on border fences and deportation. In these post-industrial states, which have seen huge population loss and economic distress in cities such as Detroit and Cleveland, Snyder and other Republican political leaders are seeing immigration as a tool to help the region “grow and thrive,” as Snyder said in his statement. Or as Karen Phillippi, deputy director of Michigan’s Office of New Americans, puts it: “The focus of our immigration policy is more on economic impact than on social justice.”

The main thrust of the Midwestern pro-immigration argument is based on two points: first, that immigrants tend to be more entrepreneurial than native-borns and therefore are job creators; and second, Midwestern colleges and universities have large numbers of foreign students, and the region wants to keep them after they graduate by opening up the number of visas available.

The Midwestern business community—including both the industrial and agricultural sectors—has long supported immigration reform based on economic criteria. In a survey published last year by the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, 75 percent of Midwest Republican business leaders (from a 12-state survey area) favored the comprehensive U.S. Senate immigration reform bill, which was never put to a vote in the House. As Snyder argued, “Immigrants are proven job creators, and we should tap their entrepreneurial spirit to accelerate our recovery. We have thousands of students who are trained at our world-class universities who want to stay and be a part of our reinvention.”

Snyder, who was elected to his second term last fall, is a former executive with computer giant Gateway and a venture capitalist who sees immigrants as valuable human capital in the new economy. Last January, he started Michigan’s Office of New Americans, an agency designed to help make Michigan a more “welcoming environment” for foreign-borns. Around the same time, Snyder also proposed that the federal government create 50,000 new visas for highly skilled workers, and to have them tied to the recipients living for a certain amount of time in Detroit. His request was novel: U.S. visas have never been awarded based upon geography.

Hence, when the 2016 campaign gets into full swing, it is very possible that the immigration issue will play differently in the important Midwestern swing states of Ohio, Michigan Pennsylvania and Wisconsin (Illinois is most certainly in the Democrat camp) than it has been recently on Capitol Hill. National GOP strategists, analyzing these regional differences, will argue even more strongly that the party desperately needs to do better with the Hispanic vote than Mitt Romney did in 2012 (when he was walloped by Obama 71 percent to 27 percent) if it is to take the White House.

To be sure, there are serious divisions within the Midwest itself. Kasich, Snyder and other Republicans are not about to publicly endorse the entire Obama plan. Indeed, the one side of the issue that seems to be problematic for Republicans of all stripes—in the Midwest too—is the so-called amnesty program. Almost every Midwestern state except Illinois and Minnesota joined a lawsuit against the Obama administration over its immigration order.

What doesn’t stand up well to scrutiny any longer is the simplistic political reckoning that Republicans can win over Midwestern voters—especially lower-income white voters who oppose Obama’s plan allowing undocumented immigrants to get work permits—by simply holding firm against immigration reform. Cutting funding to the DHS was going to be a hard sell to the public even before the Paris terrorist attacks, especially since Republicans likely don’t have the 60 votes.

And for Republicans in the Midwest, there is little political payoff by backing such symbolic congressional actions. Another view is gaining traction here: New immigrants are not moving to inner-city enclaves exclusively, like their predecessors, but are more likely to live in the suburbs, where more Republican voters reside, and these voters see them more as neighbors than as political fodder. These recent immigrants also tend to be more educated; in Ohio, about 40 percent of foreign-born people age 25 and older have a bachelor’s degree or higher, compared to 24 percent of the native-born population.

The new immigrants are also more likely to move to smaller urban areas now, according to many studies, instead of cities like New York and Los Angeles and Chicago as they did two decades ago. So rust-belt cities like Indianapolis and Dayton and Columbus and Madison (as well as Nashville and Little Rock and Scranton-Wilkes-Barre) are seeing big immigrant growth—and it is growth that they, far more than their East and West Coast counterparts, see as a revitalizing rather than a negative trend. Winning these urban areas (and the suburbs of Cleveland and Detroit) in 2016 could well be the key to winning the battleground states.

As a result, some Republicans are beginning to suggest that an extreme anti-immigrant message will drive away enough Midwestern voters to matter in 2016. This is especially true of the standard red-meat rhetoric we’ve heard on the right in recent years: the argument that liberalizing immigration is part of a Democratic conspiracy to increase entitlement spending, and therefore Democratic voting rolls.

“I think John Kasich’s comments and Rick Snyder’s policies of immigration as being a vital part of economic recovery for parts of the Midwest are signs that economic pragmatism—what Republicans have always used as their model—is more important than party partisanship,” said Mike Murphy, a Republican member of the Indiana House of Representatives from 1994 to 2010 and currently a political consultant based in Indianapolis.