The Weaponization of Fact-Checking
The TV commercial started with a barrage of four-megaton words in all caps, all attributed to serious news organizations and read aloud in a disapproving voice:

“FALSE”

Story Continued Below

“MISLEADING”

“DEBUNKED”

“A WHOPPER”

“SHAKY CLAIMS”

“GLARING PROBLEM”

“FALSE”

“That’s what independent fact-checkers are saying about Mitch McConnell’s ads,” a second voice intoned. “He’ll say anything.”

Welcome to modern campaign warfare—where battles are fought in trenches filled with facts so muddy that even the fact-checking seems squishy.

Democrat Alison Lundergan Grimes’ October ad targeting the Senate Republican leader during last year’s Kentucky Senate race was just one deployment of latest weapon on the political battlefield: media fact-checking used as both a shield and club—especially in campaign advertising.

Today politicians anticipate being “PolitiFacted,” as Rick Perry and Jeb Bush have both put it recently, verbifying the Pulitzer Prize-winning site run by the Tampa Bay Times. For a candidate, the delight in those moments when a fact-checker skewers an opponent is rarely tempered by the reality that they too will eventually find them selves in the same fact-checker’s unsparing gaze.

“If you get a good ruling, you can swing it like a cudgel at your opponent through the entire campaign,” one senior state Republican in Virginia told me. “And there’s little if any defense.”

In fact, fact-checking can be such a powerful weapon that campaigns are increasingly launching their own partisan fact-checkers, aping the journalists’ style, language and presentation in ads, news releases and social media postings. Just this week, Correct the Record—a group formed by David Brock as a “rapid response team” to defend Democratic presidential candidates from “right-wing, baseless attacks”— announced it was spinning off from its parent PAC in order to work more directly in support of Hillary Clinton’s campaign.

Clinton will hardly be the first candidate to circumvent the press with an overtly partisan fact-checking operation not dependent on the facts as the press sees them. But the blurring line between the work of journalists and their partisan doppelgangers seriously undermines media fact-checking’s ability to serve the political players who matter most—the voters.

***

The fact-checking movement in political journalism began a quarter century ago to set the record straight and counteract misleading statements and negative campaigning. Today, that assignment seems to only be getting harder—especially given how fact-checking itself is now used by campaigns.

Because of my involvement in some primordial fact-checking projects as a young journalist at the Washington Post, and my role as an adviser to some later efforts, the American Press Institute asked me to research whether fact-checking actually keeps politicians in check. I’m still a believer in the form, but the answer is much muddier than it once was—officials now often perversely use fact-checking to spread falsehoods. The new question is whether fact-checkers can adapt what they do to the way people in politics have adapted to them.

Weaponizing fact-checks is just one of many ways politicians use and abuse fact-checking. One positive response is that candidates now vet their own messages, prepare background materials, dedicate staff to answering fact-checkers’ questions—and when called out on a particular comment or line of attack, they often adjust what they say going forward. But politicians also often “stand their ground,” after being told their pants are on fire—particularly when it comes to key strategic messages. Mitt Romney’s repeated attacks on President Obama’s international “apology tour” and the Obama campaign’s relentless focus on Romney’s time at Bain Capital were just two examples from the 2012 election where politicians refused to cower to fact-checkers.

“You just decide the fact-checker is wrong,” one Obama adviser I spoke to said.

But most of the time, people in politics do the opposite: They use fact-checks to validate or reinforce their position—and bloody their opponents. That was the case in nearly every reference to fact-checking I found in House and Senate debates and congressional floor speeches from 2013 and 2014. Of 83 statements (57 from Republicans and 26 from Democrats), only three challenged the fact-checkers’ findings. The rest used the fact-checks to label themselves as truth-tellers or their opponents as liars. But, even when using fact checks to attack a political rival, politicians frequently take a swipe at fact checking itself.

“Now, I do not always agree with the fact-checkers, who are sometimes wrong,” said Senate Democratic leader Harry Reid of Nevada, as he referred directly to PolitiFact and the Washington Post’s Fact Checker to decry “egregious examples” of erroneous TV ads paid for by groups funded by the Koch brothers.

Likewise, Reid’s counterpart, McConnell, who is one the Senate’s most frequent users of fact checks, has been quick to disparage the media outlets that published them. Taking aim at Reid for misleading statements about Republican efforts to stall votes on judicial nominations, he twice cited “a fact­checker from a major left­wing paper”—a reference to a story published a few days earlier by the Post.

These same dynamics seem to be at play when politicians and their operatives deploy fact-tipped missiles in their campaigns. Fact checks are “very useful to campaigns when they’re on your side,” said Democratic political strategist Anita Dunn. “They’re most useful as a counter­offensive tool.”

Republican pollster Neil Newhouse said fact checks are such effective fodder for political commercials that when campaign ad-makers want to use a “true” or “false” ruling from a journalism organization, he doesn’t always test the message on voters first, as is typically done. “It’s assumed that it’s going to have an impact,” he said.

The pollster, whose clients included Romney’s 2012 campaign, is less convinced that the journalists who dissect campaign messages have much direct impact on voters. “Nobody reads the damn newspaper,” he said. But when campaigns repeat that same newspaper’s findings over and over through the megaphone of paid political advertising, they sting.

“Just because something gets four Pinocchios doesn’t mean a damn thing,” Newhouse said. “It’s how you use it.”

That was clearly the case in West Virginia’s 3rd Congressional District, where in 2014 state Sen. Evan Jenkins used fact-checking to help end Democrat Nick Rahall’s 38-year career in the House of Representatives. Jenkins aggressively trumpeted fact checks in several TV ads that targeted his opponent, referencing stories from FactCheck.org, Time and the Washington Post, often with images of the stories and logos from the fact-checkers’ sites and mastheads.

“Nick Rahall’s attacks on Evan Jenkins: Non-partisan fact-checkers say they’re bogus, out-and-out lies, false,” a narrator said in one Jenkins campaign ad. “One ad so wrong TV stations rejected it. Nick Rahall: A lying politician, just like Obama.”

***

Fact-checkers are keenly aware of how their reporting might be twisted by the campaigns they’re covering—especially in advertising. “It’s like it has the PolitiFact stamp of approval,” said Greg Borowski, editor of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel’s PolitiFact Wisconsin team.

That stamp of approval is so attractive that campaigns will pretend they have it when they don’t—a tactic that muddies fact checking’s good name. For instance, early in Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker’s 2014 re-election campaign, a Republican ad said Walker’s Democratic opponent, Mary Burke, “left Wisconsin with 130,000 fewer jobs” after her stint as the state’s Commerce secretary. A caption underscored the claim, attributing the data point to a five-month-old PolitiFact story.

But PolitiFact Wisconsin had instead given Walker a “mostly false” rating when he used that number the previous year. The ruling was a tricky one: PolitiFact found that Walker’s figure was “numerically true, but with scant evidence at best when it comes to blame,” since experts said broader, economic forces were at play, not just the prior administration policies.

Mark Stencel is NPR's former managing editor for digital news. He previously held senior editing and executive management positions at the Washington Post and Congressional Quarterly. He is the author of a 2015 American Press Institute report on how political professionals are adapting to the scrutiny of media fact-checkers and co-author of a 2014 Duke Reporters' Lab study on obstacles to newsroom innovation (goatmustbefed.com).