The Kremlin’s Candidate
Michael Crowley is senior foreign policy writer at Politico.

“It’s not usually to America’s benefit when our intelligence officers—current or former—seek refuge in Moscow,” said one senior Obama administration official.

Flynn didn’t respond to emails about the dinner or his relationship with RT; an RT publicist ignored questions about Flynn. Perhaps it’s just a meeting of like-minded thinkers. Flynn, after all, has also criticized the U.S. interventions in Iraq and Libya, just as Putin and his global news network have.

But a few other things are known about Flynn. In February, Flynn called on Hillary Clinton to end her White House bid over her use of a private email server as secretary of state. And Flynn has also served as an informal adviser on national security issues to one Donald J. Trump.

***

On March 21, Trump was holding a news conference in Washington when he fielded an unusual question.

“You’ve hinted that you are open to better relations with Russia as president,” began a reporter who did not audibly identify himself. “Is that a difficult position to maintain with the media in kind of anti-Russian overdrive?”

“If we can get along with Russia, that’s very good,” Trump said. He noted that Putin, who has called Trump “an outstanding and talented personality,” “says very nice things about me.”

The short but puzzling exchange made more sense a few hours later, when RT aired a segment focused entirely on Trump’s answer. “Republican presidential hopeful Donald Trump is calling for a dramatic change in U.S. policy towards Russia,” explained an RT host. Beneath him onscreen, a chyron declared that “Donald Trump Supports Improved Relations Between U.S. and Russia.” Next came RT correspondent Caleb Maupin, who had asked the question of Trump, and who explained that Trump “is widely decried and denounced in U.S. media and by many mainstream figures in U.S. politics. … Yet the more he’s denounced, the more popular he becomes.”

Not least in Moscow. In 2012, Republican nominee Mitt Romney had deemed Russia America’s greatest geopolitical rival, and in recent months, Romney called Putin “a thug [who] kills journalists and opponents.” Trump sees things rather differently. In recent months, he has called Putin a “strong leader,” and said he would “probably get along with” the Russian president. Putin responded in kind, adding that Trump “wants to move to … a deeper level of relations with Russia. How can we not welcome that?”

Trump was at his clearest in his April foreign policy address. “I believe an easing of tensions and improved relations with Russia, from a position of strength only, is absolutely possible,” he said. Sergey Kislyak, Russia’s ambassador to Washington, told me afterward that Trump had “made some intriguing points.”

In December, when Trump called Putin’s compliments a “great honor,” the MSNBC host Joe Scarborough asked the candidate if he had concerns about praise from “a person that kills journalists and political opponents and invades countries.” Trump was unfazed. “He’s running his country and at least he’s a leader. You know, unlike what we have in this country,” he said. And when ABC’s George Stephanopoulos pressed him on the point a few days later, Trump stood firm. “It’s never been proven that he’s killed anybody. So, you know, you’re supposed to be innocent until proven guilty,” Trump said. RT appeared to delight in the exchange. “Putin Killed Reporters? Prove It!—Trump to ABC Show Host,” declared a headline on the network’s website.

The more Trump has offended the U.S. establishment, the more RT has cheered him on. A March op-ed on RT.com declared the New Yorker to be “the natural outcome of a political system that has been arrogantly ignoring the will of the American electorate for many years.”

It’s not just personal: The substance of Trump’s views suggest a drastic shift in U.S. policy toward Russia that would enormously benefit Moscow’s strategic and economic position on the world stage. Trump calls American interventions in the Middle East stupid and vows to pursue an “America first” policy with reduced U.S. military commitments in Europe and Asia. Contra the official line of Obama and that of his own party, Trump said he’s fine with Putin bombing Syria if he’ll take care of the Islamic State for us.

RT’s editor in chief, Margarita Simonyan, a former state TV reporter, gives Russian President Vladimir Putin a tour of the network’s Moscow headquarters in 2013. | Yuri Kochetkov/AP Photo

Trump also has startled foreign policy experts—and delighted Moscow—with his skepticism about the nearly 70-year-old NATO alliance, which he has said costs the U.S. too much and may be “obsolete.” RT has reveled in such comments, as well as the fierce backlash against Trump in Washington. “Trump vs Neocons,” read a chyron in one recent RT segment. “Trump Sparks NATO Debate: ‘Obsolete’ or ‘Tripwire That Could Lead to World War III’”? asked an online headline.

Hillary Clinton’s view of Russia is much closer to Romney’s than to Trump’s. The Democratic front-runner has called Putin a “bully,” compared his incursions into Ukraine to Hitler’s territorial grabs, and supported U.S. interventions in Iraq, Libya and Syria—all vehemently opposed by Putin. (Clinton also has praised her husband’s 1999 air campaign against Serbia, which infuriated pro-Slavic Russia.) Clinton has said that if Trump gets his way with NATO, “It will be like Christmas in the Kremlin.”

RT is not impressed. “Hillary Clinton leaves a trail of blood and suffering around the world and a clear record of exploitation and greed in her own country,” declared a March op-ed on RT’s website by an Australian journalist named John Pilger. A similar screed ran under the title “Hillary Clinton’s Record Is a Monument to Mendacity.”

On the topic of Clinton, RT’s live TV programming is only slightly more subtle. One recent evening, a former Pentagon official and fringe conservative named Michael Maloof told a patiently listening Ed Schultz about Clinton’s “total inability to manage foreign policy.” On the March 23 edition of CrossTalk, which bills itself as RT’s flagship program, the show’s Moscow-based host, Peter Lavelle, claimed not to “see anything positive out of American foreign policy when Hillary Clinton was secretary of state … zero!” The three-man panel featured one Clinton defender, Washington Democratic lawyer Richard Goodstein. But when he spoke up, Lavelle cut him off, accusing Clinton of “duplicity and hypocrisy.”

Goodstein told me in an interview that the segment was typical of his experience on RT. “When I’m on Fox, the accusation is that Obama is a weakling and Hillary has the same weak foreign policy,” he said. “Then I get on RT, and it’s that they’re these monsters who bomb indiscriminately. It’s wild.”

When I’m on Fox, the accusation is that Obama is a weakling and Hillary has the same weak foreign policy. Then I get on RT, and it’s that they’re these monsters who bomb indiscriminately. It’s wild.”

In mid-March, Trump interrupted his bromance with Putin by releasing a video on Instagram attacking Hillary Clinton as unfit to stand up to the Russian leader. The video opened with a clip of Putin, clad in a white judo suit, slamming a partner to the mat. An image of an ISIL fighter was followed by a clip of Clinton, at a campaign event, playfully barking like a dog. (“When it comes to facing our toughest opponents, the Democrats have the perfect answer,” read the on-screen text.) A Kremlin spokesman lightly chastised Trump for the ad, lamenting that “the demonization of Russia and everything connected to Russia is, unfortunately, an obligatory part of an American election.” If it was possible to detect a trace of admiration for Putin’s strength in the ad, though, that might have to do with its source: Trump’s opening clip of Putin doing judo bore RT’s logo.

***

Simonyan, the RT editor-in-chief, insisted to me that RT was not taking sides in the American election. “We do not give preferential treatment to any candidate,” she said. But in hours of watching RT programming and combing through its online content, I could find only the rarest, token defense of Clinton. Critical stories about Trump, touching, for example, on the violence at his rallies, tended to be less about Trump himself than the recurring theme that America is stumbling toward social and political anarchy.

Bernie Sanders, meanwhile, is routinely hailed as a courageous insurgent, conspired against by Clinton and her political establishment allies—a view in keeping with RT’s generally leftist line; the network depicts America as a heartless corporate oligarchy. Schultz has played a key role in the Sanders boosterism, even conducting softball interviews with the Vermont Democrat for RT on the eve of the Iowa caucuses and Wisconsin’s primary. “If you win Iowa and New Hampshire, is that a game-changer?” Schultz asked. (Sanders and Rand Paul are the only 2016 candidates I could identify as past RT guests. Clinton’s campaign told me it has not heard from RT.)

Schultz, meanwhile, seems to have turned on Hillary Clinton, whom he once called his favorite living New Yorker and whose candidacy he spoke of warmly as recently as July. Now he complains that the Democratic Party has “rigged” the primaries in her favor and that “there has been a tremendous slant of the coverage in favor of Hillary Clinton, but the people are rejecting it right now.”

Why the change of heart? Upon taking the job, Schultz insisted that the Kremlin wouldn’t have any sway over him. Such talk, he said, was “hogwash. Absolutely ridiculous. Nobody’s going to tell Ed Schultz what to say, or how to say it, or what stories to pick.”

Maybe so. I tried to ask Schultz those questions myself, but an interview I arranged with him through an RT publicist was abruptly canceled. Shultz hasn’t spoken much these days about his change of heart about Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump. Nor has he discussed how a former lunch-pail populist feels covering stories like NATO’s strategy toward Eastern Europe and the global role of the (very much Putin-connected) patriarch of the Russian Orthodox Church, whom Schultz recently interviewed, then urged Congress to invite for a speech.

Two years ago, on a radio show he then hosted, Schultz fumed at a Republican congressman who had described Putin as acting from a position of strength against Obama. “Can I ask you a question?” Schultz thundered rhetorically. “Whose side are you on?” Good question.