Crist joins Obama to sell stimulus
Crist Joins Obama to Sell Stimulus

FORT MYERS, Fla. — President Barack Obama told voters here Tuesday that he might have a tough time winning a second term if his plan for reviving the nation’s economy doesn’t work.

And he made that startling admission as Florida’s Republican Gov. Charlie Crist — a man who’d be happy to fill Obama’s shoes –– looked on.

Crist took to the stage here to help Obama stump for his stimulus package — making him a rare Republican willing to come forward and publicly back the $838 billion measure.

The pairing might seem like an unusual alliance. But the Democratic president and the Republican governor are more similar than they appear at first glance — and not just because both were sworn into office following eight years of a chief executive with the last name Bush.

Obama and Crist embrace a modern brand of politics that seeks to avoid ideological battles and mixes centrist instincts with a people-first approach.

Joining together on the stimulus makes sense for both right now, too — for Obama, to get some Republican cover, and for Crist, to burnish his bipartisan bona fides by standing next to the popular president in a state Obama carried. And with Florida unemployment at over 8 percent and a projected state budget shortfall in excess of $2 billion this year, Crist also is looking forward to a potential $10 billion federal windfall from Obama’s proposed stimulus plan.

Crist did his part, urging passage of the stimulus and, as is his signature, touting the merit of doing so without regard to party.

“This issue of helping our country is about helping our country,” said Crist, who ditched a meeting in Tallahassee of former Florida governors to appear with the president. “This is not about partisan politics. This is about rising above that, helping America and reigniting our economy.”

And Obama returned the favor. “The thing about governors is they understand our economic crisis in a way that maybe sometimes folks a little more removed don’t understand,” Obama said, a dig at Crist’s fellow Republicans back in Washington who have offered near-unanimous opposition to the stimulus plan.

“Gov. Crist shares my conviction that creating jobs and turning this economy around is a mission that transcends party. And when the town is burning, you don’t check party labels. Everybody needs to grab a hose, and that’s what Charlie Crist is doing right here today.”

The two are essentially politicians cut from different sides of the same political cloth — Obama on the left, Crist on the right.

Consider: Obama’s first executive order was to open up presidential records. Crist’s first executive order was to create an office of open government.