Rick Perry taps into fear of Washington
AUSTIN — Bob McDonnell, Chris Christie and Scott Brown scored recent Republican victories by singing from the same political hymnal: focusing on kitchen-table issues, criticizing Washington without demeaning the president and keeping their distance from the GOP’s most polarizing figures. Their strategies resounded in Virginia, New Jersey and Massachusetts and won plaudits from GOP establishment voices as the way to win in the Obama era.

Meanwhile, Texas GOP Gov. Rick Perry has embraced the cause of state sovereignty, suggested his famously independent state could secede from the union, deemed the president a socialist and, last month in Houston, happily stood by former Alaska Gov. Sarah Palin’s side to receive her endorsement.

One day before Texas Republicans go to the polls for the state’s gubernatorial primary, Perry’s approach seems to be paying dividends. He enjoys a wide lead in polls over his chief primary opponent, Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, and the only real question that remains is whether he can crest the 50 percent needed to avoid a runoff in his quest for a third full term.

Unlike the trio of recently successful statewide Republicans, Perry’s positioning has, notably, taken place within a GOP primary in a deep-red state where conservatives make up much of the electorate.

But if McDonnell, Christie and Brown harnessed tea party energy while mostly sticking to safe scripts, Perry has become the first prominent Republican to make the movement’s fears about a Washington leviathan central to his candidacy.

His success against the once seemingly formidable Hutchison illustrates both the political opportunity and danger at the moment for Republicans. The Perry message, in which the federal government wants to redistribute wealth and foist a radical agenda on states, plainly resonates among right-leaning voters who don’t just oppose President Barack Obama but are downright afraid of him.

“This administration and this Congress have scared people; they’ve overreached,” Perry said in an interview at a charter terminal here before beginning a final fly-around the state Monday. He depicted the Democrats as saying, “’We will make all decisions centralized in Washington, D.C. — on health care, on energy policy, on education. Those are the ones we just know about now.”

Of Obama, Perry says flatly: “I think he has socialist beliefs.”

To hear the governor tell it, the policies being pursued at the federal level pose nothing less than a fundamental threat to ability of states to determine their own fates. And, he said, the alarm was being sounded by the people.