Brian Moran: Terry McAuliffe was W.H. 'booking agent'
Former Virginia Del. Brian Moran’s campaign slammed fellow Democratic governor hopeful Terry McAuliffe on Thursday, deriding him as “the booking agent of the Lincoln Bedroom.”

Responding to a mailer sent out by McAuliffe’s campaign, Moran campaign manager Andrew Roos said in a statement that “the last place we would go for a public service lesson is a Wall Street insider.”

“For decades, Mr. McAuliffe traded access for money, ensuring that big companies — not people — were in control, all the while pocketing millions through his proximity to power,” Roos said. “Brian Moran will take no lectures on ethics from the booking agent of the Lincoln Bedroom and the architect of the Business Leadership Forum.”

The Business Leadership Forum is a Democratic National Committee fundraising entity once headed by McAuliffe.

At issue is a negative mailer with “scratch off” answers identifying candidates and their stances on four issues to voters.

Under the campaign finance section, the former Democratic National Committee chairman is identified as having “pledged not to take contributions from Dominion Power Corp. or its PAC” and “pledged not to take any contributions from companies taking federal bailout money.”

For Moran’s campaign finance section, the mailer says the former delegate “took $46,800 in contributions from Dominion Power Corp. or its PAC” and “took then returned contributions from companies receiving bailout money.”

Under the lobbying reform section, McAuliffe is credited as the “first candidate to propose a ban on gifts from lobbyists to Virginia’s elected officials.” Moran, meanwhile, is said to have “received gifts from lobbyists and a trip to the Bahamas paid for by the auto lobby” and “eventually said he would support a lobbyist gift ban.”

In the final weeks heading up to the June 9 primary, McAuliffe’s rivals have singled out the former Democratic moneyman for tough criticism.

Moran’s first television spot knocked McAuliffe for being part of “insider deals” and attacked his role as Secretary of State Hillary Clinton’s presidential campaign chairman. “The fact is, if Terry McAuliffe had his way, Barack Obama wouldn’t be our president today,” an announcer in the ad says.

The campaign of state Sen. Creigh Deeds hit McAuliffe in a radio spot questioning McAuliffe’s commitment to crack down on payday lenders.

McAuliffe spokeswoman Lis Smith said that the mailer was not an attempt to return the fire, insisting that it is “just a comparison of everyone’s records.”

“We’ve always said that there are differences between the candidates on issues and experience, and that’s legitimate to discuss,” she said. “But Terry’s not attacking other Democrats and believes any of the three would be better than McDonnell.”