Opinion: Federal Reserve must be held accountable - Matt Stoller
Gagnon remains pessimistic about the Fed’s ability to bridge gap between regulators and macroeconomists.

An institutional breakdown of such magnitude — and with such serious consequences — deserves a wider airing, so it can be fixed. But it isn’t being fixed — or even publicly discussed.

Text Size -

+

reset

There are many reasons the Fed doesn’t want to release information about its activities. Some of them are legitimate.

Members of Congress publicly wail about bailouts and the Fed, while privately expressing relief about the Fed’s actions. The American people don’t like the Fed, but there is no consensus about the nation’s economic direction.

The tacit deal among all parties is: The Fed runs the world; Congress divides the spoils; the public doesn’t pay attention. Everyone is irresponsible.

There are profound debates that should be held about the role of the central bank. As the left-wing Fed critic Timothy Canova, a professor at Chapman University Law School, points out, a very different Federal Reserve system financed much of modern American life. It financed our victory in World War II, created the veterans health system and the G.I. Bill, and built the suburbs.

At that time, the Fed explicitly acted as an arm of the Treasury. If government is to govern, Canova said, it must be financed.

Rep. Ron Paul (R-Texas), a right-wing Fed critic, offers the inverse criticism: Government boldness is the problem.

Today’s paralyzed Fed serves neither group — so there’s an alignment against it.

Regardless, it seems very likely that our financial architecture is going to be reorganized when the next crisis hits. The Fed can either open itself up to criticism or lose its legitimacy and have others design its path.

The Fed should release the committee meeting transcripts showing what members knew and when. And if the Fed refuses, Congress should compel it.

Matt Stoller worked on Dodd-Frank and Federal Reserve transparency issues as a staffer for Rep. Alan Grayson (D-Fla.). He is currently a fellow at the Roosevelt Institute.