Dems hit Kyl over budget cut remark
Top Democrats on the House Ways and Means Committee are seizing on remarks by Sen. Jon Kyl (R-Ariz.) that Congress doesn’t have to make budget cuts to go ahead with extensions of the Bush tax cuts.

Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee Chairman Chris Van Hollen (D-Md.) said on Wednesday that Kyl is being hypocritical for promoting tax cuts but cutting off unemployment benefits because of deficit concerns.

“Here we have our Republican colleagues saying that, in the middle of this economic emergency, when people are hurting, we’re going to insist that we take money somewhere else out of the economy to pay for it,” Van Hollen said at an event held to pressure Senate Republicans to support the stalled unemployment extension bill.

“But when it comes to people who have no emergency at all, people who are doing just fine, people on Wall Street and the wealthiest Americans, let’s give them a tax break. They want the rest of America to foot the bill for the wealthiest Americans,” Van Hollen said.

Kyl said during an appearance on “Fox News Sunday” that all increased spending should be offset. “But you should never have to offset cost of a deliberate decision to reduce tax rates on Americans,” he added.

“Jon Kyl over in the Senate said the Bush tax cuts didn’t need to be paid for, they didn’t have to be offset,” said Rep. Jim McDermott (D-Wash.), who’s been working with Senate Democratic leaders on unemployment insurance. “If you’re a billionaire in this country, you’re rich, we’re going to give you tax cuts. We’re don’t have to pay for that, shift it to somebody’s grandkids 25 years from now. I frankly think Jon Kyl has nobody that he knows who’s ever been unemployed,” he said.

The House members' criticisms of Kyl follow similar rhetoric from the White House and the Democratic National Committee. But White House press secretary Robert Gibbs’ speculation on Democrats possibly losing the House in the fall have overshadowed Kyl’s statements. Tax cuts passed in 2001 and 2003 will expire at the end of the year. Ways and Means Committee Chairman Sander Levin (D-Mich.) said he doesn’t know when the committee will take up extending the cuts.