Opinion: Opposing the philosophy of Sonia Sotomayor isn't anti-Hispanic
Sonia Sotomayor’s nomination to the Supreme Court was a truly historic moment in our nation’s history. As an accomplished jurist who rose from humble roots, she is an inspiration to all who share her Hispanic heritage and all Americans who believe hard work is key to success.

Since that moment, however, I have considered it vital to ensure that the historic nature of her nomination did not interfere with the Senate’s constitutional duty of evaluating it and having a proper debate about the judiciary’s proper function in America. After all, the lifetime nature of her appointment brandishes the post with enduring influence on the nation’s affairs long after the nominating president vacates office. Whereas voters hold senators accountable every six years, this is the nation’s only chance to evaluate Sotomayor before sending her to the Supreme Court for life.

During the recent Judiciary Committee hearings, it became clear that I could not in good conscience support Sotomayor’s confirmation and would vote against it if I were in the Senate today. I reached this conclusion on the basis of a fair and thorough analysis.

As a whole, Sotomayor’s record reflects a view that judges can and should inject personal experiences and biases into what should be the objective interpretation and application of the law. While her comments about the “better conclusions” a “wise Latina woman” would bring to the bench are universally known, I have more specific concerns about her case history and testimony regarding the Second Amendment at the state level, eminent domain takings and the so-called constitutional right to privacy that resulted in the Roe v. Wade decision. Together, these and other cases point to a nominee who would bring an activist approach to the highest court in the land.

Some have said my opposition to Sotomayor’s confirmation and that of Republican senators would incense Hispanic-American voters. Right on cue, many are now attempting to brand Republicans as anti-Hispanic. It should be clear, however, that our opposition to her judicial philosophy is in no way a wholesale opposition to Hispanics.

I believe the greatest disservice we could offer the Hispanic community and the nation as a whole is to avoid a serious, principled discussion about the role of the judiciary. I reject the notion that judges should be representative of their sex, race or class. For these reasons, the suggestion that senators who have fundamental concerns about Sotomayor’s judicial philosophy should not dare oppose her for fear of being branded anti-Hispanic is disappointing.