Report: Mitt Romney's experts met at White House on health care - Tim Mak
Experts who worked on then-Gov. Mitt Romney’s health care law in Massachusetts met with Obama administration officials a dozen times in 2009, according to a report on Tuesday.

Three health care policy experts who helped craft Romney’s reforms in Massachusetts had a dozen meetings with Obama administration officials, including one in the Oval Office presided over by President Barack Obama, NBC News said, citing newly released White House records.

Text Size -

+

reset Romney: W.H. didn't consult me POLITICO 44

Also involved in the meetings were President Barack Obama’s former economic adviser Larry Summers, former budget Director Peter Orszag and Nancy-Ann DeParle, White House deputy chief of staff for policy.

It is well known that Obama’s health care plan was in part modeled after Romney’s 2006 reforms, but the report provides new details about the level of cooperation between Massachusetts experts and the White House.

“The White House wanted to lean a lot on what we’d done in Massachusetts,” Jon Gruber, an MIT economist who was hired by Romney’s administration as a consultant to run computer models simulating the costs of various health care policies, told NBC.

In response, the Romney campaign told POLITICO that Gruber was not an adviser to then-Gov. Romney, never had a decision-making role in the governor’s office, and had no title in the administration. Gruber was only hired as a consultant to run econometric models, they say.

In 2009, Gruber also was given a $380,000 contract by the Obama administration to work with Congress on drafting a federal law, based on the Massachusetts law.

The Obama administration also welcomed two other health care experts that were involved in the making of Massachusetts’ health care reforms.

Jon Kingsdale, an expert appointed in 2006 by one of Romney’s Cabinet secretaries to serve as executive director of the state agency responsible with implementing the new Massachusetts reforms, met with the White House three times in 2009.

John McDonough, head of a health care advocacy group in Massachusetts and named a “stakeholder” in Romney’s health care reform process, attended four meetings at the White House.

Romney has been harshly criticized by some conservatives for the individual mandate to purchase health care insurance in Massachusetts. A similar feature in Obama’s health care reforms is now being challenged in the courts. In September, the Obama administration asked the Supreme Court to declare the federal individual mandate constitutional.

Romney has said repeatedly that he will work to repeal Obama’s health care reforms if elected president.

“If I am elected president, I will issue on my first day in office an executive order, paving the way for waivers from ObamaCare for all 50 states. Subsequently, I will call on Congress to fully repeal ObamaCare,” he wrote in an op-ed in May.