Left on sidelines, Mark Warner mounts deficit effort
Sen. Mark Warner spent six months with the Gang of Six, and when that group fizzled, he asked to be on the powerful deficit-cutting supercommittee. Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid turned him down.

So now, Warner is mounting a campaign both inside and outside the Senate, meeting with senators and lobbyists in an effort to push the supercommittee to cut a much bigger deal — closer to $4 trillion.

Text Size -

+

reset POLITICO 44

As he tries to become a power player, Warner is also expressing his frustration with the pace of the tradition-bound Senate. Warner’s top aide, Luke Albee, complained at a meeting that there are only “six or eight people” who effectively make the decisions on Capitol Hill, leaving rank-and-file lawmakers on the sidelines. Warner blamed the tea party for much of the gridlock and quipped that he was “not trying to pick a fight with Harry Reid,” according to sources who attended the session.

Yet some of this maneuvering — from a junior senator — doesn’t appear to be going over very well with Democratic leaders.

Warner’s “ambition isn’t matched by an ability to deliver, and that’s created not only disappointment all around but also some goofy, if not desperate, behavior on his part,” said a Democratic source close to the Senate leadership.

Warner wants more pressure on the supercommittee to cut a big deal — he’s pushing industry heavyweights, via their lobbyists, to flex their muscles on Capitol Hill and promote calls for the supercommittee to endorse a wide-ranging deal, an effort that could potentially include a paid TV ad blitz.

Warner, who says he was never under the illusion that he would have been chosen for the supercommittee, insisted in an interview that he has no concerns at all about Reid’s leadership and that he simply is part of a growing number of lawmakers who want to break the gridlock.

Warner says he is trying to send the message that “we have their back” if the supercommittee tries to strike a major deal beyond the $1.2 trillion in spending cuts called for in the legislation creating the panel.

Knowing that time is running short, Warner raised the possibility that the supercommittee could propose a two-step approach tied to more significant reforms — like to the Tax Code — at a future date.

“What I would like to see is how do we convince folks, not just downtown, [but] more importantly, leaders across the country that this is a real opportunity — this is a chance to have a straight up-or-down vote?” Warner told POLITICO on Monday. “How do we get folks to feel like that maybe this time, conventional wisdom is going to be wrong?”

Asked if he was frustrated with the Senate, Warner said with a chuckle: “I think this is not an unusual transition for a former governor. I hope I can add some value, and that’s what I’m trying to do. … There’s an awful lot of folks on both sides of the aisle that want to do the right thing — and that doesn’t get attention.”

Warner, 56, was elected in 2008 after serving out his term as Virginia governor and pursuing successful careers in telecommunications and venture capital, where he was among the original investors of telecom firm Nextel. Warner made a fortune in his corporate career — his minimum net worth now stands at an estimated $76 million, according to his annual financial disclosure report. Hailing from a Southern state and maintaining ties to the business community, Warner was once seen as a prospective leader of the Democratic Party and a potential presidential candidate.

Since joining the Senate, however, he’s tried to avoid being labeled as partisan — and he has turned down offers to run the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.