Rick Perry knocks George W. Bush, Mitt Romney for 'big government' policies - Jonathan Martin
Texas Gov. Rick Perry insists that he’s not running for president, but he didn’t mind offering an unvarnished view Monday about the signature policy accomplishment of one Republican who almost certainly is in the race.

“The health care plan out of Massachusetts, I would suggest to you, is too much the like the health care plan passed out of Washington,” Perry said, succinctly voicing one of the chief difficulties former Bay State Gov. Mitt Romney faces in the upcoming GOP primary.

Text Size -

+

reset POLITICO 44

Washington may hold little allure for him, but that doesn’t mean that Perry, who just won a convincing victory for his third full term, isn’t interested in increasing his national political profile.

Offering the sort of blunt talk sure to keep drawing attention his way, the conservative Texan used a reporters roundtable designed to promote his new book to expound on where his own party went wrong on its way to losing the White House.

Perry criticized former President George W. Bush, whom he succeeded in Austin, for promoting two significant pieces of domestic legislation, the Medicare prescription drug benefit and the No Child Left Behind bill that implemented federal education standards.

"I think those were both Big Government, but more important, they were Washington-centric," he said of the two laws, both significant parts of the Bush legacy. "One size does not fit all, unless you're talking tube socks."

The former president — now in the midst of a media tour for a book of his own — “missed some opportunities to send some good messages to a Congress that was spending too much money, frankly, on programs that we can't afford and don't need,” Perry said.

In his new jeremiad against federal power, “Fed Up!” the governor is even tougher as he takes aim at unnamed “old-guard Republicans” who “enable the statists.”

“They cowardly and selfishly empower themselves politically by compromising liberty issue by issue, often selling principle for a bridge, a museum or some building named after them back in their home district or state,” writes Perry in the 187-page polemic.

Such language is evocative of the tea party movement, the spirit of which Perry captured en route to a crushing primary victory over Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison and an equally triumphant win last week over former Houston Mayor Bill White.

Yet Perry insisted he’d prefer to lead a band of conservative governors as a bulwark against what he portrayed as an encroaching Washington than try to challenge President Barack Obama.

“I got the best job in the country,” he said. In four years, Perry added, “Lord willing, I will be governor of the state of Texas.”

He boasted of the numbers of minorities he’s appointed as governor and of the success last week of a group of black and Hispanic Republican state legislative candidates.

Yet, even as he takes a hard line on border security, the governor acknowledged the difficulties the GOP had this election with Hispanics and pointed to California, where Democrat Jerry Brown thumped Republican Meg Whitman in the governor’s race 73 percent to 18 percent among Hispanics, according to exit polls. He noted that 22 percent of the state’s electorate last week was Hispanic.

“The idea of having a diverse Republican Party is very important [so] ... it looks like the rest of the country,” Perry said.

Even as he demurs about a White House bid, Perry plainly wants to have a voice in the national debate. He’s taking his book tour to a wide range of venues, including the Jon Stewart’s “The Daily Show.”

“He’s the No. 2 book reviewer in America behind Oprah,” Perry declared of Stewart, who often criticizes conservatives.

Picking up a copy of his book, the governor explained: “I’m all about that being on a lot of TVs.”