Patrick Murphy overstated length of CPA experience
A still from a campaign ad. Patrick Murphy overstated length of CPA experience

TALLAHASSEE — Rep. Patrick Murphy has cited his “several years” as a certified public accountant when building his public brand, including running television ads touting his CPA status, but his CPA licensure records show he only worked as a practicing CPA for less than a year.

"I spent several years as a certified public accountant working for Deloitte & Touche - one of the largest accounting firms in the world, going into numerous fortune 500 companies looking for inefficiencies, waste and fraud,” Murphy said, introducing himself in a candidate forum during his successful challenge to Allen West in 2012.

Story Continued Below

"That’s some experience I think we need in our country right now,” said Murphy, who is running for the Democratic nomination in a heated U.S. Senate primary against Rep. Alan Grayson, as well as Miami labor lawyer and former JAG officer Pam Keith.

During a later debate, West tried to hit Murphy on the fact that he wasn’t licensed as a CPA in Florida, a fact Murphy conceded.

“I’m a certified public accountant in the state of Colorado,” Murphy responded. “I never hid that.”

But Murphy didn’t address just how long he had worked as a licensed CPA for Deloitte and Touche.

Though he said he “spent several years” as a CPA for the firm, and his 2012 campaign website said he “joined the respected accounting firm of Deloitte and Touche as a CPA” after he graduated, he had his CPA license for about nine months while he worked for the firm at its Miami office, according to Murphy’s Colorado CPA licensure records and his LinkedIn profile.

Portraying himself as a numbers-savvy CPA that could help cleanup Congress’ books was a part of his pitch to voters during his past campaigns. His campaigns have highlighted his CPA experience, even releasing a 2012 ad titled simply “ CPA .”

“I’m Patrick Murphy, I’m a certified public accountant,” Murphy says opening the 30-second spot. “I know what you’re thinking, accounting, boring, right? Well maybe Washington needs a little more boring right now.”

“You know how many accountants are in Congress right now? Eight,” Murphy said. “I counted.”

The Murphy campaign took more than 48 hours to provide an on-the-record statement that did not answer any of the questions POLITICO Florida asked.

“As a fully-licensed CPA, Patrick is a member of the Florida Institute of Certified Public Accountants,” said Joshua Karp, the campaign’s communications director. “Patrick worked at Deloitte from 2007 to 2010 as an auditor for Fortune 500 companies. Patrick’s high-quality work and strong work ethic earned him promotions in which he steadily assumed more responsibility.”

Murphy’s campaign has had to battle several claims in recent weeks that he has padded his resume, including issues tied to his University of Miami degree and his role in the BP oil spill cleanup.

The two-term 33-year-old congressman is younger than his opponents, and has only met the age requirement to be a U.S. Senator for three years.

Republicans have tried to attack the candidate for his youth, limited work experience and affluent family, painting him as a “ privileged ” party boy who “has lived his life high on the family fortune” and won election with the help of “Daddy Murphy.”

Murphy graduated from the University of Miami in 2006, and started working for Deloitte and Touche in Sept. 2007. But Murphy wasn’t licensed as a CPA then, in Florida or any other state. He would not get licensed for nearly two more years.

On his 2009 CPA application, he listed his position with the company as an “audit assistant,” though his LinkedIn profile lists his position with the company as an “audit senior.”

Murphy did get his CPA license from Colorado in Sept. 2009 after passing the exam in Vermont. He left the firm in May 2010, and he renewed his license in 2015. Murphy did not meet the academic requirements to get licensed as a CPA in Florida, but did in Colorado at the time.

The Murphy campaign provided a statement from one of Murphy’s colleagues at Deloitte and Touche praising his work and speculating as to why Murphy took the extensive four-part exam through Vermont — a question the campaign itself did not answer — explaining that the requirements to take the exam are often more flexible in other states.

“It was very common for people to take the standardized exam in other states where they qualified,” wrote Alexander Menendez, who also donated $1,500 to Murphy’s 2012 campaign. “It is also important to note that CPA is a standardized test so, regardless of the state, the information tested is the same.”

Similarly, when Murphy applied for his CPA in Colorado, the education requirements were lower there than Florida, only requiring 120 semester credits. Murphy’s application showed he had 130 semester credits from the University of Miami. Colorado’s standard has since changed to require 150 semester credits, similar to Florida’s 150 semester credit requirement.

Joanne Fiore a VP at the American Institute of CPAs wrote in an email to POLITICO Florida that “many who work at firms are non-CPAs on their path to becoming CPAs. Firms recruit on college campuses and hire graduates who are not yet CPAs and cannot be, because in addition to passing the Exam there is also an experience requirement. The firms oftentimes support them on their journey to licensure.”

Among the questions the Murphy campaign left unanswered is how he was authorized to work as a CPA in Florida if he’s licensed in Colorado.

According to the Department of Business of Professional Regulation, which includes the state’s Board of Accountancy, there are certain circumstances in which someone who is licensed as a CPA can work as a CPA in Florida.

Florida law about CPAs licensed in other states says, in part, that “an individual who does not have an office in this state has the privileges of Florida certified public accountants,” but leaves the definition to DBPR.

The agency adopted a definition of “office” effective March 2010 as “a place in which public accounting is conducted or any place for which the physical address is identified in advertising,” or in the case of a CPA working for a Florida firm, “office” means that CPA’s “designated address of record.”

In his 2009 Colorado CPA application, Murphy lists Deloitte and Touche’s Miami office as his employer, and lists his personal address as a South Beach condo.

It’s the latest in a round of questions about the accuracy of Murphy’s professional and education background.

Miami Herald recently reported that Murphy embellished his academic record , claiming to have two bachelors degrees when he only had one. Murphy claimed to have earned “degrees in accounting and finance” from the University of Miami. He actually earned one bachelor’s degree from UM in 2006 in business administration with his major areas of study in accounting and finance.

Murphy’s 2012 campaign website combined the degree claim with a statement about his CPA experience.

"After earning dual Bachelor's Degrees from the University of Miami in Accounting and Finance, Patrick joined the respected accounting firm of Deloitte and Touche as a CPA,” his 2012 campaign website stated, according to an archived version of the site.

Meanwhile, the Tampa Bay Times raised questions about whether Murphy exaggerated his role in cleaning up the Deepwater Horizon oil spill through a company he started, related to the other half of his purported business bona fides.

"While Murphy’s bio says he spent 'six months in the Gulf of Mexico leading cleanup efforts,' a timeline provided by his campaign contradicts that,” the newspaper reported .

Murphy's profile on the House Democratic caucus website currently states that "After graduating, he went to work as a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) for Deloitte and Touche,” and highlights his “background as a CPA and operating a small business” as giving him firsthand knowledge of “the importance of bringing smart, efficient rules of the road to protect taxpayers from reckless behavior and the need to work together to find new ways to support small business growth, the true backbone of our economy.”

His current campaign website, however, is more vague when describing his work experience: "After graduating from the University of Miami with majors in accounting and finance, Patrick went on to work as a Certified Public Accountant (CPA) for Deloitte and Touche, auditing Fortune 500 companies, before establishing his own environmental cleanup business.”