OFA hires staff in 19 states
President Obama’s nascent political arm is retooling, with an emphasis on “grassroots fundraising” in the states after its modest first-quarter fundraising effort.

Organizing for Action now has in place 19 paid state coordinators – most announced this week – who will be responsible for curating OFA volunteers and building local fundraising efforts.

The hiring represents a shift from OFA’s original plans to concentrate paid staff in Chicago and Washington while relying on volunteers in the states. An OFA official said the decision to change course was implemented in the last few weeks.

OFA now has paid state coordinators in place in Georgia, Ohio, Missouri, Maryland, Colorado, Pennsylvania, North Carolina, Nevada, New Hampshire, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Florida, Michigan, Iowa, California, Texas and Arizona.

OFA had earlier announced paid staffers in New York and Illinois.

According to an OFA job posting circulating online, state coordinators will be responsible for the state’s Organizing for Action volunteers and curating what it described as a “grassroots fundraising team.” OFA raised $4.9 million during the first quarter.

“The State Coordinator will also be a key member of the grassroots fundraising team, helping organize a volunteer-led grassroots fundraising effort in state,” the job ad reads. “The State Coordinator will be responsible for developing a robust and effective in-state network of grassroots fundraisers by 1) leveraging the existing fundraising and grassroots volunteer communities, 2) identifying new fundraising capacity and 3) overseeing various fundraising events (e.g. house parties, surrogate visits).”

The job ad also says the state coordinators “will be responsible for supporting all OFA activities in their state. In this role, the State Coordinator will coach, mentor, and guide staff and volunteers to effectively develop self-sustaining chapters that will execute a local issue organizing program around national issues like immigration reform, gun violence prevention, climate change, and statewide legislative battles.”

“Salary is competitive,” the job ad reads. The start date: “ASAP.”

Read more about: Barack Obama, OFA Organizing For Action