House votes down Democrats' fracking bill amendments
Rep. Dwight Dudley. | POLITICO Florida House votes down Democrats' fracking bill amendments

TALLAHASSEE — The House on Tuesday voted down 20 amendments offered by Democrats to a bill that would bar local governments from banning oil and gas fracking, setting the stage for what could be a contentious debate and vote on Wednesday.

The vote came the same day that Broward County joined St. Lucie County along with Estero Beach, Bonita Springs and the Broward city of Coconut Creek in adopting ordinances to ban fracking.

Story Continued Below

The House bill that will get a vote Wednesday, HB 191, would provide for regulations on oil and gas hydraulic fracturing and bar cities and counties from banning the practice.

The House approved amendments offered Tuesday by the bill's sponsor, Rep. Ray Rodrigues, a Republican from Estero, including one that would let local governments maintain zoning and land use requirements on oil and gas operations as long as they don't impose a ban.

Rodrigues said that amendment resulted from a compromise with the Florida League of Cities and Florida Association of Counties, which had opposed the fracking preemption.

"I would point out that oil and gas activities already are preempted by the state," Rodrigues told the House. "I worked very hard with the Florida League of Cities and Florida Association of Counties on a preemption amendment they can support."

He also argued against the amendments offered by Democrats. Those amendments would have maintained local fracking bans, required health studies of fracking, raised liability requirements and required a two-thirds vote by the Legislature to approve regulations once a study is completed in 2018 if the bill passes.

Environmental groups and some Democrats support two bills, HB 19 and SB 166, that would ban fracking in Florida, but they haven't been heard in committees, which are chaired by Republicans.

Also voted down was an amendment by Rep. Kristin Jacobs — a Democrat from Coconut Creek, which has already banned fracking — that would have exempted 25 counties that have adopted resolutions in support of fracking bans.

Jacobs said compromises the Florida Association of Counties and Florida League of Cities agreed to don't supplant the will of residents in communities that supported bans.

"With those communities that want fracking in their communities, have at it," Jacobs said. "But for those communities that have said unequivocally, 'We do not want fracking' in those communities, please respect those counties and help us ban it in those areas."

Rodrigues asked the House to vote down that amendment in favor of the compromise with the county and city groups. "I would submit that this amendment undermines that agreement," he said.

That amendment was voted down on a voice vote, while others offered by Democrats were voted down largely along party lines.

A spokeswoman for the Florida Association of Counties said her group appreciated the compromise amendment by Rodrigues that was adopted by the House.

"We would prefer that there be no preemption but recognize the difficulty in pleasing all stakeholders and appreciate the final amendment that increased zoning and land use for counties," spokeswoman Cragin Mosteller said in an email.

The Senate companion bill, SB 318, was amended Monday with similar language.