Staten Island lawmakers sue to stop de Blasio purge of ID card records
An IDNYC Pop-Up event in Bushwick. | William Alatriste for the New York City Council Staten Island lawmakers sue to stop de Blasio purge of ID card records

Two Staten Island lawmakers filed a lawsuit Monday seeking to prevent Mayor Bill de Blasio from destroying records associated with the city’s municipal ID program, after the mayor promised to purge those records to protect undocumented immigrants who may have applied for the ID cards.

The ID program, created by the City Council and de Blasio in 2014, included a provision to destroy records related to cardholders’ identities after two years. That provision was inserted to help allay concerns among undocumented immigrants that their personal information could be handed over to federal immigration officials.

Story Continued Below

Donald Trump promised to deport millions of immigrants from the United States during his campaign, and has reiterated that pledge since his election last month.

De Blasio has promised he will “never turn over” data from IDNYC applicants, and will destroy IDNYC records before handing them over to immigration authorities seeking them for help in deporting city residents. Applicants do not include their immigration status when applying, but they must provide their names, addresses and photographs.

Two Staten Island Assemblymembers, Nicole Malliotakis and Ron Castorina, filed the lawsuit Monday in Richmond County Supreme Court, arguing that the record-destruction clause in the law violates the state’s Freedom of Information Law.

Malliotakis said the IDNYC data “could be helpful in the future to investigate a crime perpetrated with the use of an IDNYC card.”

“It’s ironic that after all the talk of ‘transparency’ during the 2013 campaign season, we have to ask a court to prevent a government agency from destroying its records," she said. "It is unconscionable that the City of New York would distribute nearly 900,000 identification cards, then destroy all the documents applicants used to apply for those cards."

Bob Freeman, the head of the state’s Committee on Open Government and an expert in the state’s Freedom of Information Law, agreed with the principle of the lawmakers’ suit. But, he suggested, they didn’t need to file an injunction — all they need to do to test their case is to file a FOIL request.

“If a FOIL request is pending, they can’t destroy the records,” Freeman said. “The existence of the FOIL request would preclude the city from destroying those records.”

The de Blasio administration said it could not comment on the lawsuit until it has seen and reviewed the filing, but noted that ensuring the privacy and security of IDNYC cardholders' data is a top priority of the program.

Cardholder information is confidential, and that information can only be shared when the cardholder gives consent, when it becomes necessary to share that information with another city agency to determine eligibility for other programs, or when the city is ordered to share it in a court of law.

"Claims that IDNYC is being used by those intending serious harm is reckless fear-mongering – the IDNYC application process is similar to DMVs across the country, highly trained staff use state of the art technology to identify instances of fraud, and IDNYC cannot be used to obtain a driver’s license, board a plane, or cross a border," said de Blasio spokeswoman Rosemary Boeglin in a statement to POLITICO New York.

"Over 900,000 New Yorkers have IDNYC, and we are committed to protecting the privacy and security of our data,” Boeglin said.

Council Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito challenged the lawmakers to file the suit last week.

"Go ahead, sue us," Mark-Viverito told reporters when asked about the possibility. "They want to raise the funds and sue the city. They have every right to do so."

On Monday, Mark-Viverito's spokeswoman Robin Levine decried the lawsuit as ridiculous.

“It’s sad but not surprising that backbench Assembly Member Nicole Malliotakis is more interested in filling ridiculous lawsuits than she is in serving New Yorkers - 900,000 of whom have already signed up for IDNYCs,” Levine said, in a statement.

On Monday, de Blasio defended the municipal ID law, when asked about the lawsuit, arguing the records-destruction clause is legal because it’s the law.

"As I've said, we're are very clear, if you look at the original legislation, which is the law of this city, it was quite clear that we're not going to allow ourselves to be in a situation where those records would be turned over to the federal government,” de Blasio told reporters at an unrelated press conference.

“The reason people were willing to trust us was we made very clear that there would never be a situation where it would lead to their deportation," he added. "And we're going to keep that pledge and it's also part of our law. It's quite clearly stated in the legislation, so we will follow through on that."