Legislative pay raise commission created
Herman "Denny" Farrell. | AP Photo/Mike Groll Legislative pay raise commission created

ALBANY—In a near-empty Capitol just before 3 this morning, the State Assembly completed work on this year's budget by voting to create a legislative pay raise commission.

"The optics don’t look very good,” Assembly Republican Mark Johns of suburban Rochester said.

Story Continued Below

The commission was included in a broader budget bill that was introduced Tuesday and received a message of necessity. The bill also included an expansion of the Start-Up NY tax break program to Stewart International Airport in Newburgh and debt forgiveness for Albany County.

The commission will be made up of seven members—three appointed by the governor, two by the chief judge of the Court of Appeals, and one each by the Assembly speaker and Senate majority leader. In addition to setting the salaries for legislators, the panel will also set the salaries of the state’s judges, statewide elected officials, and some members of the executive branch.

The commission will make its first recommendations for legislative pay raises on Nov. 15, 2016. If the Legislature does not convene and specifically vote against an increase, the new salary will take effect Jan. 1, 2017. This schedule will be repeated every four years.

The base salary for legislators is now $79,500.

During the floor debate, Republicans questioned the legality of a commission since the state Constitution specifies that legislative salaries be set by law.

“I would certainly appreciate someone else making the decision on what our salary is, especially if they meet after our next election, so we don’t have to explain it or defend it and most assuredly, so they don’t raise it so high so as to get competent opponents to run against us,” said Republican Andy Goodell of Jamestown. “But I am constrained to remind all of us that only the Legislature has the power to enact law.”

Ways and Means chairman Herman "Denny" Farrell dismissed this line of reasoning, arguing the statutory change was the only one required.

“If we say so, it becomes so, it’s called the law,” said Farrell, who represents parts of Manhattan. “So we’re going to change that line and add that this program is the one that’s acceptable. And it’s us voting on it, and if you don’t want that to happen, you vote no now.”

Democrats have usually been more supportive of pay raises than Republicans, largely due to the higher cost-of-living in the downstate regions more Democrats represent.

Assuming the commission meets constitutional muster, it will remove a persistently biannual issue from the table in Albany. Every two years, there are rumors legislators will return to Albany in the six weeks between their re-election and the start of a new session to vote for a pay increase, coupled with an issue supported by the governor.

But governors’ asking prices have been high. The last time a compromise was reached was 1998, when a pay raise was combined with the creation of the state’s first charter schools and an increase in payments to dairy farmers.

The creation of the commission is a victory for the state’s judges, who have been calling for a panel to deal with their salaries for years.