MacArthur ‘cautiously optimistic’ about his Obamacare replacement amendment
The Tuesday Group, which includes around 50 members, also met Wednesday afternoon and Rep. Tom MacArthur presented his amendment to the caucus. | Getty MacArthur ‘cautiously optimistic’ about his Obamacare replacement amendment

Shortly after his amendment received an endorsement from the conservative House Freedom Caucus, U.S. Rep. Tom MacArthur said Wednesday he was “cautiously optimistic” the changes he’s negotiated to revive the House GOP Obamacare replacement plan could soon become a reality.

“I don’t think the issue was ever needing to move moderates from no to yes,” MacArthur, who represents the 3rd Congressional District, told POLITICO New Jersey in a phone interview. “We gained some votes from the Freedom Caucus and that’s helpful, extremely helpful. I think we now need to make sure we hold the people that were yes before. And if we do, I’m cautiously optimistic we can get this done.”

Story Continued Below

MacArthur, co-chair of the caucus of moderate Republicans known as the Tuesday Group, crafted the amendment to the American Health Care Act with Rep. Mark Meadows of North Carolina, chairman of the Freedom Caucus, which has around three-dozen members.

Some Tuesday Group Republicans, including fellow members of the New Jersey congressional delegation, like Reps. Frank LoBiondo and Leonard Lance, have already said they won’t support the compromise.

The Tuesday Group, which includes around 50 members, also met Wednesday afternoon and MacArthur presented his amendment to the caucus.

“It’s very important members of Tuesday Group can speak for themselves. I don’t want to imply where anyone is,” MacArthur, a former insurance executive, said when asked about the meeting. “The reality is people are in different places.”

The text of the amendment, which was obtained by POLITICO yesterday, would allow states to obtain waivers to opt out of certain fundamental Obamacare provisions if they demonstrate they could lower premiums, increase the number of insured people, stabilize the insurance market or increase the number of health plans offered.

As a result, more conservative Republicans are saying they will now back the bill, but it still fails to address one of the biggest concerns raised by moderate Republicans, including the other four members of the New Jersey delegation, which is the rollback of federal funding for Medicaid expansion.

MacArthur said he wasn’t thinking “about one caucus or another.”

“I proposed an amendment as an individual that I thought was a bridge between this difficult balance of giving states more flexibility so they can bring down cost and increase the number of insureds while also providing critical protections for the most vulnerable people among us,” he said.

House Speaker Paul Ryan pulled the AHCA last month after it failed to garner enough support.