Documents shed light on TARP action
Bush officials knew the political reaction was key - that too much criticism from Barack Obama, John McCain or key interest groups could seriously complicate the deal. Documents shed light on TARP action

A series of emails and other documents released this week fill in dramatic new details of the Bush administration's decision to bail out the nation's largest banks - portraying Treasury Secretary Hank Paulson and White House aides as frantically reaching out to bank executives, the two presidential candidates and even a conservative think-tank to line up support for the plan.

The bailout occurred just 21 days before Election Day 2008, and the documents, which were obtained by Judicial Watch, suggested that that Paulson and the White House aides knew the political reaction was key - that too much criticism from Barack Obama, John McCain or key interest groups could seriously complicate the deal.

Story Continued Below

So they started working the phones.

Obama got a call from Paulson that day - and ended up backing the plan. They tried to reach McCain but couldn't at first. Instead, Bush White House official Joel Kaplan called McCain economics advisor Douglas Holtz-Eakin, who said "he had succeeded in backing down the 'they are nationalizing the banks' crowd ... for now," Kaplan wrote in an email that day.

Meanwhile, the White House worried that conservatives would hate the idea of such far reaching government intervention on Wall Street and they might blast the agreement in the press the next day.

White House counselor Ed Gillespie called Heritage Foundation president Edwin Feulner to sell him on the deal. "He no like it, but think he will hang back,' the veteran conservative operative reported to Administration colleagues in an e-mail.

The new insight into the events of October 13, which would prove to be a pivotal day in American capitalism, come from documents released Wednesday by the public interest group Judicial Watch. The group submitted a Freedom of Information Act request to the Treasury Department for all documents related to the meeting. This account is based on the hundreds of documents Treasury turned over, which are posted publicly.

Paulson had invited the CEO's of the nation's nine largest banks to meet with federal officials in Washington that afternoon, and he intended to present them with a deal they couldn't refuse: the bankers would be told to accept billions of dollars in government money, whether they liked it or not.

But the bankers didn't know that. All they knew was they had been summoned to a hastily called gathering.

At 7:50 a.m., Citigroup Vice Chairman Lewis Kaden sent an urgent e-mail to his Washington lobbying office. "Can you find out as soon as possible what Paulson invite to [Citigroup CEO Vikram Pandit] for meeting at Treasury this afternoon is about," he wrote to Citi's Nicholas Calio and Heather Wingate.

Pandit, apparently, wasn't sure this was a meeting he wanted to attend. Perhaps Citigroup would send a lower-level person in his place.

For the Treasury officials, that would be a disaster. They were convinced that the fate of the American financial system was riding on the success of the meeting, which was now only hours away. And for the meetings to succeed, the nation's top CEOs - not their deputies - had to be in the same room at the same time.