Students, Lenders Clash Over Loan Subsidies

The student loan industry is about to go up against its own customers.

Lenders and student advocacy groups are preparing to fight each other on Capitol Hill over how much the government subsidizes school loans.

Story Continued Below

Heeding the battle cry, students are marching to Capitol Hill attempting to plead their causes personally. Lenders, with their considerably more financial muscle, are promoting their side as well, using their long-established relationships with lawmakers to make their case more privately.

Student loan subsidies were designed originally to encourage lenders and guarantors to participate in the program. Student groups such as the United States Student Association and the Student Aid Alliance want to see the subsidies reduced, arguing that those federal dollars would be better spent on increasing Pell Grants to $5,100 from $4,050, the maximum amount established five years ago.

Reducing subsidies could drive some lenders out of the business entirely, industry members contend. And fewer lenders means fewer options for loan-shopping students. In addition, America's Student Loan Providers executive director Kevin Bruns says any cuts could force lenders to eliminate some or all of the services they give students, such as financial counseling.

If recent history is an indicator, the lenders are facing an uphill fight. At the close of the 109th Congress, federal subsidies for loans were cut $20 billion as part of the Deficit Reduction Act. Then this year, President Bush proposed cutting an additional $17.3 billion in subsidies.

They are also grappling with fallout from scandal. One firm, Nelnet, is being scrutinized for some $278 million in subsidies that an audit claimed improper. And Sallie Mae raised eyebrows recently when Chairman Albert Lord sold more than $18 million in stock three days before Bush proposed the subsidy cut, causing the company's stock to drop 9 percent.

"The banks have been triangulated by the president," said Michael Dannenberg, director of education policy at the New America Foundation. "He has made common cause with congressional Democrats."

The new Democratic majority pushed student loan reform to the forefront of the national agenda within the first 100 hours of the 110th congressional session by passing the College Student Relief Act; this would reduce interest rates under both the Federal Family Education Loan Program (FFELP) and Direct Loan program. The bill paid for the cuts by increasing various fees and decreasing lender insurance rates.

Over in the Senate, Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.), chairman of the Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, held a hearing on college affordability in February. He also introduced two bills that encourage borrowers to use the government's loan programs before taking out private loans.

Loan providers are not taking the threat lightly. Although they are very tight-lipped about their lobbying tactics, they've got deep pockets and plenty of connections to make their case. In 2006, SLM Corp., Sallie Mae's parent company, paid $1.62 million in lobbying expenses, about 8 percent of the $19,822,687 total paid by the finance and credit industry, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. Nelnet has a gold-star lobbying team of Quinn Gillespie & Associates, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld, VPR Associates and Clark & Associates. Quinn also represents fellow America's Student Loan Providers member Bank of America.

Alexa Marrero, a vice president for the Education Finance Council, said, "What we are doing is what we always do, which is to help tell policymakers what nonprofit folks are doing to make a difference in their community." Previously, she was the deputy communications director for the House Committee on Education and the Workforce under Rep. John A. Boehner (R-Ohio), a major ally of the lenders in this fight.

Barmak Nassirian, associate executive director for the American Association of Collegiate Registrars and Admissions Officers, said the loan industry is "so lucrative that even the Bush administration, which has been their patron saint, has put them on the chopping block. ... They are a lobbying operation that happens to conduct lending."

In contrast, the student groups spend less money on lobbying, relying instead on their members to reach Capitol Hill as best as possible. "The student groups do as decent a job as they can," he said, "but it is a David and Goliath battle."

The United States Student Association organized a legislative conference in early March that more than 400 students from 300 schools across the country attended. They participated in lobby clinics before going to Capitol Hill for a rally with Rep. George Miller (D-Calif.) as part of Student Lobby Day, which culminated in more than 200 concurrent congressional visits by students.

Carmen Berkley, a 21-year-old senior at the University of Pittsburgh and member of the association's board of directors, was one of the student lobbyists. The March visit was her third. Berkley said she will graduate with debt of $60,000 to $70,000. "I don't know how I am going to pay it off, but I don't know how I am going to work in the field that I want to unless I can," she said.

Rosaria Matos, 19, is a sophomore at Rutgers University. She came to Washington during her winter break and met with Rep. Frank LoBiondo (R-N.J.) and Sen. Robert Menendez (D-N.J.) directly. Reps. Jim Saxton (R-N.J.), Frank Pallone Jr. (D-N.J.) and Donald Payne (D-N.J.) had staff available to meet with Matos and two other students. In New Jersey Democrat Sen. Frank R. Lautenberg's office, Matos met with the assistant to the chief of staff.

STUDENT AID ALLIANCE, COLLEGE AFFORDABILITY COALITION The two together represent higher education associations, student financial aid administrators, admissions officers, colleges and universities, and student organizations such as U.S. Public Interest Research Group. MEMBERS The two coalitions represent more than 100 organizations, as well as student groups across the country. LOBBYING MUSCLE In 2006, the two groups spent a total of $6,733,862. ALLIES ON CAPITOL HILL Sen. Edward M. Kennedy (D-Mass.) Rep. Tom Petri (R-Wis.) Rep. George Miller (D-Calif.) PITCH The student advocate groups support a decrease in the degree to which the federal government subsidizes lenders. They say some of that money should go to students in the form of increased Pell Grants, thus making college more affordable. TACTICS •Grass-roots organizing with students who are visiting members of Congress in Washington •Relying on students to get the message to their peers across the country AMERICA'S STUDENT LOAN PROVIDERS Represents the lenders, guarantors, secondary markets and organizations that provide federally guaranteed student loans through the Federal Family Education Loan Program MEMBERS ASLP represents 88 organizations, including Sallie Mae and Nelnet. LOBBYING MUSCLE In 2006, ASLP members spent a total of $16,319,514. ALLIES ON CAPITOL HILL Sen. Michael B. Enzi (R-Wyo.) Rep. John A. Boehner (R-Ohio) Rep. Buck McKeon (R-Calif.) PITCH The federally guaranteed student loan program is almost the perfect public and private partnership. It gives students options when deciding how to finance their education and provides additional services that will be unavailable to students with reduced subsidies. TACTICS •Members of the industry are tight-lipped about lobbying practices. •They acknowledge that they're talking to both Republicans and Democrats in Congress.