J. Mohan Malik
Dr. Mohan Malik came to the Asia-Pacific Center for Security Studies in February 2001 from Deakin University in Australia where he was Director of the postgraduate Defense Studies Program. He obtained his Ph.D. in International Relations from the Australian National University, M.Phil in Chinese Studies from Delhi University and Advanced Diploma in Chinese language from Beijing University. He is a trained Sinologist and has broad research interests in China and Asian Geopolitics and nuclear issues. Dr. Malik has lectured at the Australian Joint Services Staff College, Warfare Studies Center, and Australian Defence College and has held Visiting Fellowships at a number of strategic policy “think-tanks” in Asia, Europe and the United States.

Dr. Malik is the author of China and India: Great Power Rivals (Lynne Rienner Publishers 2011), Dragon on Terrorism (U.S. Army War College, 2002), The Gulf War: Australia’s Role and Asian-Pacific Responses (Strategic and Defence Studies Center/ANU Press, 1992), co-editor of Religious Radicalism and Security in South Asia (APCSS, Honolulu, 2004), and editor of Maritime Security in the Indo-Pacific (Rowman & Littlefield, 2014), Australia’s Security in the 21st Century (Allen and Unwin, 1999), The Future Battlefield (Deakin University Press and Directorate of Army Research and Analysis, 1997), and three volumes on Asian Defence Policies (Deakin University Press, 1994). He has contributed numerous chapters to books and published over 250 articles on Asian-Pacific security issues in journals such as Asian Affairs, Asian Survey, Arms Control, Asia-Pacific Defense Reporter, Australian Journal of International Affairs, China Quarterly, China Report, China Brief, Comparative Strategy, Contemporary Security Policy, Contemporary Southeast Asia, Current Affairs Bulletin, Defense and Foreign Affairs, Encyclopedia Britannica, Issues and Studies, Jane’s Sentinel, Jane’s Intelligence Review, Journal of Northeast Asian Studies, Korean Journal of Defense Analysis, Orbis, Pacific Affairs, Pacifica Review, Parameters, Strategic Policy, The World Today, The National Interest, World Affairs and World Policy Journal. He has also written for a number of newspapers and news magazines, most notably International Herald Tribune, Wall Street Journal, Japan Times, The Australian, The Age, The Power & Interest News Report, Asia Times, YaleGlobal Online, The Diplomat, Guanxi: The China Letter, Force, Honolulu Star-Bulletin, The Hindustan Times, and The Pioneer.

Dr. Malik has testified before the United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission (USCC), the Australian Senate Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade and also done consultancy work for the Science Applications International Corporation (SAIC), Booze, Allen Hamilton (BAH), Australian Department of Defence (Army), and the UK-based Jane’s Information Group. He was awarded the Australian Department of Defence Fellowship twice in 1991 and 1998. During 1998-2000, he was a member of the Australian Foreign Minister’s National Consultative Committee on Peace & Disarmament (NCCPD) and Australian Committee on Security and Cooperation in the Asia-Pacific (AUS-CSCAP).

Dr. Malik’s Publications: