Nevada race could get nasty

If you’re looking for a contender for a nastiest House campaign, the race between freshman Rep. Dina Titus (D-Nev.) and her likely Republican challenger, Joe Heck, is a leading possibility.

The two candidates have a history of a contentious relationship dating back to their tenure in the state Senate, where they both served alongside each other for several years. He noted that she would chafe when he was referred to as “Dr. Heck” on the Senate floor since he was a medical doctor. Titus, a former political science professor at UNLV, demanded to be referred by her doctoral title as well, he said.

Story Continued Below

Heck also recalled her regularly asking him to slow down his speaking style when making presentations on the floor.

“On the Senate floor, we were separated by one seat, so we needed an arbiter between us,” Heck told POLITICO. “There was this constant nitpicking about everything I would do... It more was like childish, high school-like behavior than going head-to-head on a lot of issues on the floor. We just didn’t hit it off.”

Heck had served in the state Senate since 2004, but lost his re-election bid in 2008 — a loss he blamed on Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) for working to target his defeat.

Heck said he disagrees with nearly all of Titus’ major votes, from the stimulus, cap-and-trade energy bill and health care bill. The economy has been particularly hard-hit in Titus’ district, which was recently one of the fastest-growing congressional districts in the country but has experienced a net out-migration from suburban Las Vegas.

Heck took a tough line on federal earmarks, saying he would decline them into the district until the process was reformed. It’s a risky stand in a district in need of economic assistance, with the construction and service industry sectors continue to struggle.

“I would not take earmarks. I would not solicit nor would I accept earmarks for the district,” Heck told POLITICO. “In an election year, everyone wants to run how much pork they’ve brought back, how many building have their name on them. I’m not a believer in that.”

And despite the district’s significant and fast-growing Hispanic population (18 percent of the electorate), Heck said he supported the Arizona immigration law cracking down on illegal immigrants, and favors a similar approach nationally. Heck said he opposes birthright citizenship – giving legal status to illegal immigrants’ children who are born in the United States – and said he favors cracking down on employers who hire illegal immigrants.

“It was unfortunate that Arizona had to go to those lengths, but it was bold of them to do it,” Heck said, adding that the Hispanic community in southern Nevada was not monolithic on the issue. “A large portion of the Latino community in southern Nevada is against illegal immigration. They feel that they’re being lumped in with a group and being maligned, stereotypically.”

Titus is considered one of the more vulnerable incumbents in the country. An April Mason-Dixon poll showed Heck leading Titus by five points, 49 to 44 percent.