Some Dems refuse to back Obama
Joe Manchin, independent Bernie Sanders and John Barrow aren't committed to Obama. | AP Photos Some Dems refuse to back Obama

Sanders, the independent from Vermont who is revered on the left for his staunchly liberal views, initially refused to say in an interview whether he would back the president in 2012.

Instead, he turned serious and said he hoped that “the president never forgets who elected him to the White House. It was not Wall Street, although they contributed. It was not the big money interests. It was working families, lower-income people and the middle class.”

He urged Obama to not cut Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid, demand higher taxes from the rich and “stop reaching negotiated agreements with Republicans that are extremely weak and disadvantageous to ordinary people.”

In a subsequent interview, Sanders sought to temper his comments, saying, “I certainly hope and expect to be supporting the president, but it’s a little bit early in the process.”

He added that if Obama stands up to the wealthy and helps the middle class and ordinary citizens, “he’ll be elected by a very strong vote.”

Obama campaign spokesman Ben LaBolt argued that Mitt Romney, a potential GOP rival, was already dividing Republicans over his positions on home foreclosures and the auto industry rescue plan.

“Not only are Democrats unified in their opposition to the sorts of policies Mitt Romney has laid out: privatizing Medicare, gutting Social Security, letting Wall Street write its own rules again, and making middle-class families pay for tax breaks for large corporations, but even Republicans are running away from him,” LaBolt said.

To be sure, Obama still has support from many moderate Democrats, and that backing could very well grow once the general election campaign starts in earnest.

“My answer would be ‘Heck yes, indubitably.’ I will be out there campaigning wholeheartedly for Obama for 2012,” said Rep. Joe Baca, a California Blue Dog Democrat who said he would be a surrogate for the president. “I believe he’s done a great job in leading us in face of bitter partisan attacks.”

Baca said he and his fellow Democrats haven’t found much time to discuss what they would be doing for his reelection campaign.

Rep. Leonard Boswell, a moderate Democrat from Iowa, said he’d back Obama in 2012. “Considering the crisis he inherited from the Bush administration, he is doing the best anyone could and people see that,” Boswell said.

Said Rep. Sanford Bishop (D-Ga.), “President Obama and I have not seen eye to eye on every issue, but I am a strong supporter of his reelection efforts and I look forward to continuing to work with him.”

Indeed, for some targeted Democrats who support the president, there’s a desire to keep their distance from Obama’s legislative agenda even while they back his reelection.

In these cases, red-state senators like Ben Nelson of Nebraska and Jon Tester of Montana are quick to point out where they differ from Obama.

“I have an election of my own, and I’m focused on that. But I believe that the president will run an outstanding reelection campaign and most likely will be reelected,” Nelson said. “It’s not about my support — I supported him last time, I still support him. We don’t have to agree on everything, and I don’t have to support him on every bill to say that I support him for the president.”

“Yeah,” Tester said when asked whether he would back Obama. “Wish he changed his jobs bill a little — but yeah.”

Then Tester grinned and quickly added: “We ain’t stumping for anybody; we’re focused on moi.”