Portman could face heat on steel
In 2005, Portman urged the president not to restrict Chinese steel imports. Portman could face heat on steel

In a February 2006 letter to then-Sen. Blanche Lincoln (D-Ark.), Portman explained that such trade restrictions would be “ineffective” since other steel-pipe-producing countries would simply step in and fill the void left by the reduced Chinese imports. And he argued that curbing Chinese steel imports would increase prices for American consumers.

But the Alliance for American Manufacturing, which advocates for steelmakers, said Chinese steel pipe imports to the U.S. jumped from 27,000 tons in 2005 to 277,000 tons in 2008, a 10-fold increase. Profits for U.S. steelmakers fell dramatically during that time, and factories shut down. The 2005 decision contributed to the closure of two John Maneely Co. steel plants in Sharon, Penn., and Little Rock, Ark., executive Bill Kerins testified before the ITC in 2008.

“The failure of the Bush administration to provide relief to U.S. steelmakers and their workers had devastating consequences for the industry, both in terms of market share and its employment prospects,” said Scott Paul, AAM’s executive director who’s worked with Portman, and was the AFL-CIO’s trade lobbyist at the time of the 2005 decision.

A key Romney surrogate, Portman has emerged as a top vice presidential prospect. The mild-mannered Midwesterner is regarded as a safe pick who’s undergone a thorough vetting and could help Romney in the swing state of Ohio. Before winning his Senate seat, he served as George H.W. Bush’s top liaison to Congress, spent 12 years in the House, then became George W. Bush’s trade ambassador and budget director.

But his vast experience in Washington means he’s left behind a long record that Democrats are all too happy to exploit. The Democratic-aligned American Bridge 21 st Century already compiled a 347-page opposition research report on the 56-year-old Portman, painting him as “a key Bush family adviser, confidant, supporter and appointee.”

“Rob speaks as well as anybody can for Bush administration policies,” Ohio Sen. Sherrod Brown, a Democrat, said.

The China steel issue, in particular, would be especially tricky for Portman to navigate on a national stage. It raises questions about whether he favored free-trade policies with China at the expense of American workers, while underscoring his deep ties to an unpopular Republican president.

“It embodies what people see as the decline of American manufacturing, jobs going overseas and the decline of the Rust Belt,” said one Democratic strategist who’s studied Portman’s record. “There is a stark contrast here between [Obama], who is emphasizing bringing jobs home, and a potential Romney-Portman ticket and their outsourcing record.”

CORRECTION: Corrected by: Vivyan Tran @ 07/25/2012 02:36 PM CLARIFICATION: A previous version of this story incorrectly referred to the Alliance for American Manufacturers. It is the Alliance for American Manufacturing.