Ryan targets 'rationing board'
Paul Ryan is taking aim at the Independent Payment Advisory Board Ryan targets 'rationing board'

It’s the return of the “rationing” debate.

Paul Ryan’s appearance on the Republican ticket doesn’t just bring his Medicare overhaul plan to center stage. It also shines a brighter light on a new Medicare panel in President Barack Obama’s health law that Republicans say would “deny” or “ration” health care.

Story Continued Below

Ryan’s attacks on the health law’s Independent Payment Advisory Board — a centerpiece of his campaign event with Mitt Romney in Manchester, N. H., Monday — are ripped from the pages of the playbook Republicans used during the health reform debate. Sarah Palin stirred up the opposition by warning of “death panels,” and other Republicans charged that the entire law would put government bureaucrats between patients and their doctors.

Now, Ryan is bringing that rhetoric back by warning voters of the dangers of the “rationing board.”

Ryan has long been one of the harshest — and most vocal — critics of the new board. It’s a panel that will be tasked with controlling future Medicare growth, and that duty will require rationing health care, Ryan says.

Obama “puts this new board of 15 unelected, unaccountable bureaucrats that he’s about to appoint, who are required to cut Medicare every year in ways that will clearly lead to denied care for current seniors,” Ryan said at a town hall meeting in New Hampshire on Monday.

In the past, he’s been even more critical of the board.

“Repealing the Independent Payment Advisory Board is critical to ensuring that seniors never have to face the waiting lists and rationed care that have affected other nations who have gone down the misguided path of bureaucratic medicine,” he said in March when the House Ways and Means Committee voted to repeal IPAB.

Now that Ryan is on the ticket, voters can expect to hear a lot more about IPAB as he and Romney press their counterattacks against Obama on Medicare.

“American seniors need to know that the only one threatening to deny them care is President Obama,” said Brendan Buck, a campaign spokesman for Ryan. “As Congressman Ryan continues to talk about the Romney-Ryan plan to protect and preserve Medicare, he will be highlighting the danger posed by this unaccountable panel of bureaucrats.”

Supporters of the health law say the IPAB won’t — and can’t — deny or ration health care. They point to the health law itself, which specifically says the panel can’t deny health care treatment. IPAB’s supporters say the panel will find cuts within Medicare that won’t have an impact on beneficiaries — and won’t even need to find cuts if Congress can control Medicare spending by itself.

Fact-checking groups have rated similar statements that the board will decide who will get care as false. But as a practical matter, IPAB opponents say that there is no way for this board to slow the growth of Medicare spending without limiting care.