Obama lunches with Hill leaders
The president regularly met with congressional leadership until the debt-ceiling faceoff. | REUTERS Obama lunches with Hill leaders

President Barack Obama lunched privately with congressional leaders Wednesday to talk about jobs and the economy — the first such meeting since last summer’s debt-ceiling negotiations dissolved.

The group was limited to only the top congressional leaders: Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, House Speaker John Boehner and Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi.

Story Continued Below

That left out House Majority Leader Eric Cantor. The president and Cantor had a famously tense encounter during the debt ceiling talks — White House staff said Cantor repeatedly interrupted Obama toward the end of a meeting, Cantor’s staff said Obama walked out. But they have in recent days begun working together on a legislative jobs package designed to help small businesses get access to capital.

The bill was drawn from elements of the president’s jobs agenda, allowing Obama to take credit for proposing the measures, and it was trumpeted by House Republicans as their own jobs act, allowing them to also claim responsibility.

The White House, which had initiated the lunch Wednesday “to discuss ongoing efforts to find common ground on legislative priorities that will create jobs and strengthen America’s economy,” held up the meeting as proof that Obama and Republicans can work together to pass legislation, even in an election year.

“It was a constructive and cordial meeting,” Press Secretary Jay Carney said. He declined to get into specific pieces of legislation that could be passed but said the group discussed “a variety of topics, a range of topics, both domestic and foreign.”

Boehner’s office said after the lunch that he was “hopeful” about the prospects for cooperation.

“The Speaker was encouraged by what the President had to say about the JOBS Act,” Boehner’s office said in a statement.

Boehner also pushed for action on energy proposals, including expanding development of oil, natural gas and renewable energy sources.

“The Speaker told the President he’d be happy to work with him to put in place a true all-of-the-above energy policy, including these measures that are supported by the President’s own Jobs Council and bipartisan majorities in both Houses of Congress,” the statement said.

McConnell’s office said the senator was also “encouraged” and glad Senate Democrats appeared poised to act on bills passed by the House but that “have been gathering dust in the Senate.”

McConnell pushed for action on energy and hit the president on rising gas prices.

“The leader noted that while government actions can’t drop the price of gas overnight, the administration can stop taking actions that increase the price at the pump while limiting opportunities for American job growth,” McConnell’s office said in a statement.

The president regularly met with congressional leadership until the debt-ceiling faceoff in July, when the president promised he would take his case to the American people rather than continue talks with House Republicans that had grown rancorous.

Ever since, the president has been traveling the country to promote his jobs agenda to the American people and asking them to encourage Congress to act, rather than engaging Congress directly.

Some Republican aides note privately that Obama hasn’t even invited some congressional leaders to the White House for bill signings.

That all seemed to change this week after Cantor unveiled his jobs package.

“It might seem to be that the stars are beginning to align, and aligning on the one thing that we need to be focusing on, the one thing America wants to see happen which is economic growth,” Cantor said Tuesday on MSNBC. “We know that growth happens in the private sector. It happens through small start-ups and it happens through entrepreneurs going to work and putting their capital to work so that we can see jobs created.”

After Cantor published a POLITICO editorial about the bill, Carney said Tuesday that the White House saw “great opportunity” and “great overlap” between Obama’s jobs proposals and Cantor’s plan.

“There’s real opportunity to work to get a lot of that done,” Carney said.