D.C. abortion bill falls short in House
Trent Franks sponsored the bill to ban late-term abortion. D.C. abortion bill falls short in House

A majority of the House backed a bill to ban abortion in the District of Columbia after 20 weeks of pregnancy, but the legislation still failed to get the votes needed to pass.

Rep. Trent Franks’ “District of Columbia Pain-Capable Unborn Child Protection Act” was considered under a procedure that requires two-thirds of the House to pass. The bill fell short of that level with a final vote of 220-154 — six Republicans voted against the bill and 17 Democrats voted for the measure.

Story Continued Below

“Late term abortions are gruesome and painful,” Franks said on the floor Tuesday. “Under the ‘Humane Slaughter Act,’ farm animals in America have protection from completely unnecessary cruelty, yet unborn children in America have no such protection from that kind of agonizing pain.”

The restriction would not apply in situations where the life of the mother was threatened but it would criminalize abortions after 20 weeks even in cases of rape, incest and fetal abnormalities. Doctors would face up to two years of jail time and fines for not complying with the law.

Democrats said the Franks bill was far-reaching and a continuation of what they see as the Republican “war on women.”

“The majority of this House, the conservatives, can think of nothing better to do than continue to wage a war against women and take our time up with these divisive issues,” said. Rep. John Conyers (D-Mich.).

House Republican leaders have maintained their sole focus is on jobs and the economy and have been pushing against Democrat’s tax plans this week, but decided to allow the vote. A spokesperson for the majority leader did not return a request for comment as to why the bill was being taken up under a procedure that all but guaranteed the bill’s failure.

The Franks bill has garnered national attention because anti-abortion groups have made legislation banning late term abortions a top priority.

National anti-abortion groups said they would be scoring the vote. Current D.C law permits abortions under almost all circumstances but since Congress has final say over the District, the bill’s supporters say it’s the responsibility of Congress to act to restrict it.

“A vote against H.R. 3803 will be accurately described as a vote to endorse and preserve the current policy of allowing legal abortion for any reason, until the moment of birth, in our nation’s capital,” the National Right to Life Committee wrote to members.

Abortion rights groups Planned Parenthood Federation of America and NARAL Pro-Choice America also informed members they would score the bill.

D.C. Delegate Eleanor Holmes Norton has been an outspoken opponent of the Franks bill. She argued it undermined the District’s own laws for political gain.

“The national implications of the D.C. abortion ban bill have been clear to the pro-choice community and women’s groups from day one,” Holmes said in a statement Monday. “The bill picked on the District, seen as an easy mark in a Republican House, to thwart a wholesale reaction from the nation’s women.”

In a May hearing on the bill, Franks took heat for not allowing Norton to testify. Voter rights group DC Vote organized a protest outside of the Arizona lawmaker’s office in May. Fifty D.C residents lined up outside Franks’ Rayburn Building office and aired various gripes about the District, arguing that if the Arizona congressman wanted to introduce laws affecting D.C. residents, he should take care of the city’s other problems like construction and cockroaches.

“This bill separates us out, we who live in the District of Columbia, in violation of the 14th amendment,” Norton said on the floor Tuesday. “This is the first time in our history that a stand-alone bill has come to the floor to deny the residents of the nation’s capital the same constitutional rights as other Americans. We won’t stand for it.”

Similar legislation has been passed in nine states, including Franks’ home state of Arizona where a judge recently upheld the law as constitutional.

This article tagged under: Abortion

Trent Franks

Politics