Patty Murray plan doesn't balance budget - Manu Raju and Ginger Gibson
Sen. Patty Murray’s new budget plan would cut annual deficits but still leaves the country with a $566 billion shortfall after 10 years, as Senate Democrats and House Republicans continue to debate whether balancing the budget in a decade is the best approach to bolster the tepid economy.

Murray unveiled the plan to the Senate Budget Committee, which Wednesday afternoon started debate on the bill. The panel is expected to approve it on a party-line basis Thursday, and the full Senate could vote on it by the end of next week.

Text Size -

+

reset BTC: Obama's tax problem Ryan budget: Break down with Republican strategist

Democrats are unlikely to win GOP support on the floor, which means Murray, the Budget Committee chairwoman, and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid will have to ensure they lose no more than five of their colleagues in order to win approval from the body.

(DOCUMENT: Sen. Patty Murray's budget plan)

Red-state Democrats who face reelection next year, such as Sens. Mark Pryor of Arkansas, Mark Begich of Alaska and Kay Hagan of North Carolina, have said they would review the plan in more detail before taking a position. Senate Finance Chairman Max Baucus (D-Mont.), who is up for reelection and initially raised strong objections to the fast-track tax reform procedures called for under the Murray budget, also has been mum so far.

Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.), who also could face a tough reelection, said in an interview that the budget “cannot be balanced by cuts only” and that she’d support the Murray plan.

In the committee, the 12 Democrats appeared united when they delivered their opening statements Wednesday. Assuming Murray succeeds in keeping her caucus largely in line and ushering the measure through the Senate, she will have an enormously challenging task of reconciling the plan with House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan’s approach, who proposes no tax increases and calls for a dramatic overhaul of Medicare and Medicaid, as well as a repeal of the president’s health care law.

Ryan’s plan also projects the U.S. would carry a $7 billion budget surplus by 2023.

Murray argues that the sharp cuts in Ryan’s plan would harm economic growth, saying that it makes more sense to stabilize the debt in the long-term rather than balance the budget in just 10 years. Beginning in 2013, when the deficit is projected to account for 5.6 percent of GDP, the annual shortfall would be reduced to 2.2 percent by 2023, she said.

The major difference between the Ryan and Murray approaches has more to do with projected spending over the next 10 years, not revenue increases. Over 10 years, Murray’s plan would cumulatively spend $4.9 trillion more than Ryan’s proposal, according to budget documents. And while Ryan assumes no net tax increases in his proposal, Murray’s plan appears to call for less than one percentage point more in revenue than the Republican’s does as it relates to GDP.