Republicans applaud chained CPI in Obama budget - Ginger Gibson
Senate Republicans voiced optimism at news of the inclusion of “chained CPI” in President Barack Obama’s budget plan, which will be unveiled Wednesday.

Obama is expected to offer the tweak to Social Security benefits as an olive branch to Republicans in an effort to jump-start talks over a large-scale deficit deal.

Text Size -

+

reset Hoyer dubious of chained CPI

Chained CPI is something Obama had put on the table in earlier talks with House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio). It would decrease the amount paid out in Social Security benefits by lowering the rate of cost of living adjustments.

(Also on POLITICO: Steny Hoyer dubious of chained CPI)

“I’m encouraged by any steps that President Obama is taking to save and preserve Social Security and Medicare,” said Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas), a conservative firebrand who has carved out a niche as one of the president’s most vocal opponents.

“I think it should be a bipartisan priority to strengthen Social Security and Medicare to preserve the benefits for existing seniors and to enact fundamental reform to ensure that those programs remain strong and vital for generations to come.”

Obama will meet with about a dozen Senate Republicans on Wednesday night at the White House for a dinner that Sen. Johnny Isakson (R-Ga.), who is organizing the meeting, said will be an open opportunity for all parties to discuss ways to come together.

(Also on POLITICO: GOP ready to bash Obama budget)

“There is no agenda. It’s no holds barred. It’s an open agenda. He didn’t set parameters — just asked me to invite 12 members of the Senate in the Republican Conference,” Isakson told POLITICO.

While Isakson’s office isn’t releasing a guest list ahead of the meeting, three Republicans have confirmed they will be there: Sens. Orrin Hatch of Utah, John Thune of South Dakota and John Boozman of Arkansas.

“It’s good that [the] president is starting to throw things on the table,” Boozman said of chained CPI. “I know he got some pushback from his troops. And so, at some point, we’re going to just need to sit down and figure out how to not cut Medicare, Social Security, those programs, but make sure they’re viable for young people in the future.”

(Also on POLITICO: What is chained CPI?)

Chained CPI was seen as a positive step by those who attended the last dinner Obama hosted with Republicans.