Patty Murray budget: $1 trillion in new revenue - Manu Raju
Sen. Patty Murray’s new budget plan calls for raising tax revenues by nearly $1 trillion while cutting spending by roughly the same amount over the next decade, according to people familiar with the proposal.

The Budget Committee chairwoman briefed fellow Democratic senators over the new proposal in a closed-door lunch Tuesday that President Barack Obama also attended. Committee deliberations will begin Wednesday, and the panel expects to vote on the plan Thursday before floor debate next week.

Text Size -

+

reset Ryan budget: Break down with Republican strategist Ryan: 'Reviving' budget process

The plan is a non-binding blueprint that does not carry the force of the law, but it allows each party to lay out its vision and priorities for the coming fiscal year.

(Also on POLITICO: Obama budget coming in April)

Murray’s plan calls for $1.85 trillion in additional deficit reduction over the next decade, Democrats said Tuesday. It calls for $975 billion in spending cuts and an additional $975 billion would be raised through an overhaul of the Tax Code by eliminating certain tax deductions, including ones typically claimed by high earners and corporations.

And Murray will include fast-track provisions calling on congressional tax writers to draft filibuster-proof legislation that would raise new revenue. The so-called reconciliation provisions have drawn strong objections by Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus (D-Mont.) who argued that the budget parameters would limit his ability to push a full-blown rewrite of the Tax Code.

Taken with the $2.4 trillion in deficit reduction already taking effect, Democrats argue the Murray approach would produce $4.25 trillion in additional savings over the next decade, a goal called for by budget experts in both parties.

But critics are certain to jump on what they believe are gimmicks in the Democratic budget plan. For instance, it counts $242 billion that would be saved in reduced interest payments under the proposal.

In addition, Democrats are also expected to cut $240 billion in defense spending, officials said Tuesday. They say the proposal would slash $493 billion from domestic programs, including $275 billion in health care spending, but they would not go nearly as far as Republican calls to dramatically overhaul Medicare.

(Also on POLITICO: Paul Ryan unveils budget plan)

The proposal calls for the automatic spending cuts — known as sequestration — to be replaced with a mix of different spending cuts and tax increases. The proposal also would call for $100 billion in new spending in infrastructure development and job training programs, which Democrats said would be paid for by eliminating certain tax deductions.