The delicate matter of military BRAC base closures
The man who ran the last round of military base closures knows better than anyone that it’s one of the toughest jobs in Washington — but he says going through with it again soon might ultimately be better than putting it off.

Anthony Principi, a former secretary of Veterans Affairs and the chairman of the 2005 Base Realignment And Closure Commission — known by the infamous shorthand BRAC — told POLITICO in an exclusive interview that he appreciates as few do just how tough it is for members of Congress, local officials and communities.

Text Size -

+

reset

Military downsizing is a fact of life, however, and so if Congress doesn’t agree to the new rounds of BRAC the Defense Department is expected to pitch in its budget submission next month, Principi said, it might still wind up with changes — ones outside its control, under another name.

“You can do some of it without a BRAC, but what you’re really doing is having a BRAC under the radar,” he said. “Defense still has some authorities where they can piecemeal a base apart. There are certain requirements in the law where you can cut [some] civilian personnel, you can move military personnel. … That doesn’t help a community, in my view.”

And if there’s anything Congress hates more than BRAC, it’s a “backdoor BRAC,” or “stealth BRAC,” as members call it. But Principi pointed out that the Air Force, for example, has about 500 fewer aircraft than it did in the last BRAC and yet has “excess” real estate at its bases around the country. The Army plans to disestablish six of its U.S-based brigade combat teams. So something’s got to give — especially, as defense officials have warned, if sequestration winds up shrinking the force even more than previously planned.

Defense advocates are covering their ears. The Pentagon hasn’t even sent its budget to Capitol Hill, but Rep. Rob Wittman — the Virginia Republican who chairs the House Armed Services Committee’s readiness panel — convened a hearing to pre-emptively rule out the prospect of BRAC.

“There is simply not enough evidence to even consider moving forward in such a time of uncertainty,” he said. The process of BRAC costs a substantial amount of money to execute, and real savings don’t accrue for years after the BRAC is initiated. In the case of BRAC 2005, we will not accrue savings until 2018, 13 years into its implementation. We have too many long-view decisions that need to be sorted out and need to be settled before we make a shortsighted decision to authorize a BRAC round.”

Principi acknowledged that the 2005 BRAC was more expensive than any other — a congressional report estimated that it wound up running $14.1 billion over its original estimate, for a total price tag of $35.1 billion — but he said much of that came from costs incurred after the closure decisions, especially in military construction.

“There was inflation in [military construction],” he said. “There were some structures that — I won’t say they were gold-plated, but they were very large. I’m trying to be objective here — if you go out and see these structures, they were certainly built to last a long time.”

At least the BRAC process lets lawmakers and communities plead their case, Principi said, and he remembered occasions in which the commission’s involvement helped save everyone involved from potentially bad outcomes.

For example, Principi flew up to Kittery, Maine, the home of Portsmouth Naval Shipyard, a major economic engine for Maine and New Hampshire that the Defense Department had slated for closure. Principi’s and BRAC’s job was to visit the site and decide whether to concur or object.