Bob Goodlatte outlines cautious path for House GOP on immigration - Seung Min Kim
House Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte outlined a cautious, “step-by-step” approach to immigration reform Thursday, emphasizing he will thoroughly vet any bills to fix the country’s immigration system that his panel will face this year.

Goodlatte stressed that no decisions have been made on how he will proceed on the pieces of immigration reform legislation that House Republicans intend to introduce, nor even what they will look like, except for two smaller components focusing on E-Verify and a new temporary agricultural worker program.

Text Size -

+

reset

“The way forward is for Congress to pass immigration reform through regular order,” Goodlatte, a Virginia Republican, told reporters Thursday.

House Republicans are “not drawing any conclusions about the best solution to move forward,” he added.

Goodlatte also said information from the investigation into the Boston Marathon bombings could aid lawmakers as they attempt a rewrite of the country’s immigration laws.

One example he gave was knowing more about the vetting process for the naturalization of the Tsarnaev brothers, the bombing suspects in last week’s fatal attacks. The asylum process could also be addressed, Goodlatte added.

As a former immigration attorney and chairman of the House Judiciary Committee, Goodlatte will hold considerable authority in Congress’s effort to accomplish the most dramatic overhaul since the 1986 immigration overhaul.

But the process is still very early for House Republicans and their plan for immigration reform. For instance, Goodlatte said he does not have legislation ready that would address the nation’s 11 million illegal immigrants. He said he personally does not favor a “special pathway to citizenship,” but rather a way to give them “some kind of legal status.”

“No one should take the limited bills that we’re introducing here this week to be in any way an indication of our overall interest in solving all of the various aspects of immigration reform that are before the House and the Senate,” Goodlatte said.

One poll released Thursday morning highlighted the Republican Party’s embrace of the pathway to citizenship.

The survey released by Americans for Tax Reform and conducted by the Winston Group shows that 85 percent of Republicans polled either “strongly support” or “somewhat support” a pathway to citizenship that would include requirements to pay back taxes, pay fines, learn English and not jump ahead of other immigrants currently waiting for citizenship.

Two immigration bills from House Republicans will be rolled out this week. One focuses on a temporary agricultural worker program that would allow up to 500,000 workers to stay and work in the United States for no more than 18 months. The other will require all U.S. employers to use the E-Verify program.

Still, no decisions have been made on how to mark up those bills, or other immigration-related bills that could come before the Judiciary Committee, such as the package expected from eight House immigration negotiators.

Broadly speaking, Goodlatte said immigration reform should encompass three pillars: enforcing the current law, improving legal immigration, and finding a solution for the estimated 11 million immigrants living in the United States illegally.

House Republican leaders, spearheaded by Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy, have been holding educational sessions for rank-and-file members to familiarize them with the intricacies of immigration law. Around 100 House Republicans have participated in those sessions, lawmakers said.

Their Democratic counterparts have held similar meetings with various immigration policy and polling experts.

Goodlatte said he wanted his committee to mark up immigration legislation this year, and while he acknowledged that the 2014 midterm elections would create a more difficult political atmosphere for reform, he said getting the policy correct is more important.

“By taking a fine-toothed comb through each of the individual issues within the larger immigration debate, it’ll help us get a better bill that will benefit Americans and provide a workable immigration system,” he said.