Conservative group rushes to Kelly Ayotte's aid - Alexander Burns
A heavily-funded national conservative group is coming to the aid of New Hampshire Sen. Kelly Ayotte, the first-term Republican taking heavy criticism for her opposition to the Manchin-Toomey gun control bill.

The American Future Fund will launch ads Friday praising Ayotte for having the “courage and independence to stand up and do what’s right for New Hampshire,” strategists involved with the campaign told POLITICO.

Text Size -

+

reset

The commercials show a collection of New Hampshire residents, including several identified as law enforcement personnel, pushing back on ads national gun control groups are airing against Ayotte.

(PHOTOS: Kelly Ayotte’s career)

The starting price tag for the TV advertising, as well as online ads, runs to approximately $250,000, according to an AFF strategist. That figure is expected to grow in the coming weeks.

The organizations targeting Ayotte – after she voted against a gun control deal brokered by West Virginia Democratic Sen. Joe Manchin and Pennsylvania GOP Sen. Pat Toomey – include Mayors Against Illegal Guns and the Gabrielle Giffords-backed Americans for Responsible Solutions.

(Also on POLITICO: Poll: Ayotte sees post-gun-vote dip)

Ayotte is not up for reelection until 2016, so it’s hard to gauge how the skirmish will affect her long-term prospects. But the early dust-ups over her vote on background checks is a case study in the new politics of the gun debate, characterized by newly cash-flush gun control groups, a National Rifle Association stuck on defense and a Democratic base enraged by the difficulty of getting legislation through the U.S. Senate.

The AFF ads don’t defend Ayotte’s vote with a “just say no” message on gun control. Instead, they cast her as a crime fighter who supported an alternative background-checks measure proposed by the GOP.

(Also on POLITICO: Ayotte says she backs gun checks)

“Those commercials from out-of-state groups attacking Kelly Ayotte are flat-out wrong,” one Granite Stater says in the AFF ad.

Another New Hampshire voter says Ayotte has supported “fixing background checks and strengthening mental health screenings.” A third alludes to her service as state attorney general: “Kelly Ayotte has worked closely with New Hampshire law enforcement to put violent criminals behind bars.

The ads are running on New Hampshire broadcast television on WMUR, and on cable in the Boston media market. They will expand onto broadcast television in Boston next week.

The ad campaign represents the most significant paid effort so far to rebut criticism of Ayotte’s vote against the Manchin-Toomey deal. The NRA has also aired commercials defending her, but for a comparatively stingy sum of about $25,000.

Notably, AFF is not a group organized around issues related to guns or the Second Amendment. A registered nonprofit, its advertising during the presidential campaign was largely focused on the economy, as well as select national security issues like chaos in Libya.

AFF president Nick Ryan said the decision to engage on guns came “in response to the wave of unfair attacks being launched against Sen. Ayotte.”