Karl Rove: IRS did what Democrats wanted - Kevin Cirilli
Karl Rove is linking congressional Democrats to the IRS scandal, saying that the agency was just doing what some on the Hill wanted.

“The administration is blaming this on low-level bureaucrats in Cincinnati and that turned out not to be true. We know people at the [IRS central headquarters] in Washington were involved. But we are missing something else. Remember, they were doing what people on Capitol Hill wanted them to do,” Rove said on Fox News on Tuesday.

Text Size -

+

reset

Last week, the IRS apologized for unfairly targeting conservative groups — including tea party organizations — that were seeking nonprofit status.

(PHOTOS: 10 slams on the IRS)

Rove said that Sens. Max Baucus (D-Mont.), Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.), Al Franken (D-Minn.), Jeff Merkley (D-Ore.), Jeanne Shaheen (D-N.H.), Tom Udall (D-N.M.), Michael Bennet (D-Colo.), Carl Levin (D-Mich.) and Sheldon Whitehouse (D-R.I.) all deserve scrutiny for signing a letter that urged the IRS to bolster their scrutiny of certain “political” groups, as ABC News noted on Tuesday.

“In 2010, [Senate Finance Committee Chairman] Max Baucus… wrote a letter to the director of the IRS saying,’Go investigate these kinds of groups.’ We had Chuck Schumer, who has been stirring this around for a number of years, by 2012 he goes out and gives a similar tough letter to the head of the IRS saying, ‘Look at these groups,’ and [he] gets six others to sign the letter,” Rove said, naming the senators above that signed the letter.

(Also on POLITICO: The IRS wants YOU — to share everything)

Rove continued: “Maybe the low-level bureaucrats aren’t so low level and maybe they were influenced by Democrats in the Congress saying take on these groups or else you will face the consequences in front of us.”

Baucus spokeswoman Meaghan Smith told POLITICO that Baucus just wanted the IRS to be practicing proper oversight.

“In 2010, with hundreds of millions of dollars being spent in elections by tax-exempt entities, Chairman Baucus wanted to make sure the IRS was conducting proper oversight of tax-exempt organizations involved in political campaign activity to ensure they were complying with the Internal Revenue Code’s rules for nonprofits and that taxpayer dollars were being protected,” Smith told POLITICO.

Smith added: “Chairman Baucus of course expected this oversight to be thorough and equitable and administered across the board and he still expects proper oversight to be conducted equally across the board.”