Immigration deal would double size of Border Patrol - Manu Raju and Seung Min Kim and Burgess Everett
Two Republican senators unveiled an amendment on Thursday to strengthen the border security provisions of the Gang of Eight’s bipartisan immigration bill. The amendment will help bring aboard swing senators and removes a major impediment to passing the Senate’s immigration reform bill before the July 4th recess.

Sens. John Hoeven (N.D.) and Bob Corker’s (Tenn.) amendment will require that border security be toughened before 11 million undocumented immigrants can pursue green card status, a key requirement of some Republicans.

Text Size -

+

reset Immigration debate gets heated on Senate floor

Requirements in the amendment include completing 700 miles of fencing along the U.S.-Mexico border, adding 20,000 border patrol agents, adding an entry-exit and implementing an E-verify program to prevent illegal immigrants from getting jobs, the senators said.

(PHOTOS: 10 wild immigration quotes)

“Some people have described this as a border surge, and the fact is we are investing resources in the border that have never been invested before,” Corker said. “The American people have asked us, if we pass an immigration bill on the Senate floor, that we do everything we can to secure the border.”

The bill will be introduced Thursday afternoon, Hoeven said, and co-sponsored by Gang of Eight Republicans John McCain (R-Ariz.), Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.), Jeff Flake (R-Ariz.) and Marco Rubio (R-Fla.) as well as Kelly Ayotte (R-N.H.) and Dean Heller (R-Nev.).

Senators hope that the amendment can bring as many 15 Republican votes in support of the immigration bill, which would mean the support for the bill would approach 70 votes in favor.

In pitching the amendment to his colleagues, Graham compared the surge in troops on the border to the surge in Iraq.

(Also on POLITICO: House GOP on immigration tightrope)

“This is a border surge,” Graham said. “I can look anybody in the eye and tell them that if you put 20,000 Border Patrol agents on the border in addition to 20,000 we’ve got … that’s one every 1,000 feet. That will work. And if you buy technology that helped us fight and create success in Iraq when we did that surge, that will help the Border Patrol agents.”

The Senate tabled an amendment from Sen. John Cornyn (R-Texas) on Thursday, 54-43, which would have required a hard trigger on border security along the pathway to citizenship but also would have added 5,000 border security agents and security technology on the border. Cornyn asked the deal-making senators how they could criticize his amendment as “budget-busting” when their own amendment went even further.

“We built on the foundation you laid,” Hoeven told Cornyn on the Senate floor. “You asked for 5,000, we gave you 20,000.”

Cornyn also wondered how they would pay for the $30 billion in additional border security that they were pitching. Hoeven responded that the CBO score delivered earlier this week that showed hundreds of billions in deficit reduction would more than pay for more boots on the ground.

“We use about $30 billion to make darn sure the border is secure,” Hoeven said.

Strengthening border security had long been the major impediment to attracting conservative votes, and a compromise that resolves the issue would significantly improve chances for passage of the overall bill.