Eric Cantor pledges another Obamacare repeal vote
The House will vote again in the “near future” on full repeal of Obamacare, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor said in a memo to fellow Republicans Friday.

He said a timeline has not yet been set.

Text Size -

+

reset

The House has already voted dozens of times on bills to repeal all or part of the law but has not voted on any Obamacare-related bills this year. But conservatives, particularly freshmen, have been eager to hold another vote.

(Also on POLITICO: Roundtable: Does Obama have the juice?)

The announcement of a repeal vote comes after Cantor’s failed efforts to pass a bill to elimination some of the health law’s prevention funding to expand the law’s high-risk insurance pools. The push resulted in complaints from the rank and file that Cantor was trying to expand Obama’s health care law, not starve it.

That bill is likely to be brought up again, and aides say that leadership is eying tweaks to ensure that the high-risk pools are state-based, not federal, according to sources involved in the planning.

(Also on POLITICO: Dems fret over Obamacare)

House Republican insiders say that Cantor’s move to vote again on repealing the law comes with risks. It looks, again, like the GOP that says it’s trying to soften its image is stuck on repealing a law that has no chance of being taken down. It won’t help much on the right, either: most conservative groups want House Speaker John Boehner, Cantor and Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) to defund the law through government funding bills and debt ceiling legislation — something they’ve been unwilling to do.

Cantor’s memo outlined a “full legislative agenda” for May.

He said the House will vote on a bills pushing construction of the Keystone XL pipeline, requiring the SEC to conduct cost-benefit analysis of rulemaking, allowing working parents to accrue paid time off, and prioritizing payments if the debt ceiling is hit. He also plans to hold a vote on a bill to fund pediatric research at the NIH by eliminating taxpayer funding of presidential campaigns and party conventions.

Later this summer, Cantor says the GOP plans to move spending bills “through an open appropriations process,” pass the Defense Department authorization bill and “consider a Farm bill produced by the Agriculture Committee and Frank Lucas.”

One issue that not included in Cantor’s memo is immigration. Judiciary Committee Chairman Bob Goodlatte last month outlined a “step-by-step” approach to immigration reform and introduced two bills: One focusing on a temporary agricultural worker program that would allow up to 500,000 workers to stay and work in the United States for no more than 18 months, the other would require all U.S. employers to use the E-Verify program.

Here’s the full memo:

MEMORANDUM

TO: House Republicans

FR: Eric Cantor

DT: Friday, May 3, 2013

RE: May Legislative Agenda

In line with our underlying principles for legislation and our goal of helping make life work for American families and businesses, I expect the House to have a full legislative agenda in May. We will push the administration to finally approve the Keystone pipeline delivering much needed jobs and lower energy prices for families. We will ensure that working moms and dads in the private sector have the same freedoms and flexibility currently offered government employees. We will reform our student loan process and hold the SEC accountable so that business can be assured of more certainty and less red tape. We will put pediatric disease research ahead of politics to focus on finding cures. And we will guarantee our debt obligations are met under any circumstance so as not to burden our kids with unpaid bills. While we have not locked in the timing, I expect that the House will vote on full repeal of ObamaCare in the near future.