President Obama defends surveillance - Josh Gerstein and Jennifer Epstein
SAN JOSE, Calif. — President Barack Obama defended his administration’s data-gathering programs Friday, calling them necessary for national security and well within the bounds of the law, and saying he believed his administration had “struck the right balance” between privacy and security.

“I think it’s important to understand that you can’t have 100 percent security and then have 100 percent privacy and zero inconvenience. We’re going to have to make some choices as a society,” he said at an event which was scheduled as a chance to promote his health care law but became an opportunity for him to discuss controversial national security policies that spilled into public view this week.

Text Size -

+

reset Obama's missing remarks

Answering questions from reporters, Obama stressed that Congress had been fully briefed on phone surveillance and that members of relevant congressional committees have been briefed on PRISM, the program involving the collection of internet data from non-Americans outside the United States from companies including Apple, Google and Facebook.

(PHOTOS: Pols, pundits weigh in on NSA report)

“What you’ve got is two programs that were originally authorized by Congress, have been repeatedly authorized by Congress. Bipartisan majorities have approved them,” he said. “Congress is continually briefed on how these are conducted. There are a whole range of safeguards involved.”

In addition to the executive and legislative branch, the judicial branch is also involved in “overseeing the entire program throughout.” Beyond all that, Obama said, “we’ve also set up an audit process when I came into office to make sure that we’re, after the fact, making absolutely certain that all the safeguards are being properly observed.”

Echoing statements the White House issued Thursday, Obama said he welcomed public discussion on the issue and recognized that some might have different views about how much privacy should be sacrificed in the fight against terrorism.

“I welcome this debate. And I think it’s healthy for our democracy,” the president said. “I think it’s important for everybody to understand, and I think the American people understand, that there are some trade-offs involved.”

Obama pointed to mentions of such trade-offs that he made in a speech last month about ending the war on terror. However, he did not explain how Americans could assess the balance he described without having an understanding of the program that did not emerge in detail until the leak of a top-secret court order this week.

(WATCH: NSA reactions in under 60 seconds)

Asked by POLITICO if his embrace of the debate meant he welcomed the leak, Obama indicated he did not, and said the unauthorized release of classified information can help terrorists evade detection.

“I don’t welcome leaks, because there’s a reason why these programs are classified,” he said. “If every step that we’re taking to try to prevent a terrorist act is on the front page of the newspapers or on television, then presumably the people who are trying to do us harm are going to be able to get around our preventive measures.”

Obama also dismissed what he called “some of the hype” suggesting that the government is broadly tapping phone calls and reading emails.

While details of phone numbers dialed and the duration of calls are collected, “nobody is listening to your telephone calls,” Obama insisted. “That’s not what this program’s about. …They are not looking at people’s names, and they’re not looking at content.” But by analyzing metadata, investigators “may identify potential leads with respect to folks who might engage in terrorism,” and go back to courts to get permission to listen in on calls.