Senators: Too much focus on college degrees - MJ Lee
With federal student loan debt mounting across the country, lawmakers across the political aisle are in agreement that Washington must help emphasize that jobs training can be just as valuable to young Americans as a college degree.

Speaking at POLITICO’s Jobs of the Future event Wednesday, Sen. Ron Johnson (R-Wis.) said the out-of-control level of student loan debt in the United States is in part due to the widespread suggestion that a young person is a “second-class citizen” if he or she doesn’t attain a four-year college degree.

Text Size -

+

reset POLITICO's Jobs of the Future Play Slideshow Blumenthal: Need ‘different concept’ of higher ed

“We’ve actually made college less accessible because we’ve made it so unaffordable and we’ve plunged our children into debt,” Johnson said. “Let’s give our children and their parents the full range of options. Let’s quit preaching to them that their only path to success is a four-year degree.”

(PHOTOS: POLITICO's Jobs of the Future)

Johnson said another problem contributing to the rising amount of student loan debt is that many young people are taking as many as six years to complete their four-year college program, sometimes only to graduate with degrees that employers don’t value.

“They can work. They can go to vocational college,” the senator offered as an alternative.

The increase in student debt has become an issue of increasing concern, with economists and regulators arguing it could weigh down the economy. If graduates have to spend a lot of their income paying down their student loans they have less money to buy a home and make other investments.

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau announced Wednesday that federal student loan debt has topped $1 trillion.

One of Johnson’s Democratic colleagues, Sen. Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut, agreed that there is a need to highlight the value of two-year degrees and community college education.

“We need to have a different concept of higher education in so far as part-time, full-time, and of course the means of financing,” Blumenthal said at the POLITICO event. ”How can you start a business, how can you build a family, how can you buy a home, how can you be a consumer, which is vital to economic progress and job creation, if you’re paying off a $90,000 loan?”

But the Connecticut lawmaker lamented Washington gridlock, calling the filibuster in the Senate a “major obstacle” to legislative accomplishments including keeping student loan interest rates low.

Interest rates on federally subsidized Stafford loans doubled earlier this month from 3.4 to 6.8 percent because Congress failed to reach an agreement to prevent the rate hike.

House Republicans have gotten behind a proposal that would have prevented this hike but it would have allowed these rates to fluctuate with the market. The Obama administration opposes this plan.

Meanwhile, lawmakers in the Senate have been working to reach an agreement on student loans after attempts to keep the rates at 3.4 percent failed. Several senators, including Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) have introduced legislation aimed at helping student borrowers.