GOP targets Alaska's Mark Begich over carbon tax - Darren Goode
The National Republican Senatorial Committee Wednesday will launch a robo-call campaign in Alaska targeting Sen. Mark Begich for his support of a carbon tax.

NRSC plans to call nearly 70,000 households statewide about what it calls the Alaska Democrat’s “steadfast support for the costly carbon tax,” according to a script of the calls provided to POLITICO. A carbon tax means “more EPA red tape regulation,” says the script, which cites National Association of Manufacturers’ data to contend it would increase electricity, natural gas and gasoline prices and hurt Alaskan jobs.

Text Size -

+

reset

“Sen. Begich didn’t paint that picture for you did he?” says the script. “Higher taxes, higher energy costs and Sen. Begich just don’t work for Alaska.”

The NRSC is aiming the calls at all female voters and likely male swing voters across the state.

(PHOTOS: Senators up for election in 2014)

The claims are based on Begich’s support for a non-binding amendment to this year’s budget resolution by Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse (D-R.I.) that would have called for any revenue generated by a carbon tax to be “returned to the American people in the form of federal deficit reduction, reduced federal tax rates, cost savings or other direct benefits.”

That amendment failed 41-58, and drew opposition from 13 Democrats. Opponents included Democrats Mary Landrieu of Louisiana, Kay Hagan of North Carolina and Mark Pryor of Arkansas, who, like Begich, are running for reelection in 2014 in politically red states.

Begich also voted against a budget resolution amendment from Sen. Roy Blunt (R-Mo.) to require 60 votes to approve a carbon tax. Landrieu and Pryor were among eight Democrats that supported the Blunt amendment, which received 53 votes but fell short of the 60 it needed.

House lawmakers passed language this summer essentially opposing a carbon tax by requiring congressional approval before one could be implemented.

Begich’s campaign manager Susanne Fleek, in an emailed response to the NRSC robo-call, said, “As Sen. Begich has said before, Alaskans don’t appreciate out-of-state groups telling Alaskans what to think and this is no exception.”

(WATCH: Mark Begich goes after No Child Left Behind)

Begich led several possible Republican challengers – including former Gov. Sarah Palin – in a recent survey conducted by Public Policy Polling.

The Begich robo-calls come after the NRSC put up billboards criticizing Hagan, launched a TV ad against Landrieu and launched a website and Web video against Pryor on healthcare reform and other issues. The NRSC has also launched campaigns this month against Reps. Brian Braley (D-Iowa) and Gary Peters (D-Mich.), who are running for the Senate.

Below is the full script of the Begich robo call: