President Obama on Hill's Obamacare mess: I'm on it - John Bresnahan and Jake Sherman
President Barack Obama privately told Democratic senators Wednesday he is now personally involved in resolving a heated dispute over how Obamacare treats Capitol Hill aides and lawmakers, according to senators in the meeting.

The president’s commitment was delivered at the beginning of Obama’s remarks to Senate Democrats during a closed-door session.

Text Size -

+

reset The state of Obama Obamacare funding vs. government shutdown

At issue is whether Obama’s health care law allows the federal government to continue to pay part of the health insurance premiums for members of Congress and thousands of Hill aides when they are nudged onto health exchanges.

(Also on POLITICO: Coburn seeks answers on Hill staff health coverage)

Currently, the government pays nearly 75 percent of these premiums. The government’s contributions are in jeopardy due to a controversial Republican amendment to the Affordable Care Act, which says that by 2014, lawmakers and their staff must be covered by plans “created” by the law or “offered through an exchange.”

The Office of Personnel Management hasn’t said if the Federal Employee Health Benefits program can contribute premium payments toward health plans on the exchange. If the payments stop, it could cost Hill staffers thousands of extra dollars each year.

The uncertainty is leading to dozens of lawmakers and aides considering leaving Capitol Hill.

It is extraordinarily rare, to say the least, for the president of the United States to get involved in an inside-the-Beltway flap over the payment of health care premiums.

(PHOTOS: 25 unforgettable Obamacare quotes)

Yet the anger over the administration’s inability or unwillingness to resolve this issue is bipartisan and deep. The feared so-called brain drain of congressional staffers over rising health care costs has become a topic of constant conversation on Capitol Hill.

Party leaders in both chambers want OPM to rule that the government can continue to contribute to health insurance premiums for members and staffers. OPM, though, has so far refused to say how it will handle the provision despite months of lobbying by lawmakers.

The controversy has to be resolved before Oct. 1, which is when members and staffers can begin enrolling in the exchanges.

At Wednesday’s meeting, Obama told the Democratic senators he was working to find a solution and that the administration will soon present its plan to top lawmakers in both parties.

(PHOTOS: 10 alarmist quotes on health law ruling)

“The president is aware of it,” said Illinois Sen. Dick Durbin, the No. 2 Senate Democrat. “His people are working on it.”

Some lawmakers have privately threatened to push through a legislative fix — possibly attached to a must-pass spending bill — that would require the government to continue its contributions for health care premiums for Hill employees.

However, that could open a door for Obamacare opponents to try to unwind other parts of the 2010 legislation, and senior administration officials want to avoid that step or the accusation that lawmakers and Hill aides are getting any kind of special treatment.