Virginia governor race 2013: Ken Cuccinelli, Terry McAuliffe polar opposite on guns and proud of it
BLACKSBURG, Va. — Democrat Terry McAuliffe and Republican Ken Cuccinelli have staked out polar opposite positions on gun control, but both view it as a winning issue in the home stretch of the Virginia governor’s race.

McAuliffe supports an assault weapons ban, expanded background checks and limits on high-capacity magazines.

Text Size -

+

reset

Cuccinelli opposes all those things, saying improved treatment for mental illness is the key.

“I’m an A-rated NRA candidate,” the Republican attorney general said Thursday night during the final debate of the race. “I’m running against the only F-rated candidate running statewide.”

(POLITICO's full coverage of gun control issues)

The debate was on the campus of Virginia Tech, where a student killed 32 and injured 24 in 2007. The Democrat spoke of visiting a memorial earlier in the afternoon and wore a ribbon to honor the victims.

“I don’t care what grade I got from the NRA,” McAuliffe said. “I never want to see another Newtown or Aurora or Virginia Tech ever again.”

McAuliffe’s eagerness to slam the NRA was notable. He stressed during the same debate that he would be a governor in the tradition of former governor and now Sen. Mark Warner, who ran for office as strongly pro-gun in 2001 and 2008.

Virginia political analyst Bob Holsworth called McAuliffe’s defiance of the NRA the most interesting feature of the night.

(Also on POLITICO: Ken Cuccinelli lashes out at Terry McAuliffe)

“He is obviously betting that the political landscape of Virginia has been altered dramatically over the past decade,” Holsworth wrote for POLITICO.

Indeed, Warner broke with the NRA this year to support expanded background checks. And the state’s most recent Democratic governor, Tim Kaine, won a Senate seat last year despite an “F” rating from the group.

The candidates’ diametrically opposed views on guns underscore how the governor’s race increasingly has become a base election in the final weeks. Turnout is expected to be even lower than usual for an off-year election.

Cuccinelli believes that many independents will be turned off by the tens of millions in biting attack ads that pop up every commercial break. He sees his path to victory as getting his true believers to the polls in greater numbers than Democrats, who may despise him but are only lukewarm about McAuliffe.

(PHOTOS: Ken Cuccinelli’s career)

Stopping perceived attacks on the Second Amendment inspires conservatives like few other issues.

Despite the clear contrast, guns have not been a major issue all year until now.

But with McAuliffe likely to win — he’s up in the high single digits in poll after poll — national gun control groups seem intent on trying to inject the the issue as much as possible into the final two weeks of the race.

A McAuliffe win would be a high-profile “win” for those groups, especially after two Colorado legislators were recalled last month over their support for gun control.

New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg is investing $1.2 million of his own money into Virginia TV ads through his super PAC. He also spent $1 million helping newly-elected New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker near the end of a race in which he was heavily favored to prevail.

(PHOTOS: Terry McAuliffe’s career)

The NRA’s chief lobbyist, Chris Cox, notes that “there are a lot of issues at play” in the Virginia race beyond guns, such as the federal government shutdown.

“Bloomberg is trying to buy some relevancy,” Cox said in an interview. “It’s clear what he’s trying to do.”

A spokesman for Bloomberg’s group attacked the NRA for trying to downplay a potential Democratic victory.

“I suppose if I were endangering families in Virginia and all across the country by fighting to let criminals and the dangerously mental ill get guns without background checks, I’d try and change the subject too,” emailed Stu Loeser.

McAuliffe’s campaign, trying to galvanize the coalition that elected President Barack Obama, has happily gone along. He went to New York this summer and asked for Bloomberg’s backing during a private meeting. His advisers have cited polls showing that 90 percent of people support expanded background checks to argue that voters are on their side.

Other gun control groups are spending heavily, too.

Americans for Responsible Solutions, the group backed by former Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, said earlier this month that they would at least match the $500,000 that the NRA committed to spend on TV for Cuccinelli.

(Also on POLITICO: Who won the Virginia debate? Experts weigh in)

It has sent a series of mailers to independent women voters, and Giffords’ husband Mark Kelly held a telephone town hall after the debate aimed at this constituency.

The Coalition to Stop Gun Violence, meanwhile, got more than 60 people directly affected by the Virginia Tech tragedy to sign a letter criticizing Cuccinelli’s record.

While the voter makeup of Virginia has undoubtedly changed, it remains at core a conservative state outside of the Washington, D.C. suburbs.

Virginia is home to the NRA headquarters, and Mitt Romney held a huge rally in this part of the state with NRA chief Wayne LaPierre last October to tout the group’s endorsement.

So it’s no coincidence that Bloomberg’s ads are only running in the Washington media market. They attack Cuccinelli on background checks, saying he opposed having them at gun shows.

(Also on POLITICO: Cuccinelli links McAuliffe to Obamacare)

The NRA, meanwhile, is running a spot out in this part of the state attacking the Democratic candidate for attorney general, Mark Herring, as a tool of Bloomberg.

Cuccinelli also attacked Bloomberg’s ads during the debate, which he said “falsely claim” that more gun laws will stop violence.

Cox noted that McAuliffe, as he attacks the NRA, still pays lip service to being a hunter and a “strong supporter of the Second Amendment.”

“That’s a great soundbyte,” Cox said, “but it’s not true.”