Obamacare: Pre-existing conditions
This article is an excerpt from “Understanding Obamacare: POLITICO’s Guide to the Affordable Care Act,” a new, comprehensive guide to help POLITICO’s readers cut through the spin and learn how the law really works – and what may not work the way Congress planned. The complete series of articles is available here, and the entire guide can be downloaded here.

If you’ve listened to President Barack Obama and the Democrats talk about the need for Obamacare, it may be hard to tell what the law is “about.”

Lower costs? Whacking the insurance companies? Covering young adults? Covering contraceptives? The sales pitch has changed over the years, sometimes from speech to speech.

But perhaps the biggest change for consumers, as the law becomes part of their everyday lives, is also the benefit that may give the Obama administration its biggest chance of closing the sale: the coverage of adults with pre-existing conditions.

This is one of the biggest pieces of the law that is supposed to start in 2014, and it will be a huge selling point when Democrats talk about the benefits. When you sign up for Obamacare coverage — which is aimed at people who don’t get health insurance through the workplace or other sources — the insurers won’t be able to turn you down if you have health problems, or charge you more because of them.

Children with pre-existing conditions are already covered — that part of Obamacare took effect in September 2010. But adults with health problems are more expensive to cover, because people are more likely to develop chronic conditions or other issues as they get older. That’s why adults couldn’t be covered until the rest of the law was in place, so the cost of their illnesses could be spread among a larger population of sick and healthy people.

There are a lot of things for critics to hate about the law — the individual mandate, the cuts in Medicare payments — and every problem with the rollout will get a harsh spotlight. But most Republicans aren’t complaining about the pre-existing condition coverage. That’s because pre-existing conditions affect enough people — from all political parties, in all parts of the country — that it’s hard for them to attack the law on those grounds.

There’s no broadly accepted estimate for how big the problem is. A 2011 study by the Department of Health and Human Services said the number of people with pre-existing conditions could be as low as 50 million non-elderly Americans or as high as 129 million, which is a pretty wide range. But even if you use the lowest number, 50 million, that’s almost one out of five Americans under age 65, including 25 million who are uninsured.

Conservatives don’t think that many people have actually been shut out of coverage. The American Enterprise Institute’s Tom Miller, for example, estimates that only 2 million-4 million Americans have been blocked from getting coverage because of their health. He says a lot of the uninsured people identified by HHS might lack coverage for reasons that have nothing to do with pre-existing conditions.

Still, the prospect of not being able to get coverage because of a health problem is deeply scary to people of all political stripes. That’s the message Clint Murphy, a former Republican operative in Savannah, Ga., who survived testicular cancer, sent in his widely publicized Facebook post aimed at Republicans who want to defund Obamacare.

“I’d say there’s a lot more of us than people think,” Murphy said. When someone has been through an illness like cancer — or even when they just have a common condition like high blood pressure — it becomes harder to leave the security of a job with a group health plan that covers pre-existing conditions, he said.

“If you’re in a group environment, you can get in a group plan. So it’s not an issue for you,” Murphy said. But if someone with a health condition wants to start a business — or switch careers to become a realtor, where there’s no easy access to a group health plan — “this really becomes a big barrier,” Murphy said.

Republicans in Congress, however, say there are other ways to cover pre-existing conditions without remaking the insurance market the way Obamacare does. That’s the idea behind the bill by Rep. Tom Price of Georgia, which is one of the few GOP alternatives currently in the mix. It would let people with health issues get their coverage through trade associations, alumni associations and other groups that could also spread the costs of sick and healthy people.

That way, people who join those associations couldn’t be rejected for pre-existing conditions “for the same reason that Coca-Cola or UPS or Home Depot doesn’t turn you down — you’re part of a larger group,” Price said.

But a House vote on Price’s bill — or other GOP alternatives, like the one by the conservative Republican Study Committee — would present its own problems, since Republicans don’t all agree on whether it’s smart to offer an alternative. Many would rather just keep the focus on Obamacare and see if it collapses. So that leaves Obamacare as the only real player on pre-existing conditions.