House Republican leaders: Debt hike is the better fight - Jake Sherman and John Bresnahan
A government shutdown is looming on Oct. 1. But don’t worry about it.

That’s the message the House Republican leadership and its allies are spreading as Congress moves toward a fiscal showdown with President Barack Obama and the Democrats, a clash with huge political and economic ramifications for both parties.

Text Size -

+

reset Obama marks 5 years since beginning of financial crisis

Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio), Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R-Va.), Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy (R-Calif.) and their allies are instead privately urging rank and file to forgo a clash over government funding — and a possible government shutdown — and instead dig in against Obama and the Democratic Senate when the debt ceiling needs to be lifted sometime next month.

(Also on POLITICO: GOP staffers want to stop Vitter)

Boehner and his top lieutenants believe that digging in for a fight over the debt ceiling gives them more leverage against Obama and Democrats. Republicans hope to take advantage of Obama’s desire to blunt $20 billion in sequester cuts that kick in Jan. 1 to reach a broader budget deal with the White House.

There’s even been chatter in and around leadership about holding a vote on a debt ceiling bill before the government funding measure — a way to satiate conservatives’ budget-cutting hunger and help avoid a government shutdown.

Center stage in all of this is funding Obamacare. Roughly 30 Republicans refused to vote for a government funding bill if it provides money for the health care law. GOP leadership thought giving those lawmakers a vote on defunding the law and kicking it over the Senate would be enough.

They were wrong.

Now instead of leadership’s strategy of moving the fight to the Senate, Republicans are coalescing around having the battle in the House. That’s why leadership’s strategy is far from certain to work.

(Also on POLITICO: Tough Hill vote on Syria fades)

According to internal House GOP counts, roughly two-dozen House Republicans are refusing to vote for a continuing resolution that funds Obamacare. After rejecting Cantor’s funding plan — which would’ve funded the government at the $988 billion level while including nonbinding language defunding Obamacare — dozens of Republicans have signed on to a bill by Rep. Tom Graves (R-Ga.), which funds the government at $967 billion in 2014 while delaying implementation of Obamacare until 2015.

Those aren’t the only challenges.

House GOP leadership has acknowledged to Democrats that it has no idea how it’s going to cobble together a package to boost the debt ceiling, so urging a fight there is far from a fireproof move.

Early discussions have begun over the debt ceiling, and Republicans want their opening bid to tie elements of entitlement reform to the debt ceiling, a laughable request for Democrats and the White House.

But Boehner admitted to Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.) in a private session last week that he is not even sure he has the votes to pass a debt ceiling package with entitlement cuts. He also admitted that passing a CR will be a heavy lift.

Boehner also has assured Wall Street and K Street that he will not allow the U.S. government to default on its debt — effectively removing some of his leverage in the battle.

Furthermore, Obama and Reid are telling anyone who will listen that they will not negotiate over the debt ceiling.

“We can’t negotiate around the debt ceiling,” Obama said during an interview aired Sunday on ABC’s “This Week.” “If Mr. Boehner has ideas about how we can grow this economy, strengthen the middle class, put people back to work in a serious way, of course we’re happy to, you know, support the negotiations that are taking place between the House and the Senate.”

But time is running short. The September House recess is almost certain to be canceled. This week holds big political ramifications in the House.

At this point, there’s almost no doubt that Boehner, Cantor and McCarthy will have to fight back with something drastic to squeeze a government funding bill through the House.

The rejection of Cantor’s CR proposal last week was widespread throughout GOP ranks. The internal Republican opposition was both ideological and strategic — rank-and-file lawmakers thought that their leadership was giving up too easily on defunding the health care law. Cantor privately told Republicans that there were no more than 190 GOP votes for his plan, far short of the 217 votes needed to pass the legislation, according to sources involved in those talks.