Ted Cruz delivers stemwinder at Iowa’s Reagan Dinner - Maggie Haberman
DES MOINES, Iowa – Sen. Ted Cruz exhorted the party faithful at Iowa’s Reagan Dinner Friday to join a grassroots insurgency against the Washington establishment, in a speech at an event that was part fundraiser and part tea party rally.

Cruz (R-Texas), who has achieved newfound fame since the government shutdown, delivered a stemwinder in which he blamed Senate Republicans for not holding the line against Democrats over defunding Obamacare, bashed the Washington consulting class, Obamacare and the media, and called on attendees to join the movement by signing up for his email list.

Text Size -

+

reset

“I’m convinced we’re facing a new paradigm in politics,” Cruz, who spoke for 45 minutes without notes or a teleprompter, told the crowd of about 600 people at the Iowa Events Center. “It is the rise of the grass roots … it has official Washington absolutely terrified.”

(PHOTOS: Key quotes from Ted Cruz)

“This new paradigm has been beta-tested, unlike the Obamacare website,” Cruz said to applause. “It was beta-tested in 1980 with the Reagan Revolution and it pulled this country back form the brink.”

The senator and potential 2016 contender defended his futile battle to defund Obamacare — which led to the two-week-plus government shutdown and damaged the GOP’s already suffering national image — that some in his party’s congressional leadership have since called a tactical blunder.

“One of the things we accomplished in the fight over Obamacare is we elevated the national debate over what a disaster, what a train wreck, how much Obamacare is hurting millions of Americans across this country,” Cruz insisted to the crowd.

(QUIZ: Do you know Ted Cruz?)

House Republicans were “a profile in courage [who] stood strong and listened to the American people,” Cruz said, adding that Democrats who voted to give themselves what he called a special exemption on Obamacare would see that move come back to haunt them in ads in the 2014 midterm.

“We didn’t accomplish our ultimate policy goal in this battle and we didn’t because unfortunately a significant number of senate Republicans chose not to unite and stand side by side with House Republicans,” he said. “Had we stood together I’m.convinced the outcome of this fight could have been be very” different.

Cruz insisted he was undeterred, although he didn’t offer a specific alternative to reporters who pressed him after the speech.

“We all understood it was going to be an ongoing effort,” he told the crowd. “In time the [United States] Senate will listen as well to the American people.”

(WATCH - Cruz’s “fauxibuster”:10 colorful quotes)

In a reference to the NSA spying scandal, Cruz said, “For anyone who has your cell phones here please them on – I want to make sure President Obama hears everything we say.”

And he saved some of his toughest criticism for the New York Times. “They will tell you this battle accomplished nothing,” Cruz said of the newspaper. “Collectively, we accomplished a great deal. “

In speech after speech, Republican party officials as well as Cruz’s colleague, Sen. Chuck Grassley, rattled sabers and urged the grass roots to stand strong. One official, Christian conservative activist and national committeeman Steve Scheffler, delivered the prayer before the dinner was served, saying Republicans need more officials willing to “basically be crucified” for their beliefs and to take “arrows [to the back] of the head.”

It stood in stark contrast to a speech just before Cruz, delivered by Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad, who called for party unity and invoked Ronald Reagan’s 11th commandment, that Republicans should not criticize one another.

Indeed, this single event – it was the annual fall Reagan Dinner, which the party uses as a showcase of top talent in order to sell tickets – felt very much like a series of different rallies.