Nix, not fix: GOP pushed on health law
Republican primary candidates are caught in an Obamacare fix.

Even the slightest hint that a GOP contender might support anything besides all-out repeal of the health care law is drawing attacks from the right. So, increasingly, in races across the country, proposals to fix the existing law or retain any of it are being ruled out by Republicans eager to further burnish their conservative credentials.

Text Size -

+

reset Sunday shows in 90 seconds

It’s a dicey situation for both establishment Republican candidates and their tea-party inspired opponents.

Health care looks to be the dominant issue of the 2014 midterm elections, so it’s natural that GOP candidates in a primary, especially those taking on incumbents, would try to outflank each other on the right. But Republican pollsters warn that it’s hard to paint many of the current crop of GOP candidates as not anti-Obamacare enough and that it could backfire on opponents who try. Democrats, meanwhile, are hoping the primary drama turns into another case of GOP overreach that ultimately alienates moderate voters in the general election.

(PHOTOS: 10 Sebelius quotes about Obamacare website)

Rep. Jack Kingston, who is running for an open Senate seat in Georgia, learned the dangers of the “don’t fix it, just nix it” dynamic earlier this month when he argued against simply letting Obamacare fail.

The congressman mentioned in a radio interview that “a lot of conservatives say ‘No, just step back and let this thing fall to pieces on its own,’ but I don’t think that that’s always the responsible thing to do. I think we need to be working for things that improve health care for all of us.”

His opponent Paul Broun, a fellow GOP House member, quickly accused Kingston of wanting to “keep” Obamacare.

(PHOTOS: 12 Democrats criticizing the Obamacare rollout)

He cited Kingston’s vote for a Republican-sponsored bill that was intended to protect people set to lose their health insurance next year by letting them keep policies that would have been canceled under Obamacare. The White House opposed the bill, arguing it would undermine the new health law’s standards. Broun was one of just four Republicans who voted against the measure; he said it was because it didn’t go far enough to scrap the law.

“I don’t want to fix Obamacare. I want to get rid of it,” Broun said in blasting Kingston, whose campaign responded by saying he still wants to repeal the law.

The health care law is complex, and as more of its elements kick in, it will become impossible to repeal in its entirety. Even if Republicans capture the Senate in 2014, President Barack Obama has vowed to stop them from dismantling his signature legislative achievement.

(PHOTOS: 10 Sebelius quotes about Obamacare website)

In addition, polls have shown substantial support for parts of the law, such as requiring insurance companies to cover people with pre-existing conditions, or allowing young adults to stay on their parents’ plans until they are 26 — a provision that the White House says has already covered more than 3 million people.

It’s tough to say whether voters might abandon a Republican candidate altogether based on the nuances of how much he or she wants to gut the health care law, but Democrats, nonetheless, see an opening. They point to fresh polls that show slightly more voters want to “implement and fix” the law than to “repeal and replace” it — the mantra the GOP has long used.

“The question for voters in these races is not whether they support or oppose the law,” said Matt Canter, deputy executive director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, “but do they want a candidate who will work to fix it or a Republican who is hell-bent on repealing the law, wasting money and continuing the same partisan battles of the last several years.”

Iowa Senate candidate Matt Whitaker was criticized earlier this year when he suggested that parts of the law might be worth keeping. “We don’t want to throw the baby out with the bath water,” he told a Des Moines Register columnist in May. “It’s a very easy sound bite to say ‘repeal Obamacare,’ or ‘repeal the Affordable Care Act,’ but there are actually some good things.”

The blowback in the crowded primary field led the former U.S. attorney to announce that he had examined the law more closely and found nothing good in it, something The Iowa Republican, a widely read blog, branded a “flip-flop.” Whitaker then signed a pledge to try to defund the law.

That pledge has been promoted by the Senate Conservatives Fund, a group that has challenged establishment Republicans and opposes tinkering with the law. The group supported conservatives’ bid to halt the law’s implementation during a fiscal showdown in the fall, which led to a government shutdown. The shutdown badly damaged Republicans in the polls.