Nevada's Republican governor is 'all in' on ACA
In a Republican party that’s gone all out against Obamacare, Nevada Gov. Brian Sandoval went all in.

Sandoval is the only Republican governor whose state is both running its own health insurance exchange this year and expanding its Medicaid program under the health law. He’s arguably doing more to put the Democrats’ signature law into place than any other Republican.

Text Size -

+

reset

But in fully implementing Obamacare, Sandoval faces a double-edged sword: He’s helping bring health care coverage to a state with the second highest uninsured rate in the country, while he may be hurting his national ambitions because he’s not actively blocking the president’s law.

(PHOTOS: 12 Democrats criticizing the Obamacare rollout)

Sandoval has always maintained that he dislikes the health law and he’d like to see it repealed. But as long as it’s the law of the land, he says it is his job to make it work for the people of his state.

“I opposed the Affordable Care Act from its inception,” he wrote in an email. But he’s a former federal judge and in his view, once the Supreme Court upheld the legislation, “the Affordable Care Act became the law of the land.”

Even after sticking his neck out on Obamacare — which few others in his party would consider amid fear of a conservative backlash — Sandoval is overwhelmingly popular in Nevada. State lawmakers backed his Obamacare approach on a bipartisan basis, and he’s cruising toward reelection next year with no formidable opponent in sight.

(Next up: Obamacare worst-case scenario?)

“Sandoval’s approval numbers are stratospheric, so it’s a very small group of folks who are concerned about it,” said Jon Ralston, the state’s leading political analyst. The objections came from those on the far right who “seized on that because they don’t believe Sandoval is conservative enough.”

On health care, Democrats laud him too.

“I don’t know what the politics are from his standpoint but I think it’s the right decision,” said Democratic Rep. Dina Titus, whose Nevada district has one of the highest uninsured rates in the country. “People are signing up, fortunately, in Nevada and the website is working pretty well. We’ve been very aggressive.”

Politically, it helps that Nevada is a “purple” swing state with the second highest uninsured rate in the country and especially high uninsured rates among Hispanics, a key constituency that Republicans hope to attract. That makes it easier for the Republican governor to carry out President Barack Obama’s law.

(Also on POLITICO: Obamacare: Officials waited on announcing SHOP enrollment delay)

But Sandoval, 50, is also seen as a GOP up-and-comer, and Obamacare implementation could crimp any national ambitions if the health law remains as unpopular with Republicans as it is today. There’s a hint of early 2016 vice presidential buzz around Sandoval, and Obamacare implementation could be a big negative.

“I don’t think most Americans know that he’s one of the only Republican governors to implement,” the law, said Republican strategist Ron Bonjean. Bonjean noted that Sandoval has been more vocal with his opposition recently, “and it seems like he’s really going exactly where his constituents want him to be.” He’s trying to “thread the needle,” implementing in his state, while being clear about his record of opposing the law.

Nevada was one of the states that went to the Supreme Court in an unsuccessful bid to have the Affordable Care Act struck down. Sandoval says he still wants the law to be “dramatically changed or repealed.”

(Also on POLITICO: Jay Carney pushes back on Kathleen Sebelius report)

He’s ratcheted up his objections in recent weeks as Nevadans were among the millions of consumers who got cancellation notices from their insurance companies. “The fact is the president misled the American people when he promised they could keep their insurance if they liked it,” he said in the email.

Still, Sandoval has made decisions all along that differed from most Republican governors, who kept spurning much of a state role even after the Supreme Court ruling and Obama’s reelection.