GOP candidate’s Democratic giving past - Byron Tau
Many congressional candidates say on the stump that they want to work across the aisle.

But David Jolly, a Republican candidate for Congress running in a Florida special election, has taken it a step further — he’s given nearly $30,000 to the Democratic Party and Democratic candidates since leaving the Hill in 2006.

Text Size -

+

reset

His biggest contribution to a Democrat went to former Illinois Rep. Jesse Jackson Jr. — now serving time in a federal prison for campaign finance violations. But he’s also given thousands to liberal Democratic stalwarts like Sens. Dick Durbin and Barbara Mikulski, as well as the late Senate Appropriations Chairman Daniel Inouye, according to public records.

“David has been a strong Republican supporter as the numbers show. David also has personal relationships with Democrats and Independents, and in non-competitive races he has supported them,” said Sarah Bascom, a spokeswoman for Jolly. “David has said from day one that this race is about working together with Republicans, Democrats and Independents all for the betterment of Pinellas County.”

He has also given plenty of Repulicans over the years — including conservative favorites like Sen. Marco Rubio (R-Fla.). His donation history leans slightly towards the GOP — with about $36,000 in campaign donations to Republican committee and candidates since 2007.

But his long donation history — as well as his time as a registered lobbyist for Three Bridges Advisors and Van Scoyoc Associates — underscores the challenges that any K Streeter faces in running for office

While a bipartisan schedule of fundraisers is simply the cost of doing business for most lobbyists looking to have influence on Capitol Hill and in the White House, they’re a potential liability in any partisan primary, where voters are more likely to want aggressive confrontation — not bipartisan influence peddling and access seeking — from their nominees.

According to Federal Election Commission records, Jolly has donated to more than a dozen Democratic campaigns and leadership PACs during his time on K Street.

His most recent donation to a Democrat was in the summer of 2012, when he gave $1,000 to Rep. Michael Michaud — a liberal Democrat from Maine. Since 2010, Jolly has given $2,250 to Michaud — who is now running for governor of Maine against conservative firebrand Paul LePage.

He’s also backed Rep. Allyson Schwartz (D-Pa.) with two donations totaling $2,165. She’s now running for governor of the Keystone State against Republican Tom Corbett.

He gave a $1,000 contribution directly to the Democratic Party’s Senate arm, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee in 2007.

Jolly has also backed members of his state’s Democratic delegation. He’s given $2,500 to Sen. Bill Nelson (D-Fla.) over the years, plus another $2,000 to Nelson’s leadership PAC Moving America Forward. He’s also given campaign cash to Allen Boyd and Kathy Castor — both Florida Democrats who served in Congress at the time of the donations.

He also backed Charlie Crist when he was a Republican. Crist is now a Democratic candidate for Florida governor.

Other donations to Democratic members include checks to Reps. Chris Carney and Peter Visclosky and Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin.

Jolly is running to replace his former boss, the late Rep. Bill Young. The special election will be held in March.