For U.S. Sochi delegation: Diversity, not diplomacy
The Obama administration’s delegation to the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi includes two openly gay athletes — including tennis legend Billie Jean King — and, in a snub to Russian President Vladimir Putin, does not include the president, first lady or current members of the Cabinet.

President Barack Obama has been under pressure to respond to Russia’s tough laws against openly gay people, and appears to have in part done that with his picks to attend the games, announced Tuesday by the White House. King, the openly gay former tennis star, is headed to the opening ceremonies, while women’s ice hockey medalist Caitlin Cahow, also openly gay, is headed to the closing ceremonies.

Text Size -

+

reset

But with U.S.-Russia relations already icy and concerns about gay rights swirling, the administration has opted against sending any members of the first family or the vice president’s family, as has traditionally been the case.

First lady Michelle Obama led the U.S. delegation to London in 2012, while Vice President Joe Biden and Dr. Jill Biden led Americans at the opening ceremonies of the 2010 Winter Games in Vancouver, Canada. Despite human rights complaints from Americans including then-Sen. Obama, President George W. Bush traveled to Beijing for the 2008 Summer Olympics.

National Security Council spokeswoman Caitlin Hayden said the president’s schedule doesn’t allow for him to travel to Sochi, but that he intends to cheer on American athletes from Washington. “He knows they will showcase to the world the best of America – diversity, determination and teamwork,” Hayden said.

The delegation, she added, “represents the diversity that is the United States. All our delegation members are distinguished by their accomplishments in government service, civic activism, and sports. We are proud of each and every one of them and think they will serve as great ambassadors of the United States to the Olympic Games.”

While Tuesday’s White House statement addressed the administration’s concerns in broad terms, officials have repeatedly stressed their concerns about gay rights in Russia and their expectations that all attendees will be treated fairly.

“I can be very clear that our views on the issues that you mention with regard to Russia’s civil rights record have been abundantly clear, and we’ve made it clear that we expect Russia to conduct the Olympics in a way that respects the rights of all participants,” White House press secretary Jay Carney said last week.

Former Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano, who left the administration earlier this year to become president of the University of California, will head the U.S. delegation to the opening ceremony of the Sochi Games.

Napolitano will be joined at the opening ceremony by Ambassador Michael McFaul and White House deputy chief of staff Rob Nabors. Former Olympic gold medalist figure skater Brian Boitano will also attend.

The closing delegation will be led by Deputy Secretary of State William Burns, and will also include McFaul, as well as five-time speed-skating gold medalists Bonnie Blair and Eric Heiden.

Human Rights Campaign, a major gay-rights group that has repeatedly expressed concerns about holding the Olympics in Russia, welcomed the delegation picks.

“Given Russia’s deplorable law against LGBT people, the makeup of this delegation is entirely appropriate,” communications director Michael Cole-Schwartz said. “Particularly the inclusion of openly gay athletes sends a message to the world that the U.S. values the civil and human rights of LGBT people.”