Report: Think tanks tied to Kochs - Tal Kopan
A network of think tanks across the country is quietly pushing the agenda of right-wing groups with funding from Koch brothers-affiliated organizations, a new report alleges.

The study, by the liberal Center for Media and Democracy, is aimed at the State Policy Network, which describes itself as “dedicated solely to improving the practical effectiveness of independent, nonprofit, market-oriented, state-focused think tanks,” which are operating in all 50 states. The tax-exempt group seeks to “enable these organizations to better educate local citizens, policy makers and opinion leaders about market-oriented alternatives to state and local policy challenges.”

Text Size -

+

reset

But that’s not the full story, according to the Center for Media and Democracy, which bills itself as a nonprofit watchdog group. CMD alleges that rather than a loose coalition of locally focused think tanks, SPN’s organizations are using “dark money” — a term for money donated for elections without disclosing its source — from conservative and corporate donors like the Koch brothers to push a cookie-cutter conservative agenda at the state level.

“These aren’t just little think tanks that are doing nonpartisan research based on what’s happening in the state and really reflective of the culture of those states,” said Lisa Graves, executive director of the CMD, which has received funds from an organization linked to liberal billionaire donor George Soros. “These are a lot of groups that put together pretty cooked books on the issues they are peddling and have been criticized in state after state for how shoddy their research has been.”

According to the report’s analysis of IRS filings, the State Policy Network and its think tanks’ combined revenue in 2011 topped $83 million, in large part with funding from conservative money groups like the Donors Trust and Donors Capital Fund, which receive large donations from groups tied to the Koch brothers and other prominent conservatives. The State Policy Network’s associate members also include a who’s who of conservative organizations, including ALEC, David Koch’s Americans for Prosperity Foundation, FreedomWorks, Grover Norquist’s Americans for Tax Reform, the Cato Institute and The Heritage Foundation.

“It really is another part of the Kochtopus,” Graves said, using a nickname given to the network of the conservative Koch brothers.

State Policy Network refuted CMD’s report, saying each of its think tanks are “fiercely independent” and select their own topics of research.

“Every think tank, however, rallies around a common belief: the power of free markets and free people to create a healthy, prosperous society. They eschew a top-down D.C.-centric approach to running peoples’ lives,” State Policy Network President Tracie Sharp told POLITICO. “And we practice what we believe: There is no governing organization dictating what free market think tanks research or how they educate the public about good public policy.”

Sharp said like most nonprofits, State Policy Network keeps its donors private and voluntary.