Obama’s plan to save the Senate
President Barack Obama has a plan to save the Senate’s tenuous Democratic majority: Sell a populist message, try to make Obamacare work better and raise lots of cash.

And unlike previous years when Senate Democrats were mostly left to fight on their own, the White House is wasting no time coordinating its political and policy agenda with congressional leaders and vulnerable lawmakers.

Text Size -

+

reset Senate Dems get SOTU preview Obama on 2014 agenda PHOTOS: 10 tough Senate races for Democrats Play Slideshow

The 55-member Senate Democratic Caucus will meet with Obama on Wednesday at the White House, the first such session since October.

(PHOTOS: 10 tough Senate races for Democrats)

White House senior adviser Dan Pfeiffer and legislative director Katie Beirne Fallon have already briefed Senate leadership aides on the outlines of proposals Obama is considering for the Jan. 28 State of the Union address, and they’re expected to do the same with House Democratic leadership aides.

A Republican-controlled Senate and House would be a nightmare for the president, likely reducing him to full lame-duck status as the GOP works to block what’s left of his agenda, including a minimum wage hike and climate change, as official Washington looks ahead to 2016.

At a low point in the Obamacare rollout in November, at-risk Democrats visited the White House and made clear that the final two years of Obama’s presidency would be a disaster if he were to lose the Senate this fall, according to attendees. Obama made clear he shared their fears about the challenges to his agenda and his nominees if Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) rises to majority leader, and he vowed to do whatever he could to keep control of the Senate, said sources familiar with the meeting.

“Particularly at a time when Washington is so polarized, if we do not have at minimum a Democratic Senate, it is very hard to see how we can make some of the advances that we need to make on work that is still undone,” Obama said at a Philadelphia fundraiser that month. “And I’ve got three years left in this office.”

(Also on POLITICO: The GOP's Obama obsession)

The electoral map this year favors the GOP, which has to win a net of six seats to take back the majority, including in red states like Montana, West Virginia, South Dakota, Louisiana, Arkansas and North Carolina.

Democrats hope messy GOP primaries in North Carolina and Georgia and McConnell’s own difficult reelection will imperil the Republican drive to the majority. But the president’s sagging popularity will burden Senate Democrats, particularly in red states, something the White House and top Democrats will have to grapple with as they try to use the bully pulpit against the GOP. Republicans, meanwhile, are making clear their November strategy will be all about the president.

The election-year agenda under discussion is a mix of initiatives designed to energize the Democratic base of women, students and blue-collar workers, and to attract independent voters. The aim is to highlight differences with the GOP and provide fodder for Democrats along the campaign trail — even though those measures stand little chance of winning approval in Congress.

(Also on POLITICO: Senate blocks jobless aid)

In private meetings across Capitol Hill, senior administration aides are talking about reviving proposals from the president’s American Jobs Act, which was used by Democrats repeatedly in the run-up to the 2012 elections. Specifically, they plan to push manufacturing issues, college affordability measures, such as the refinancing of student loans, and a host of women’s issues, including proposals they dub as “paycheck fairness” and more liberal workplace-leave policies.

The White House engagement so far ahead of the State of the Union is unusual. Lawmakers usually aren’t looped in on the discussions until days before the president delivers the speech.

“The agenda that the president will present in the State of the Union will be the focus of a sustained effort over the course of the year, and we’re hopeful that those on Capitol Hill who share these priorities will be similarly committed,” said Josh Earnest, a White House spokesman. “I anticipate they will be.”

Still, the single most important thing that Obama will do is raise money for the Democratic party committees, White House officials said.

(Also on POLITICO: Obama's pen-and-phone strategy)

He’s previously shown faint interest in congressional or gubernatorial politics. In 2012, the president was running for reelection and didn’t raise money for House and Senate Democrats. In 2010, as Democrats struggled with the backlash to Obamacare, the paramount concern was saving the House — which didn’t happen.

But last year, Obama hosted 27 fundraisers to benefit the Democratic National Committee, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. The White House is still working on a slate of events to benefit the party committees this year, but one senior administration official said the president would be very helpful.