So how many have paid ACA premiums?
The White House insists it doesn’t know how many people are fully enrolled in Obamacare but insurers say they’ve handed over enough data to show that the sign-up numbers are not as rosy as federal officials say.

The latest administration figures show that 4.2 million people have selected health plans in the new insurance markets. Insurance industry officials at four of the big national health plans tell POLITICO that about 15 to 20 percent people who have signed up have not yet paid their first monthly premium — the final step to get coverage.

Text Size -

+

reset

And they’ve told the White House the same, insurance industry officials say.

(Also on POLITICO: Full health care policy coverage)

“They have a lot more information than they’re letting on,” one industry source said of the Obama administration. “They have real hard data about the percent that have paid … If they have not processed those yet and compiled the data, that is a choice they are making. But they have that data now.”

That contention prompted Republicans on Capitol Hill to launch an inquiry Thursday to determine how many Obamacare sign-ups are actually paying. House Energy and Commerce leaders sent letters to insurers in 36 states requesting details on the total number of customers who have begun paying premiums.

“If the administration won’t provide transparency, we will work with every insurance provider to get the real picture the White House seemingly wants to hide from the public,” said Chairman Fred Upton (R-Mich.) in a statement.

Federal officials say they count sign-ups — people who select plans on HealthCare.gov or in state exchanges — because they can’t yet rely on the insurers’ figures. They say the industry reports are not comprehensive, and they change month to month.

(Also on POLITICO: Kathleen Sebelius: No more Obamacare delays)

“I can’t tell you because I don’t know that,” Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said Wednesday when Republicans asked about the number of paying Obamacare customers during hearings on Capitol Hill. “We don’t collect it.” She reiterated her contention Thursday, telling lawmakers that she’d provide the information as soon as it’s available.

The dispute emerges as the administration is trying to convey a sense of enthusiasm and momentum ahead of a March 31 deadline to enroll in exchanges. But unless the current pace doubles, the administration won’t hit its target of 6 million people — a goal that was already scaled back from 7 million after last October’s messy rollout of HealthCare.gov.

But the hill to climb may be even steeper than the White House acknowledges. Once the premium payment rate is factored in, the actual count of people who now have health coverage under the president’s health law could be closer to 3 million than 4 million. The insurance exchanges may still work with fewer people — but the political narrative is that the controversial health law is again falling short.

(Also on POLITICO: Administration: 4.2 million people signed up for Obamacare plans)

The White House insists that industry claims notwithstanding, it can’t provide precise enrollment totals — and may not be able to for months because major, “back end” components of HealthCare.gov are still under construction. Those pieces are supposed to collect data directly from insurers about the number of premium-paying customers on their rolls.

Last month, White House spokesman Josh Earnest said reporters would have better immediate luck getting accurate coverage numbers from insurers.

“Questions about who exactly has paid for the health insurance can best be directed to those private insurance companies that are collecting those payments,” Earnest said.

Of course, there are hundreds of insurers and not all of them have readily released their number of paying Obamacare customers. Several major ones have, however.

(Also on POLITICO: Lance Bass visits W.H., flubs site address)

Aetna and Health Care Services Corp., two of the country’s largest insurers, told POLITICO that through February, about 80 percent of their exchange customers had paid. Officials from WellPoint and Blue Shield of California said about 85 percent of subscribers had submitted premiums. A handful of other large- and medium-sized insurers told The New York Times last month that about four of five of their January customers had paid.