Obama fund binds pre-K, defense money
President Barack Obama wants to link a major cash infusion for education and other domestic priorities to new spending for the Pentagon, but his strategy of chaining them together risks sinking the proposal for everyone.

The president plans to include a request for some $58 billion in new spending in addition to the full budget he sends Congress on Tuesday, officials say, in what the administration calls its “Opportunity, Growth and Security Initiative.” The problem for the Departments of Defense, Education and other agencies is that proposals include one or more poison pills for Republicans.

Text Size -

+

reset

Many Republicans have already said the main defense budget previewed by Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel on Monday was a nonstarter, and also appear likely to balk at the “initiative,” which includes support for expanded pre-kindergarten programs, Head Start, energy efficiency incentives and other Democratic domestic priorities, as well as a more than $26 billion bonus for the Pentagon.

(Sign up for POLITICO’s Morning Education tip sheet)

Speaker John Boehner and other House Republicans slammed the door on Obama’s previous standalone attempt at universal Pre-K. This time, the White House has altered its approach, pairing its proposal with readiness assistance the military says it needs to undo some of the damage from last year’s sequestration. The wager is similar to the one the administration made in 2011 with sequestration, hoping to divide pro-defense Republicans from anti-spending Republicans and push ahead — a wager the White House lost.

This time, it believes it’s got a better shot: Hagel told reporters the extra request would be a good idea for everyone.

“These additional funds would be paid for with a balanced package of spending and tax reforms and would allow us to increase training, upgrade aircraft and weapons systems, and make needed repairs to our facilities,” he said. “The money is specifically for bringing unit readiness and equipment closer to standard after the disruptions and large shortfalls of the last few years.”

(Also on POLITICO: Common Core's 'critical juncture')

A senior military official, who spoke to reporters on the condition he not be identified, was even more candid. Sequestration played havoc with units’ ability to train, maintain their equipment and keep ready, he said, which is why the Pentagon needs an extra boost above the budget cap set by last year’s bipartisan cease-fire.

“Our near-term readiness remains one of our most critical risk factors,” the official said, and the $26 billion in the fund “would significantly mitigate that. If that was to be appropriated, we would put all that money against readiness and facilities — that’s just been gutted.”

Republican defense advocates hate that “gutting.” But they and many other Republicans also don’t want to increase spending beyond last year’s budget ceiling. Nor do many Republican critics want expanded Pre-K in any form, which they view as a needless new entitlement and a potential long-term electoral threat given the numbers of new teachers it might entail.

And Boehner made clear in a press conference Thursday that he already has all but ruled out Obama’s proposals.