Rick Scott: I’d veto Arizona SB 1062
Adding to the pressure on Gov. Jan Brewer from her own party to veto the controversial SB 1062 is another big-name Republican governor, Rick Scott, who said Wednesday he would veto a similar bill in his state.

“I don’t want to tell Gov. Brewer what to do, she can do what’s best for her state,” the Florida governor said, according to the Tampa Bay Times. “From my understanding of that bill, I would veto it in Florida because it seems unnecessary.”

Text Size -

+

reset

Brewer has faced calls from a number of prominent Republicans to reject the legislation, which would expand that state’s religious freedom protections to allow businesses to refuse service to customers on the basis of religious beliefs — largely considered a method to allow businesses to reject gay customers on religious grounds.

(WATCH: Arizona bill drives conversation GOP doesn't want)

Both of Arizona’s Republican senators, Sens. John McCain and Jeff Flake, as well as former presidential candidates Mitt Romney and Newt Gingrich have spoken out encouraging Brewer to veto the bill, which was sent to her desk Monday.

Scott, a Republican running for reelection this fall, said the bill would not make sense for Florida.

“In Florida, we are focused on economic growth, and not on things that divide us,” Scott said. “We are for freedom here in Florida. And we want everyone to come here, create jobs, and live in freedom, and that includes religious liberty. I am very much opposed to forcing anyone to violate their conscience or their religious beliefs, and of course, I’m very much opposed to discrimination. … Other states can spend their time fighting over issues like this, but in Florida we are laser focused on creating jobs and opportunities.”

(Also on POLITICO: Other states copy Arizona SB 1062)

The bill passed the state Legislature last week, and if Brewer does not either sign it or veto it within five days of its delivery to her, it will automatically become law. She has not yet indicated what she will do.

As for Scott, one of his potential Democratic challengers seized on his statement Wednesday as coming too late.

“Being against discrimination is not the kind of issue that requires much thought, but I am glad that after the justifiable outrage to Gov. Scott’s response to the issue, that he came around to the right position,” former Republican Florida Gov. Charlie Crist said.