Bill Clinton: ‘Nothing’ to Rove remarks
Text Size -

+

reset Rove on Clinton's health

Former President Bill Clinton on Wednesday defended his wife, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, from a number of attacks she has faced, including her response to Benghazi and recent questions about her health, saying he was “dumbfounded” by suggestions of brain damage.

“There’s nothing to it. I was sort of dumbfounded,” Clinton said during remarks at the Peter G. Petersen Foundation’s Fiscal Summit. He added, “First they said she faked her concussion, and now they say she is auditioning for a part on ‘The Walking Dead.’ I mean, you know, whatever it takes.”

Clinton laughed when moderator Gwen Ifill asked about Karl Rove’s comments regarding a blood clot the former first lady suffered in 2012 and whether she might have actually suffered a brain injury. Clinton said his wife is in great shape, but he said it was a terrible concussion that took six months of very serious work to get over.

(Also on POLITICO: As Clinton waits, O'Malley moves)

“Look, she works out every week, she’s strong, she’s doing great. As far as I can tell, she’s in better shape than I am, she certainly seems to have more stamina now,” he said. “If she does [have brain damage], then I must be in really tough shape, because she’s still quicker than I am.”

However, Clinton said such attacks are “part of the deal” and that he expects more from Republicans.

“First of all, I got to give [Rove] credit, that embodies that old saying, ‘Consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds,’” Clinton said.

(Also on POLITICO: Rove vs. Clinton)

“It’s just the beginning. They’ll get better and better at it,” he added, when asked if this is part of a strategy to bring up Hillary Clinton’s age if she runs in 2016.

But the former president didn’t seem to rule out the larger question it raises about a candidate’s health.

“When a question is asked, it has to be answered in a serious fashion, if it raises a serious issue, even in a ridiculous way,” Clinton said. “After that, you just have to trust the people to go on and get back to their business of what’s really in the public interest.”

Clinton also defended Hillary Clinton’s response to Benghazi, which has been another source of attack from the right.

(Also on POLITICO: Jeb 2016: The Bush battle within)

“In my opinion, Hillary did what she should have done, she impaneled a very high-level review committee,” Clinton said.

He noted the panel included former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike Mullen and diplomat Tom Pickering.

“They looked into what was wrong; they gave 29 recommendations; she took them and started implementing them,” Clinton added.

Clinton said the last time “we had one of these things made public” was during his presidency in 1998, following a series of attacks on U.S. embassies in Africa.

“And so most Americans don’t even know how many American diplomatic personnel were killed when President [George W.] Bush was president,” he said, adding that the public would not be aware of any review or action, if any were taken.

“My advice to everybody involved is to be not defensive and to realize what this is and to answer the questions,” Clinton said.

“No one had advance notice that this was going to happen, as nearly as I can tell,” he said. “So I just think that we should let the report speak for itself.”