Establishment takes on die-hard tea partier
The establishment scored huge victories in primary races Tuesday. Their next potential target: Rep. Justin Amash.

Business groups, executives in Michigan and even some of his fellow home state Republicans are abandoning the hard-line tea party conservative, famous in Washington for voting “no” on bills as wide ranging as the debt ceiling to defense funding.

Text Size -

+

reset

Members of the Meijers family, owners of the massive Midwest supermarket chain, are all in behind Brian Ellis, Amash’s Republican primary challenger. As are the political arms of Home Depot, Dow Chemical and the International Franchise Association.

The primary race is in the beginning stages of what could be an epic throwdown in August between the business community, usually reluctant to play in a Republican primary, and big conservative outsiders, including the Koch brothers and the Club for Growth, who are dumping money into Amash’s campaign.

(Also on POLITICO: Poll: Opposition to tea party rises)

It is just one example of the many battles playing out in Republican races all across the country, where an emboldened establishment wing has accused movement conservatives of straying too far from the party’s pro-business roots — and winning.

“Once you get to know [Amash], and I know that district from being around Michigan for long enough, he’s completely out of line with these people,” said Rep. Mike Rogers, a senior Michigan Republican in an interview. “He votes more with the Democrats than with the Republicans, and that’s not out of principle, that’s out of him branding himself as something different.”

Rogers even cut Ellis a $5,000 check, a bold move for a fellow Republican Michigander.

The president of the Michigan Chamber of Commerce said his group will consider endorsing Ellis, adding that many one-time Amash business supporters have switched their allegiances after growing frustrated with his voting record and unhelpful office on even routine matters.

And Amash isn’t getting love from the rest of his Wolverine State colleagues in D.C., either. Lawmakers and corporate and association PACs are typically wary of putting money up against a sitting member of Congress, but many have started to pour money into Ellis’ campaign. Ellis is the founder of an investment advisory firm.

(Also on POLITICO: Thom Tillis beats tea party challenge in North Carolina)

“Because my vote explanations shine a spotlight on Congress, I’ve upset people who are used to operating in the dark,” said Amash in a statement. “They don’t like having their votes exposed as fringe and outside the mainstream.”

Rep. Tim Walberg (R-Mich.) said he will stay neutral. Rep. Candice Miller (R-Mich.) said she didn’t know if she would weigh in, before running into the House chamber.

Rep. Devin Nunes (R-Calif.) said Amash isn’t a “serious member of Congress,” and added “this is someone here playing games, and trying to be on the opposite side of Republicans.” Nunes gave his opponent $5,000.

Nunes said his dealings with Amash on a water bill critical to California turned him off.

“He’s been leading the charge and not telling the truth about [NSA surveillance policies],” Nunes said in an interview. “He’s been fanning the flames, and it gets to the point where my assessment is this is a guy willing to work with San Francisco Democrats to protect bait fish, and at the same time he’s Al Qaeda’s best friend in the Congress.”

Amash has been critical of the National Security Agency and caused a floor fight last year over a controversial amendment to curb the agency’s ability to collect phone data from Americans.

(On the Ground: How Lindsey Graham outmaneuvered the tea party)

Amash defended himself against Nunes’ attacks.

“I vote less often with Nancy Pelosi, the real San Francisco Democrat, than any member of Congress. I opposed Nunes’ water bill on constitutional grounds, and his comments are unbecoming of a representative,” Amash said.

The push to try to beat back against the conservative flank is a continuing trend for the party. On Tuesday night, GOP establishment forces defeated a Rand Paul-endorsed candidate in North Carolina, and Speaker John Boehner obliterated a self-branded tea party challenger who had support from outside groups.

Main Street Partnership President Steve LaTourette said Tuesday night’s primary establishment victories will just increase how aggressive groups get in the upcoming primaries and general elections.

“They are looking for their first win of the season and I think our guys are happy with what happened in North Carolina and Ohio and if you look at that we’re going to remind [Club for Growth President Chris] Chocola every time,” LaTourette said.

LaTourette said that it is unlikely Main Street Partnership will enter the Amash race because it is focusing on defending Republican incumbents against conservative challenges.