Michelle Nunn unscathed in Senate run — for now
ATLANTA — When the polls close Tuesday night, Republican candidates and their outside allies will have dropped roughly $7 million tearing each other down (and occasionally promoting themselves) in this state’s critical Senate primary.

But one key figure will emerge virtually unscathed: Michelle Nunn.

Text Size -

+

reset Primary preview: Kentucky, Georgia Chamber eyes Ky., Ga. Senate races

Despite hailing from a political dynasty and entering the race nearly a year ago, the Democratic Senate candidate has remained largely undefined in the eyes of many voters. She’s endured only about $300,000 in attack ads lasting just nine days from a single conservative super PAC. She’s avoided much media scrutiny as attention focused largely on the fiercely competitive Republican primary.

(Also on POLITICO: Pro-McConnell groups to launch ads)

And as far as her own primary is concerned, she skipped at least seven debates and public forums with her long-shot Democratic opponents as she amassed a huge war chest in preparation for a ferocious general election battle.

The money Nunn has spent during the primary — some $1.1 million for ads — has gone toward projecting the former head of a community-service organization as a pragmatist and bipartisan bridge builder. She’s betting that mainstream voters, after watching her GOP opponents woo the right wing of the party, will settle on her as the voice of reason.

At the same time, Nunn is deft at avoiding specifics on policy questions that could cause her heartburn in the fall.

(Also on POLITICO: POLITICO poll: Mounting danger for Dems)

In an interview here in Atlanta, she refused to say whether she would have voted for Obamacare, would back Harry Reid as majority leader or even whether she thinks President Barack Obama is doing a good job.

“I’m not going to get into his job performance,” Nunn said. “My name is on the ballot; the president is not on the ballot this time.”

As for Reid, she said she would vote for whichever Democrat will vow to break gridlock in the Senate — but wouldn’t say if it is the Nevada Democrat.

“I will do it based upon an independent mind-set,” she said of her vote for majority leader.

(Also on POLITICO: NRCC aims for 245 House seats)

And while she’s critical of the president’s failure to control the deficit, she offered few clues on how she’d tackle the vexing issue, other than general promises to root out waste and help control health care costs. Asked if she’d back raising the retirement age, reducing annual Social Security payments or raising taxes, Nunn said: “None of us as individual senators are going to be able to embrace any one set of solutions. … We’ll have to sit around a table with people of goodwill in a bipartisan fashion to tackle the challenges.”

What’s happening in Georgia is emblematic of key Senate races across the country. Bitter Republican battles have given Democrats a chance in red states like North Carolina, Georgia, Alaska and Kentucky. But once the focus turns to the general election, Democrats in those conservative states will have to strike a difficult balance of exhibiting independence from their national party without alienating their base whom they need dearly to turn out in droves.

Buoyed by lingering admiration for her father, former Sen. Sam Nunn, and the contentious GOP Senate primary battle, a recent poll by the Atlanta Journal-Constitution showed her with narrow leads against her top Republican opponents — businessman David Perdue, former secretary of state Karen Handel and Rep. Jack Kingston. But the electorate has changed dramatically since her father left the Senate in 1997, powered by the growth of Atlanta and its surrounding areas in Northern Georgia.

In recent years, the state has grown more ethnically diverse, with growing black, Hispanic and Asian populations. The changing demographics have given Democrats hope they could turn this Republican stronghold into a perennial battleground.

For Nunn, that means beating back GOP accusations that she’s an Obama acolyte and a Reid foot soldier once the general election begins in earnest on July 22, after an all-but-certain Republican runoff.

“If I had a choice to vote for Sam Nunn, I would do it in a heartbeat,” said Frank Barnes, a retiree in Dalton, Ga., who was wearing a Perdue sticker. “I just don’t know how far the apple fell from the tree.”