Hillary Clinton pushes gun control, Obamacare
NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. — Hillary Clinton on Tuesday offered her most detailed comments on domestic policy in months, calling for tighter gun restrictions while also going to bat for Obamacare and warning that rising economic inequality is contributing to “social collapse.”

As to whether she’ll run for the White House, however, Clinton said she’s still mulling it because there’s “a cost to everything.”

Text Size -

+

reset

The former secretary of state, who would be the Democratic frontrunner in 2016 should she run, was delivering the keynote address at a conference held by the National Council for Behavioral Health, an organization that focuses on mental health.

“We have to rein in what has become [an] almost article of faith, that anybody can own a gun anywhere, anytime. And I don’t believe that,” she said, as applause drowned her out.

(Also on POLITICO: The Benghazi-Industrial Complex)

Clinton, who argued it was possible to hold her position and still support the right to gun ownership, warned that unfettered access to guns could have dangerous consequences. She called the country’s approach to guns “way out of balance,” and referred to cases in which gun violence has erupted over minor issues.

She painted a dark picture, warning that, “At the rate we’re going, we’re going to have so many people with guns everywhere, fully licensed, fully validated, in settings where [one] could be in a movie theater, and they don’t like someone chewing gum loudly or talking on their cell phone and decide they have the perfect right to defend themselves against the gum chewer or cell phone user by shooting.”

Clinton continued, “That’s what happens in the countries I’ve visited where there’s no rule of law.”

The proliferation of guns combined with few restrictions on where they can be carried can “give someone the means to respond in the moment in a way that he wouldn’t if a few minutes passed and there was no means to inflict harm … We really have got to get our arms around this,” she said.

(Also on POLITICO: Kaine backing Clinton for 2016)

Clinton also spoke in support of President Barack Obama’s health care law. While she has previously defended the law, she has also stressed she’s open to changing it in the future. But on Tuesday, she focused more on what she said were positive aspects of Obamacare.

“There have been many complaints and concerns about the Affordable Care Act, but I’ve been struck by the polling I’ve been reading,” she said. “Because it tells the same story: A small majority of Americans don’t think they like the Affordable Care Act, but a large majority of Americans don’t want to do away with the protections that are in the Affordable Care Act. A small majority wants to repeal it, but that is slowly receding as a rising majority says, ‘No, fix it.’ This is the tradition of good, old-fashioned American pragmatism.”

Her comments earned a positive reception in the audience, which included many health care professionals.

“Yes, there are things that can be fixed, but just the preexisting conditions elimination in and of itself is such a huge gift,” she said. “We never should have had to pass legislation for it.”

Clinton, who is perceived by some on the left as too moderate and friendly with Wall Street, spent a significant portion of her speech focused on the more populist-friendly issue of income inequality.

She warned of potential “social collapse” as she detailed the challenges facing people in poorer parts of the country, especially women. Some of those women are facing a shorter life expectancy than their mothers, she said —something that “correlates strongly with unemployment and economic stress.”

Clinton ticked through a standard list of Democratic priorities as answers to social ills.

“We need to be honest about what’s happening in our country,” she said. “We need [to] take a clear-eyed view about some of the causes of this social collapse.”

She called for expanded health care; affordable child care; raising the minimum wage; paid family leave and “for women we need to ensure equal pay for equal work,” among other policies.

“The debate about economic inequality is often carried out in political terms or economic terms, but it’s social, it’s a psychological challenge,” she said. “We need to start demonstrating our care for one another, particularly those that are struggling the hardest.”

As has become standard during her many public appearances, Clinton’s future also came up Tuesday.

“I am somebody who has to really mull things over because there is a cost to everything,” she said of her next political steps. “For me, it is exciting to be in the public arena, trying to do what I can to influence the public debate and speak out for people who may not have voices…I really appreciate doing all that, I just have to decide whether I’m ready to do that. So stay tuned.”

During the event, Clinton highlighted the work her family’s foundation is doing to promote mental health and fight drug addiction. She also nodded to New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio and his family, who were set to speak later Tuesday in honor of National Children’s Mental Health Awareness Day.

Clinton later posed backstage with the mayor’s daughter, Chiara de Blasio, who has been open about her struggles with substance abuse and depression and was slated to receive an award from outgoing Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius.

In one of the lighter moments during the lengthy speech and subsequent question-and-answer, Clinton was asked to name her ‘guilty pleasure.’ She cracked that she had to think of something “G-rated,” before picking chocolate.