Harry Reid’s new challenge: His fellow Democrats
Harry Reid has a new dilemma on his hands: restless Senate Democrats who are frustrated they aren’t casting enough votes.

For the past year, Reid and Republicans have bitterly sparred over the stunning inactivity in the Senate. But the majority leader is now facing growing pressure from fellow Democrats agitating over the lack of votes on amendments, a central aspect of legislating in the Senate.

Text Size -

+

reset

Led by Sen. Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota, a small but vocal group of mostly younger Democratic senators are meeting secretly and privately lobbying Reid to help ease the gridlock. While they blame Republicans for the bottleneck, they are pressing Reid to be more willing to entertain a freewheeling process, including more votes on amendments.

(Also on POLITICO: New leadership now less wealthy)

That type of shift might make eager lawmakers feel more productive, but it could also present challenges for vulnerable Democrats facing voters in the midterm elections.

If Reid were to allow more amendments, many Democrats in tough races would be forced to cast uncomfortable votes on health care, energy and social issues. Those votes could become fodder on the campaign trail and ultimately amount to precious little since few bills are expected to become law before November. Some votes could even threaten the party’s tenuous grip on the Senate majority.

Some Democrats are well aware of potential pitfalls but still support a less restrictive process.

(Also on POLITICO: Inside the vast liberal conspiracy)

“Does it mean increased risks? Sure. That’s what voting is about,” said Alaska Sen. Mark Begich, a rare vulnerable Democrat facing reelection who is pressing Reid to open things up. “At the end of the day, you are not going to say you’re not going to vote for things because you’re afraid of how that vote will look. The vote will look bad if you don’t take the vote, so why not take the vote so people know where you stand?”

The push for more votes is being fueled by junior senators, many of whom worry they have little to show voters back home.

On the floor a few weeks ago, one of the group’s members, Sen. Cory Booker of New Jersey, buttonholed West Virginia Sen. Joe Manchin to express frustration that the Senate was casting yet another vote to confirm a presidential nominee — not on legislation. According to people familiar with the exchange, Booker asked: Is that all the Senate does?

In addition to Begich, Manchin, Heitkamp and Booker, the group of Democrats who have met over the matter include freshmen Sens. Martin Heinrich of New Mexico, Chris Murphy of Connecticut, Joe Donnelly of Indiana and Tim Kaine of Virginia, as well as Angus King of Maine, an independent who caucuses with the Democrats. Claire McCaskill (D-Mo.), a second-term senator who won reelection last cycle, has been part of the discussions, and so has Sen. Mark Warner, who faces a potentially tough reelection in Virginia this fall.

(Also on POLITICO: How Congress brought the measles back)

Leaders “understand the frustration, it was very, very evident,” Manchin said of the group’s two meetings this month with Reid and other top Democrats.

Reid spokesman Adam Jentleson said the majority leader is encouraging the group to meet but sounded skeptical that his party could work with Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, who is facing his own tough reelection this year.

“Sen. Reid is pleased senators are engaged on this effort, but step one is finding a group of Republicans willing to work with us and so far that has not happened,” Jentleson said. “At the end of the day, the Senate has to overcome the McConnell rule of 60 votes for most major legislation, and neither these discussions nor any other efforts have yet convinced enough Republicans to join with us to clear that 60-vote hurdle.”

Other Democrats privately say that more votes aren’t worth the risk, given that Republicans would likely block the underlying bills anyway and prevent them from becoming law. So Democrats would be forced to cast bad votes — such as on amendments reaffirming their support for Obamacare — and have no legislative accomplishments to show for them.

(DRIVING THE DAY: Primary preview)

During their meetings this month, Reid and his full leadership team — including Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee Chairman Michael Bennet of Colorado — urged the group to find a noncontroversial bill that would win GOP support to use as a vehicle for a bipartisan amendment process.

Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) is serving as the conduit between that bloc and Reid.

So far, the group has yet to find a bill that fits that mold, a sign that finding bipartisan agreement for votes sounds easier than it actually it is.

Still, while most legislative sessions during election years are unproductive, freshmen Democrats have reason to be concerned.