Tom Cotton's message to voters: I'm no Grinch
Democrats are equally upbeat about Pryor’s chances. The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee has reserved $3 million in TV airtime in the cheap media markets here from July through Election Day, with a Harry Reid-aligned super PAC reserving nearly $2 million itself, according to sources tracking the buys. Far more money is expected to pour in on both sides.

Pryor, who is seeking a third term and faced no GOP opponent in 2008, said he hasn’t been “shy” pointing out Cotton’s “irresponsible” votes that show the Republican putting his “political interests ahead of what’s best for Arkansas.”

Text Size -

+

reset

The 51-year-old Pryor, who won his first term when he was 39, is trying to sell himself as a pragmatic-minded senator in the mold of the centrist Democrats like Clinton who long ruled the state. Pryor is benefiting from lingering goodwill from his father, David, a former three-term senator and ex-governor, and even his late grandfather, Edgar, a county sheriff in Southern Arkansas.

Pryor has faced his own deluge of scathing attacks from conservative outside groups linking him to Obama. Already some $13 million has been spent across the airwaves from both sides, according to media tracking sources.

“It feels like October when you turn on the TV,” the senator said.

Republicans are intent on turning the race into a referendum on Obama, relentlessly tying Pryor to the White House. When asked whether he approved of the president’s job performance, Pryor wouldn’t say.

“There are a lot of things about the president that I don’t approve of — in terms of his policies,” Pryor said, adding he’s worked with presidents of both parties.

Similarly, asked in a follow-up email if he would vote for Obamacare again if he had the chance, Pryor didn’t answer directly. He said the law “isn’t perfect” and he’d “work to make it better,” but “something needed to be done” to rein in the insurance industry.

‘Turning into the fire’

A model senator in Cotton’s eyes is Tom Coburn: a straight-shooting, staunchly conservative Oklahoman known to spar with both parties and who has earned the nickname “Dr. No.” Still, even Coburn flirted with compromise in the Senate, including expressing openness to increased tax revenues as part of a “grand bargain” to rein in the deficit.

It’s not clear where Cotton would bend.

Cotton defends his conservative stands even as he acknowledges the difficulty of defending them on the campaign trail.

“One of the first things that [my] drill sergeant taught me in basic training,” he said during the interview, “was that the basic lesson in the Army is you do the hard right over the easy wrong.” Spurred by the 9/11 attacks, Cotton joined the Army in 2005 as an infantry officer, later deploying to Iraq at the height of the violence there — before volunteering for a second tour of combat duty in Afghanistan in 2008.

The easy wrong, according to Cotton, includes the farm bill, which he derides as the “food stamp bill” for its provisions bolstering the welfare program. It is simply a “bad deal for Arkansas farmers,” Cotton said. However, Arkansas’ other senator, Republican John Boozman, has called the bill “a really good product.”

Cotton was the lone member of the Arkansas congressional delegation to back the fiercely conservative Republican Study Committee budget — a plan even more stringent than the budget plan authored by Rep. Paul Ryan that Democrats claim would “end Medicare as we know it.” The plan would rapidly transform the seniors’ health care program into one giving taxpayers more private control, which Cotton says is needed to preserve its long-term viability.

When Cotton was asked whether he believed Social Security should be privatized, he responded, “I wouldn’t say that,” before advocating for gradually raising the retirement age to 70. But in response to a follow-up question about whether taxpayers should be allowed to have personalized — or privatized — Social Security accounts, Cotton said “everything needs to be on the table” to “modernize” the program and ensure it’s “available for the next generation.”

On his votes against two versions of the Violence Against Women Act, Cotton argued the bill unfairly limited due process rights on Native American reservations and did little to prevent human trafficking.

Cotton was also the lone member of the state’s congressional delegation to oppose a compromise to slash student interest rates — even though he took federal Stafford loans during his time at Harvard.

“I support the student loan program; what I don’t support are politicians and bureaucrats dictating down to the decimal point the interest rates on student loans,” Cotton said. “It’s making [education] more expensive.”

Last fall, Cotton backed the tea party-inspired tactic that helped prompt a government shutdown — tying spending legislation to a provision defunding Obamacare — an episode widely seen as a political debacle for the GOP. But Cotton blamed Senate Democrats for causing the shutdown and suggested he would not do anything differently: “I would still try to fight Obamacare.”

If his voting record seems like a hand-wrapped gift to Democratic opposition researchers, Cotton sounded unperturbed.

“At the infantry school, you are taught how to react to an ambush, which you don’t have time to plan for, you are just ambushed,” he said. “And the only way to react to an ambush is to turn into the fire and fight through it.”