5 questions: IRS lost emails
IRS told Congress that two years’ worth of Lois Lerner’s emails were erased in 2011. | M.Scott Mahaskey/POLITICO 5 questions: IRS lost emails

What does the IRS say?

Right now, not much — at least on the new information Republicans released this week.

Although Koskinen said he’s interested to learn how the Treasury inspector general discovered tapes that “we were advised … were recycled,” he has not inquired further because TIGTA asked the IRS to leave the lost emails matter alone while it completes its probe.

“They asked us not to have any further conversations, or attempt to figure out which tapes they had, or when they found them, or how come we didn’t know about them before, or what’s on them,” Koskinen said after Wednesday’s hearing.

During the hearing he was asked about the recent testimony of various IRS employees, including the tech specialist who told Ways and Means that Lerner’s hard drive was scratched.

“I am not talking to any potential witnesses about what happened three years ago,” he said.

Meanwhile, he stood by earlier testimony to lawmakers that suggested the back-up tapes were gone — he said they simply didn’t know there could be back-ups at the time. And he’s not apologizing for failing to tell Congress about the lost emails sooner than he did.

Koskinen also said he hopes TIGTA finds the emails: “The more emails they can find, the better.”

He’s even OK with allowing “outside” help to recover the data, he said.

What is Republicans’ best argument?

The GOP has optics on its side when it comes to the emails hubbub. It contends it’s way too convenient for Lerner’s emails to have been erased around the time when her division started pulling groups with “tea party” in the applications for a closer look.

Even ardent IRS defenders like Rep. Gerry Connolly (D-Va.) agreed it looked fishy when the news first broke.

On Lerner specifically, the GOP’s strongest weapon may be an intercepted email in which Lerner notes that she told colleagues to be careful what they write in emails because of congressional investigations and also inquired if IRS internal messaging was saved somewhere.

Conservatives say it looks like she was hiding something.

Atop that, Republicans accuse the IRS of changing its story and are upset the agency wasn’t candid with Congress when it first learned of the email problem in February, guarding the information until June.

Kane recently told investigators that he and a top legal adviser to the commissioner knew as early as mid-February that they had a serious problem with missing emails, promoting another round of Oversight Republican criticism. Even Deputy Attorney General James Cole said last week he would have preferred to have been told earlier.

What is the Democrats’ best argument?

Democrats play strongest when they bring it back to square one: There’s been zero proof of White House involvement in the tea party matter.

Ranking Oversight member Elijah Cummings (D-Md.) on Wednesday said TIGTA’s deputy inspector general for investigation told his staff earlier this week that they still to this day have received no new evidence suggesting an Obama administration connection.

On the Lerner emails specifically, Democrats point to emails showing Lerner corresponding with various IT folks searching for help with her computer and recovering the lost data.

Also so far, there has been no evidence that Lerner or anyone else at the IRS trashed their computer to delete emails.

Democrats also highlight a rivalry between Republicans on Ways and Means and Oversight in taking charge of the probe, which they say shows how politically powerful the issue is with the conservative base.