Bruce Braley reboot starts with minimum-wage attack against Joni Ernst
Iowa Democratic Senate candidate Bruce Braley is stepping up the attacks against Joni Ernst.

Braley’s newest ad, which debuts Tuesday and was first reported by POLITICO’s Campaign Pro, is built around two clips of Ernst talking about the minimum wage before she won the Republican primary on June 3.

Text Size -

+

reset

“I do not support a federal minimum wage,” she told Iowa Public Radio on June 1.

“I think $7.25 is appropriate for Iowa,” she said at a March 18 candidate forum sponsored by the National Federation of Independent Business.

A male narrator says in the 30-second spot: “Joni Ernst doesn’t think there should be a national minimum wage. … Ernst believes Iowans can survive on $15,000 a year.”

The ad says Ernst has “extreme ideas” that are “wrong for Iowa.”

The campaign says this is a “significant statewide buy.”

It comes amid heavy outside group spending from both sides — and with polls showing a tied race. Senate Majority PAC rolled out an ad Monday tying Ernst to the Koch brothers. Americans for Prosperity, Freedom Partners and now Concerned Veterans of America — all Koch-linked groups — have been on the air hitting Braley, as has American Crossroads.

Braley has also shaken up his campaign: Ad-maker Saul Shorr joined Braley’s team in June, replacing Larry Grisolano.

The ad is the first in a series, Braley campaign manager Sarah Benzing said. The congressman’s camp describes Tuesday’s spot as the start of an aggressive effort to use Ernst’s own words from before the primary to argue that her “tea party ideas are out of step with Iowa families.” Coming up are hits on Social Security, Medicare and the Renewable Fuel Standard.

The Ernst campaign dismissed the attack.

“Bruce Braley is so desperate that he’s once again waging a dirty, false campaign,” said Ernst spokeswoman Gretchen Hamel. “The fact is that Joni grew up working minimum-wage jobs and knows first-hand how important the minimum wage is. While Bruce Braley thinks Washington always knows best, Joni understands that a minimum wage set by Iowans, for Iowans, is the best way to help working Iowans.”