John Boehner forms group to address child migrant crisis
Speaker John Boehner said Tuesday that he has appointed a “working group” of House Republicans tasked to respond to the border crisis involving the surge of unaccompanied minors trying to enter the United States illegally.

In a statement, Boehner (R-Ohio) outlined no specific duties for the seven-member group aside from advising lawmakers and keeping them in the loop on the escalating humanitarian crisis.

Text Size -

+

reset

“The president has allowed a national security and humanitarian crisis to develop on the U.S. southern border,” Boehner said in a statement announcing the group. “There are two imperatives here: protect those children and secure our border.”

(Also on POLITICO: House panel sets aside money for child migrants)

Boehner continued: “The president has failed to take the necessary steps to address this crisis.”

He took a similarly tough tone at a press conference earlier Tuesday, telling reporters that “most” of the “humanitarian disaster on the border” was of President Barack Obama’s own making.

Members of the working group include Republican Reps. John Carter of Texas, Mario Diaz-Balart of Florida, Bob Goodlatte of Virginia, Kay Granger of Texas, Michael McCaul of Texas, Steve Pearce of New Mexico and Matt Salmon of Arizona. Granger chairs the subcommittee that oversees funding for the State Department and foreign operations.

Congressional Republicans have increasingly seized on the growing crisis on the southern border as evidence that Obama’s immigration policies are too lax. The administration has started to aggressively push back on false perceptions that immigrants who travel to the United States illegally will be allowed to stay here – either through a 2012 Obama directive that deferred deportations for many young undocumented immigrants or pending immigration reform proposals in Congress.

In a letter sent Friday, Boehner urged Obama to deploy National Guard troops to the southern border to help aid the children who are apprehended trying to cross the border – a move that would free up border patrol agents to guard the U.S.-Mexico boundary. The Obama administration announced later that day that they were taking steps that would more quickly deport immigrants who cross illegally – such as sending additional immigration court judges to the border to process cases more quickly.

Several of the members in the new working group are key players in immigration policy. As chairmen of the Judiciary and Homeland Security panels, Goodlatte and McCaul oversee immigration and border security issues. Carter and Diaz-Balart tried to negotiate a bipartisan comprehensive immigration reform bill that ultimately never materialized.

“The current situation happening at the border is a serious humanitarian crisis that needs urgent attention,” Diaz-Balart said in a statement. “We must find a humane solution to make sure these minors are both safe and healthy, while strictly adhering to the laws of this great nation.”

Jake Sherman contributed to this report.