Berkeley breaks through on soda tax
The question now becomes: Does Berkeley matter for the rest of the country? Berkeley breaks through on soda tax

Berkeley, California, a city known for its progressive politics, made history Tuesday night by approving the first real sin tax on soda in the United States.

Voters approved Measure D, a penny-per-ounce tax, by a 3-to-1 margin after a bitter campaign battle, with the beverage industry spending more than $2.1 million to oppose the initiative. The pro-tax campaign was bolstered by more than $650,000 from former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg.

Story Continued Below

Berkeley has now done what more than two dozen other cities and states have tried and failed to do in recent years: put in place a punitive tax on sugar-sweetened beverages designed to reduce consumption and raise revenue. The measure, which covers sports drinks, sweet teas and beverage syrups used in coffee shops, would raise the price of a 20-ounce Coca-Cola by about 10 percent. The tax, which does not apply to diet sodas, kicks in Jan. 1 .

( Full 2014 election results)

The question now becomes: Does Berkeley matter for the rest of the country?

The soda industry, the primary financial backer for the anti-tax effort in Berkeley as well as San Francisco — which rejected a similar tax Tuesday night after more than $9 million in opposition spending — was quick to downplay the result in Berkeley, a liberal bastion with just under 80,000 voters.

“Berkeley is unlike the rest of the country,” said Chris Gindlesperger, a spokesman for the American Beverage Association, which represents Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, Dr Pepper Snapple Group and other major beverage companies.

“Berkeley doesn’t look like mainstream America,” he said, noting that polling shows a majority of Americans oppose taxing unhealthy food and drinks. “If politicians want to stake their political reputation on this, they do so at their own risk.”

( WATCH: Election Day 2014 videos)

But health advocates are practically jumping for joy. After decades of hard-fought losses on soda taxes, they hope their victory in Berkeley will breathe new life into the issue. The win is “absolutely huge,” according to Marion Nestle, a professor at New York University and author of “Food Politics.”

“Yes, it’s Berkeley, yes, it’s a liberal community with a big university, but there are lots of communities like that in America,” said Nestle, who is currently working on a book about food advocacy and the soda industry. “Others will certainly do the same thing. If it could win in Berkeley, it could win in a lot of places. Maybe it will pass in Austin. Maybe it will pass in Ithaca. … Other places are going to try this.”

The Berkeley vs. Big Soda campaign on Tuesday night argued that it is the beginning of a larger, national effort. “We fully expect other communities to take on the soda industry and succeed,” said campaign co-chair Dr. Vicki Alexander in a statement.

Michael Jacobson, executive director of the Center for Science in the Public Interest, which gave $15,000 to back the tax effort in Berkeley, said the election shows that the beverage giants “can no longer count on spending their way to victory.”

“But they better keep their checkbooks out: We expect that cities, towns, and state legislatures all over the country are taking a close look at what happened in Berkeley and many will be readying similar campaigns to tax soda in the years to come,” said Jacobson, in a statement.