Why Obama limited immigration scope of action

President Barack Obama’s immigration order stops short of deferring deportation of the parents of Dreamers because the White House believes it cannot build one executive action on top of another, according to Sen. Dick Durbin.

The Illinois Democrat, a close ally of Obama, said it is the White House’s understanding that because the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program in 2012 was done unilaterally, it is not legally possible to also shield Dreamers’ parents from deportation through executive action. The 2012 action halted the deportation of some young undocumented immigrants, and activists have been pushing the administration to include parents of those who benefited from DACA in this year’s executive action.

Story Continued Below

Senate Democratic leaders wrote the president this week, backing him up on executive action but emphasizing that the parents of those young immigrants should be included. Ultimately, the White House concluded that was not possible.

(Video: President Obama's full immigration address)

“Here’s the problem we have: I would like to see all of the families of Dreamers be protected. But because DACA was executive action, it’s the understanding of at least the White House counsel that you cannot build executive action on top of executive action. So they had to be careful in the way that this is written to comply with all the precedents in law,” said Durbin, the No. 2 Senate Democrat.

Asked whether he personally thought the White House could have gone further, Durbin said he wasn’t sure but added, “I respect the president on this.”

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) said under Obama’s imminent order there will be some parents of Dreamers that will be shielded from deportation, mentioning one example of a Dreamer whose sibling is a citizen: “Her parents are going to be taken care of under this order.”

Reid and Durbin, along with Sens. Chuck Schumer of New York and Patty Murray of Washington, used their final media availability before Thanksgiving to send this message to Obama: “We’ve got his back” — even if the president’s final action does not go as far as they requested just days ago.

“We have a very broad program that I understand will allow some 5 million to have their status readjusted. That’s pretty good,” Reid said. “So, it’s easy to say this wasn’t done, that wasn’t done. I’m satisfied that a lot was done, and I’m very happy.”

Seung Min Kim contributed to this report.