Hillary Clinton tackles ISIL, previews economic message

Hillary Clinton on Tuesday dismissed the idea of putting American or Western troops on the ground to combat the Islamic State militant group, instead favoring “air force, but also army soldiers from the region, and particularly from Iraq,” in fighting what she said would be a “long-term struggle.”

The former secretary of state also said that she was “obviously” considering a run for president in 2016, but that her decision would come “all in good time.”

Story Continued Below

Clinton’s remarks came during a paid speech and subsequent question-and-answer session at a Silicon Valley conference for women in Santa Clara, California, where she was pressed on several topics likely to confront her in a 2016 run. She also spoke amid debate in Congress over President Barack Obama’s request for an authorization of war powers against the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, which has taken over wide stretches of Iraq and Syria.

Clinton said the National Security Agency should be more transparent about its activities, insisted that she “can never condone” the actions of NSA leaker Edward Snowden, and offered support for net neutrality. She also spoke at length about the important role women can play in the technology industry, intertwining that theme with an economic one.

On the effort against ISIL, Clinton suggested during the Q&A with journalist Kara Swisher that there was little use in inserting U.S. combat troops into the fight and essentially backed the president’s strategy so far.

“It’s a very hard challenge, because you can’t very well put American or Western troops in to fight this organism,” she said, in her clearest statement yet on the topic. “You have to use, not only air force but also army soldiers from the region and particularly from Iraq. … A lot of the right moves are being made, but this is a really complicated and long-term problem.”

The appearance was Clinton’s first one within the country this year, and it was in friendly territory for Democrats — especially those courting high-dollar donors. Clinton pointed to the underrepresentation of women in the technology field and outlined some of her work on women’s rights issues during her tenure in the State Department, sprinkling in anecdotes about her family, including her baby granddaughter.

Clinton unveiled a litany of data detailing the barriers to entry for women in technology, and said she would release her anticipated “No Ceilings” report on women’s rights on March 9, which is one day before she is scheduled to headline a United Nations conference on women’s rights.

“In so many ways our economy seems to be operating like it’s still 1955,” she said at one point. “And that’s not just a problem for women, it’s a problem for everyone.”

While lauding the technology field in general, Clinton also was careful to touch on subjects that can be sensitive in any industry, including rising CEO pay. She also called for a higher minimum wage, pay fairness, and paid leave policies. The audience at the event, Lead On Watermark Silicon Valley Conference for Women, was largely receptive.

During Clinton’s speech, Swisher tweeted that Clinton had met with a number of Silicon Valley executives, including Facebook’s Sheryl Sandberg, earlier in the day.

And while Clinton did not explicitly mention her political future during her speech, she did nod to her 2008 concession speech that mentioned cracks in the glass ceiling by saying that now it is time to “crack every last glass ceiling.”

Clinton has spent much of the year focused on the behind-the-scenes construction of her campaign, but with the beginning of April comes a new legal fundraising window, and an opportunity for her to unveil a campaign or exploratory committee.

The likely Democratic 2016 front-runner, who has been criticized by Republicans for her lack of public appearances in recent weeks, is scheduled for at least half a dozen high-profile events between now and March 23, including some highly paid speeches and one speech at a New York gala for her family’s foundation. The foundation has been under scrutiny for accepting funds from foreign governments since Clinton left the State Department in 2013.

Clinton’s schedule features multiple events that will draw attention to her work on women’s rights, which is expected to be a major theme for her 2016 campaign.

Tuesday’s event was in Northern California, a Democratic stronghold and a fundraising hub for national politicians. Women like those in the audience could make up the core of Clinton’s eventual base, especially as she will likely focus more on her status as the potential first female president than when she unsuccessfully ran for the White House in 2008.

“What you do does not have to be big and dramatic. You don’t have to run for office,” Clinton said, rallying the audience to action and pausing for applause. “Though if you do, more power to you.”

Jonathan Topaz contributed to this report.