House, Senate on DHS impasse: 'After you'
Three weeks before the Department of Homeland Security’s funding runs out, Congress is skipping town for a long weekend — and GOP leaders in both chambers are pointing fingers at each other on who must find a way out of the logjam.

Some on the Hill are predicting a “prolonged fight” that may drag on even after the Feb. 27 funding deadline — a date that Republican leaders insisted on setting but have no clue how to meet.

Story Continued Below

The House has passed a DHS bill that would gut President Barack Obama’s immigration policies and wants Senate Republicans to muscle it through the upper chamber. But that’s impossible because of unanimous opposition from Democrats, who filibustered the House bill on Thursday for the third time this week.

Now Senate Republicans argue they’ve done all they can. It’s time, they say, for the House to send something else over.

“If we’re unsuccessful getting something passed here then I think, probably, the next move’s over to the House,” Senate Majority Whip John Cornyn (R-Texas.) said. Spending bills typically originate in the House.

But House Speaker John Boehner sees a different solution: the Senate putting together its own proposal to undo the jam. Still, the Ohio Republican admits he has no earthly idea what Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.) plans to do with the House’s bill, now that Democrats have stopped it in its tracks.

“He’s got a tough job,” Boehner said. “He’s got a tough job over there, I got a tough job over here. God bless him and good luck.”

Meanwhile, neither the House nor Senate will vote on Friday, and they both plan to be in recess the entire week of Feb. 16.

The stalemate between the two GOP-led chambers was all the talk of a nearly two-hour long Senate Republican meeting on Thursday that boiled over with frustrations about Congress’ predicament. Many of the senators concluded that it’s up to the House to figure out what legislation can pass both chambers — because blowing this Congress’s first major deadline is unacceptable, especially given recent terrorist attacks and the terrible optics of lawmakers failing to pay for the nation’s premier anti-terrorism department.

“After Charlie Hebdo and the burning alive of the Jordanian pilot, we’ve got to find a way to fund DHS,” said Sen. Mark Kirk (R-Ill.). “We’ll let the speaker work out where the votes are. Because he’s got to herd 218 cats.”

But no bill that the House sends to the Senate will be acceptable to Democrats if it includes any immigration riders, so Republican senators are prepared for a lengthy fight that may take the matter all the way to the Feb. 27 deadline.

And right before the deadline, senators privately say, they expect enough bipartisan support to push through a short-term funding bill that is free of immigration riders but merely postpones the final decision. That could drag the immigration fight well into Republicans’ first year controlling both chambers of Congress since 2006.

“We’re going to be doing this for a while,” said one senator after leaving the private meeting.

There’s at least agreement on that. One House Republican source said, “There needs to be a sustained fight to make it clear Democrats aren’t willing to put any limitations on illegal immigrants in this country.”

“You’re looking at a prolonged fight,” the source said. “Where we’re going to be doing one-month bills.”

Indeed an eventual short-term funding bill is looking more and more likely given that right now there’s no Plan B and no fallback in the offing. And Boehner does not seem inclined to put together another DHS proposal that tries to thread the needle on his conference’s outrage on immigration.

“Senator McConnell is trying to win the fight that we won in the House,” Boehner said. “The House fought this fight, we won this fight. Now it’s time for Senate Democrats to work with Senate Republicans to stop the president’s unilateral actions with regards to immigration.”

Except that isn’t going to happen. Senate Democrats say they will accept only a clean funding bill with no immigration riders. They insist that they will block anything else the House sends over that infringes on Obama’s immigration policies.

Indeed, though they said funding DHS was gravely important, Democrats are eager to highlight the GOP’s divisions. Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) recited quotes from GOP lawmakers that highlighted the Republican turmoil, including a quip from Arizona Sen. John McCain: “Is that the definition of insanity, voting on the same bill over and over again?”

Sen. Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.) said the Republican strategy is “to put a gun to the president’s head and say, ‘Blink.’”

“But no one’s blinking,” he said.

McConnell is now mulling one more floor vote on the House’s bill to prove to House Republicans that the fourth attempt won’t be any more effective than the first. But some Republican senators have had it with endlessly taking the same ill-fated vote. Asked what GOP leaders’ current direction is, McCain replied: “I’m not exactly sure.”

“This is the third time we’ve demonstrated that there’s not 60 votes,” McCain said. “It would be a very serious error if we allow the DHS to not be funded, because we have significant threats to our security.”

In Thursday’s Republican lunch, some senators suggested that the House could take up a proposal from Sen. Susan Collins (R-Maine) that would leave in place Obama’s 2012 Deferred Action on Childhood Arrivals, which eased the deportation threat for so-called DREAMers, and focus instead on a broader immigration action that the president took in 2014. But Democrats quickly dismissed that plan — revealing a lack of flexibility that is frustrating many Republicans, who say Democrats have got to come off the sidelines or face the blame for a DHS shutdown.

“The Democrats are in the all-or-nothing mode. The people that play that game usually lose,” said a steamed Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.). “Can you imagine if Ted Cruz were saying this: ‘All or nothing?’ Y’all would be all over him. You need to be all over them.”

But Democrats said this line of thinking is simply a deflection of the GOP’s responsibilities as the majority.

“The Republicans have realized their strategy is not going to work,” said Senate Minority Whip Dick Durbin (D-Ill.).

Manu Raju contributed to this report.