Jeb Bush: Clinton use of personal email 'baffling'
Getty Jeb Bush: Clinton use of personal email 'baffling' The former Florida governor built a website to release his in-office emails.

Jeb Bush said Friday that Hillary Clinton’s decision to store her emails on a personal server rather than use a government account was “baffling.”

The former Florida governor told a radio station in Iowa, where he’s traveling this week for the first time since announcing steps toward a 2016 White House bid, “It’s a dangerous world, and security would mean that you couldn’t have a private server.”

Story Continued Below

“It’s a little baffling, to be honest with you,” Bush said, in comments first reported by Reuters.

Bush launched a website last month to catalog his email exchanges from his tenure as governor and was quickly condemned by the left for oversharing — his staff failed to censor his contacts’ Social Security numbers and other personal information from the messages, a mistake the Bush camp attribute to the State of Florida.

Bush aides have said that the release of the former governor’s emails demonstrates his commitment to transparency. When news of Clinton’s emails first broke, Jeb Bush quickly tweeted, Transparency matters. Unclassified @HillaryClinton emails should be released. You can see mine, here. http://jebbushemails.com.”

Democrats have countered that Bush has not released all of his emails, and that he turned over his professional email only because Florida law requires it.

The Tampa Bay Times noted in January: “The former governor conducted all his communication on his private Jeb@jeb.org account and turned over the hand-selected batch to the state archives when he left office. Absent from the stash are emails the governor deemed not relevant to the public record: those relating to politics, fundraising and personal matters while he was governor.”

Democrats circulated talking points this week noting that in addition to Bush, other potential Republican 2016 contenders have not made public their full email archives, either.

“It is surprising at the very least just how silent these same Republicans have been about members of their own party who have used their own private servers, conducted official business on private email accounts, have stonewalled open record requests, have routinely deleted official emails, and more,” an email sent by the Democratic National Committee read.

Democrats are beginning to express alarm at the seriousness of Clinton’s political predicament.

POLITICO reported Thursday that Clinton’s emails violated the State Department’s “clear-cut” rules about the routine use of private email for official business.

Clinton wrote on Twitter Wednesday, “I want the public to see my email. I asked State to release them. They said they will review them for release as soon as possible.”

The former secretary of state has turned over 55,000 pages of email records to the State Department for review.

Critics have been skeptical, claiming there is no way of knowing whether or not Clinton has withheld and deleted unsavory messages.

Rep. Trey Gowdy (R-S.C.) announced earlier this week that, as chairman of the House Committee on Benghazi, he would subpoena all of Clinton’s email, not just the 800-plus pages the State Department has turned over to his committee.

A group of House Democrats, led by Maryland Rep. Elijah Cummings, have responded that the subpoena “contribute[d] to a perception that this Committee is now targeting Secretary Clinton for political reasons.”