The Iowa Ag Summit: 10 takeaways
Mike Huckabee grabbed for the populist mantle.

Even more than during his 2008 bid, the former Arkansas governor set himself apart from the pack Saturday by expressing skepticism of trade agreements and decrying the outsized power of business in the Republican Party.

Story Continued Below

“There are three types of people: globalists, corporatists and nationalists,” he said, identifying himself as the latter. “We have allowed the Chinese to get away with things in trade agreements that we never should have done, and we’ve done it because we have a lot of globalists and frankly corporatists instead of having nationalists who put forward the best interests of the United States and working families.”

Huckabee blamed stagnant wages on bad trade deals. “We need to start making it so that Americans can prosper and not just so that the Chinese can buy Louis Vuitton and Gucci bags,” he said.

Contrast that to Walker, who boasted about getting an hour-long sit-down with Chinese President Xi Jinping during a 2013 trip to the country.

Huckabee also took a hard line on immigration. “A country that does not have secure borders is really not a country anymore,” he said. “The question is: What do we do to stem the tide of people who are rushing over because they’ve heard that there’s a bowl of food just across the border?”

Rick Santorum is putting all his chips on Iowa again.

More than anyone else Saturday, the former Pennsylvania senator touted his support for ethanol mandates. He even suggested that his fourth place finish in the 2012 New Hampshire primary was because he was such an outspoken supporter.

“You guys need to know this,” he told the crowd. “I got hit every time” I went to New Hampshire.

He said he’s always willing to take the side of ethanol in a debate.

“It creates jobs in small town and rural America, which is where people are hurting,” he said. “The RFS is a mandate. It is not a tax.”

Santorum, who lost his seat in 2006, also bragged about being the first senator from his state to serve on the Agriculture committee in 100 years.

“We have ethanol plants in Pennsylvania,” said Santorum, who now lives in the D.C. suburb of McLean.

Chris Christie’s low-energy performance fell flat.

The New Jersey governor hasn’t been able to catch a break lately. He got stuck with the first time slot on Saturday morning when the crowd wasn’t really warmed up. And he was not his normal, boisterous self. He came across as somewhat subdued, despite lobbing rhetorical bombs at Obama.

Even a heckler failed to change the dynamic. A woman held up a sign that said, “Still not home after Sandy.”

“I’ll deal with you the same way here as I deal with you in New Jersey,” Christie responded. “My people follow me everywhere. I’m magnetic, Bruce. They can’t stay away from me.”

More than anyone else, Christie took seriously the moderator’s request that participants not filibuster.

Would he support labeling genetically-modified foods? “No,” said Christie, pausing. “Sometimes you don’t need to give a complicated answer.”

He was clearly prepared to talk about the intricacies of agriculture policy. “Remember, New Jersey is the Garden State,” he said at one point. “So it’s not like I come out here not knowing any of this.”

But his carefully-rehearsed answers didn’t sound like they were written by someone steeped in free market orthodoxy.

“The law requires the president to establish RFS, and he should,” said Christie.

“I think crop insurance is a good idea,” he said later. “It provides the right kind of safety net.”

Christie ducked when asked about federal subsidies for wind power, merely attacking Obama.

He was bland on immigration too: “Our national leaders have been unwilling to deal with this issue head on…We should have a clear, legal, reliable guest worker program.”

The Republican field is in lockstep against having anything to do with Cuba.

Farmers tend to support opening new markets for their crops. Some are part of the coalition that has pushed to lift the five-decade-old Cuban trade embargo.

But to a man, the Republicans running for president decried engaging with the current regime.

Perry chastised Obama for giving Cuba three of its spies back in exchange for Alan Gross, who had been held in captivity for five years. “We got the way short end of that deal,” he said.

Cruz, the son of a Cuban émigré, noted that the island just got caught trying to smuggle arms to North Korea through the Panama Canal. “Cuba is a communist dictatorship,” he said. “They are exporting terrorism throughout the hemisphere.”

Yes, Republicans went on the attack against “Big Oil.”

Ethanol producers see oil companies as their enemy. While opposing the RFS isn’t the deal breaker it once was, even the most conservative Republicans who hold elected office in Iowa attack the oil industry.

In a party where the Koch brothers, whose fortune is tied to fossil fuels, are the biggest donors, the language from GOP leaders is atypical, to say the least.

“Ethanol is no longer receiving a federal subsidy,” said Republican Gov. Terry Branstad. “What ethanol needs is fair access to the marketplace, which Big Oil wants to prevent.”

The renewable fuel industry plans to spend seven figures this year promoting its agenda in the caucuses. The governor’s son, Eric, is leading the campaign-style effort.

A procession of Iowans spoke in between the presidential candidates, including freshman Sen. Joni Ernst and senior Sen. Chuck Grassley.

Steve King, one of the most conservative members of the House, suggested that “America itself” could be “lost” if the oil companies have their way.

“The dream team of petroleum industry lobbyists” has maneuvered to undercut ethanol in Congress, King said. “The petroleum industry…wants to shut down all we’re doing here [in order] to keep the competition out.”

Lindsey Graham is having the time of his life.

The South Carolina senator easily won what could have been a very tough Republican primary last year, securing at least six more years in office. Now actively testing the presidential waters, he’s clearly enjoying his dark horse campaign.

Graham, whose niche is national security, could become a media darling in the race. His favorite son status in the Palmetto State could also meaningfully alter the calculus of the nominating fight, even if he never wins anywhere. His speech Saturday, full of hilarious one-liners, showcased his potential to shape the debate.

Asked about Trade Promotion Authority, he responded: “If I were king, I’d be benevolent – with a streak of cruelty every now and then, just to keep people on their toes.”

On his support for an “all-of-the-above” energy strategy: “Where would Vladimir Putin be without gas? I’ll let you think about that for a minute!”

On most issues, he spoke the crowd’s language. Every barrel of ethanol is a barrel less of oil the U.S. has to buy “from people who hate our guts,” he explained.

His candor was refreshing. “I’m not a farming expert,” he said. “Don’t claim to be!”

Without prompting, he said he supports means testing and raising the retirement age for Social Security.

He also vigorously defended his role in the Gang of Eight, along with Florida Sen. Marco Rubio (who canceled his appearance at the event to attend a family wedding), that passed an immigration bill through the Senate.

Graham said it’s hurting the Republican Party to stand in the way of reform, and he argued that no compromise is ever going to be perfect.

“We need immigration reform that will supply us the labor to keep rural America working,” said Graham. “Strom Thurmond had four kids after he was 67. If you’re not willing to do that, then we need immigration.”

“I’ve enjoyed being in Iowa,” he concluded, “but how the hell did y’all vote for Obama twice? Don’t do that again!”