Rand Paul clashes with Savannah Guthrie over changing views

Sen. Rand Paul clashed with “Today” show host Savannah Guthrie over her line of questioning during an interview Wednesday morning, criticizing her for editorializing over perceived changes in his political views since his election to the Senate.

“You have had views on foreign policy in the past that were somewhat unorthodox, but you seem to have changed over the years,” Guthrie told the Kentucky Republican, who was appearing via satellite from Nashua, New Hampshire. “You once said Iran was not a threat, now you say it is. You once proposed ending foreign aid to Israel, now you support it, at least for the time being, and you once offered to drastically cut … defense spending.”

Story Continued Below

Paul attempted to speak as Guthrie continued.

“Why don’t we let me explain instead of talking over me, OK?” Paul interjected. “Before we go through a litany of things you say I’ve changed on, why don’t you ask me a question, ‘Have I changed my opinion?’ That would sort of a better way to approach an interview.”

“Is Iran still not a threat?” Guthrie asked in the cross-talk.

“No, no, no, no, no, no, no, no. Listen, you’ve editorialized,” Paul said. “Let me answer a question. You ask a question, and you say, ‘Have your views changed?’ instead of editorializing and saying my views have changed.”

Paul said he has come to the realization that limiting foreign aid to other countries “will have to be done gradually.”

“My opinion has always been that we shouldn’t borrow money from China to send it to any country — Pakistan, Israel, or any other country,” he said. “But I also realize that things will have to be done gradually, and if we are going to try to eliminate or reduce foreign aid, why don’t we start with the countries that hate us, that burn our flag. And the one thing that is true is that Israel doesn’t burn our flag, and so I haven’t proposed removing aid from Israel —”

“But you once did,” Guthrie said.

“But I still agree with my original precept, which is,” Paul continued. “Let me answer the question. I still agree with my original statement years ago that ultimately, all nations should be free of foreign aid because we shouldn’t borrow money to do it.”

Paul said that his opinion is no different from that of Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s, referencing a 1996 address Netanyahu delivered at a joint meeting of Congress in which he said Israel would be stronger without reliance on foreign aid for defense products.

Pressed on his changing views of Iran, Paul answered a question on whether he had altered his 2007 assessment that Iran was not a serious threat to the United States.

Paul said, “2007 was a long time ago, and events do change over long periods of time. What I would say is that there has always been a threat of Iran gaining nuclear weapons, and I think that’s greater than it was many years ago. I think we should do everything we can to try to stop them.”