Guy Cecil poised to join pro-Hillary super PAC
AP Photo Guy Cecil poised to join pro-Hillary super PAC

The political director of Hillary Clinton’s 2008 presidential campaign, Guy Cecil, is in final talks to take on a major role at the super PAC Priorities USA Action — a move that would give Clinton’s implicit nod to donors that she wants them to contribute to the outside group raising money to help her bid.

“There have been serious discussions about strengthening some elements of Priorities, and Guy has a very strong reputation,” said another source with knowledge of the super PAC. “If he comes in, it’ll be a strong addition.”

Story Continued Below

Cecil’s new role, first reported Friday by the Washington Post and confirmed by a person with knowledge of the situation, would wrestle some power away from Jim Messina, the current board co-chair who served as President Barack Obama’s campaign manager in 2012. It installs a Clinton insider in a prominent role instead of an Obama campaign veteran — someone who has the trust of the Clintons and may be able to anticipate how best to assist the campaign from the outside.

Cecil is expected to work closely with executive director Buffy Wicks, whose role is not expected to change.

“Guy brings two things to the table: he’s experienced, and he’s loyal to the Clintons and the Clintons are loyal to him,” a source with knowledge of the situation said. “Donors need that. At the end of the day, Buffy Wicks has been essential and important to getting Priorities up and running. People have come to really admire and appreciate Buffy, her skill and her hard work, people look forward to her and Guy working together.”

While Priorities has long been expected to serve as the primary super PAC supporting Clinton’s White House bid, some donors have been waiting on a sign from Clinton’s camp that the candidate approves of Priorities’ work. Weeks after officially announcing her candidacy, Clinton has begun raising money for her campaign in person, appearing at events with donors in New York and Washington in recent days. She will raise more funds in California after a campaign stop in Nevada next week.

Former President Bill Clinton is a huge fan of Cecil’s, another source added. And Cecil, along with EMILY’s List President Stephanie Schriock, were on the short list for the campaign manager job that ultimately went to Robby Mook. But there was no senior position available in Mook’s operation where Cecil could have a role from the inside, the source said.

Priorities has only been ramping up its outreach to donors in the past few weeks, the person with knowledge of its operations said. It wanted to give the campaign a chance to get rolled out first, but in the past three weeks has started to “test the waters for those preparing to put in some serious money,” the person said, and explain to them what Priorities did in 2012 for Obama and what it intends to do this cycle.

The news of Cecil’s role comes as Republicans and Democrats alike eye Jeb Bush, whose presidential bid is expected to rely on an allied super PAC to an unprecedented extent. While Clinton’s campaign is not expected to have problems raising large amounts of money, Bush’s supporters have recently spoken of record fundraising for the Republican.

A Priorities USA spokesman declined to confirm the story. Cecil did not return messages.