Ben Carson's home-field disadvantage
DETROIT — Ben Carson was always going to be a long-shot for the GOP presidential nomination. And one of the many hurdles he faces was front and center Monday when the prominent neurosurgeon announced his candidacy in the city where he was born.

Here in Carson’s hometown, there are Ben Carson Reading Rooms and the Benjamin Carson High School of Science and Medicine. The local African-American history museum, the biggest in the country, features him on “this day in history” acknowledgements, sharing space with famed educator Booker T. Washington and popular actress Jada Pinkett-Smith.

Story Continued Below

Yet despite a busy day of announcement events in the place that looms so large in his campaign narrative, his connection to Detroit is badly frayed. He moved away long ago — he now lives in Florida — and hasn’t kept up with community leaders or pastors here. More important, he’s launching his presidential bid as a staunch conservative and a fierce critic of President Barack Obama in a city that is a majority-black Democratic stronghold that gave the president 98 percent of its vote in 2012.

In other words, it’s hard to find a place that’s less receptive to his conservative message and firebrand rhetoric — he has compared Obamacare to slavery, drawn parallels between the Obama era and Hitler’s Third Reich and made frequent, personal attacks against America’s first African-American president — than Detroit.

“I gotta tell you something. I’m not politically correct,” Carson said during his official presidential announcement at Detroit’s Music Hall. “I’m not a politician. I don’t want to be a politician. Politicians do what is politically expedient. I want to do what’s right.”

The retired Johns Hopkins neurosurgeon’s team has said he stands out in the crowded Republican field precisely because he can eventually compete in cities like his hometown. Carson, who talks much more about working his way out of poverty than he talks about race, believes that people who have been offended by his more controversial remarks will come to see that he’s right. To which they respond: Not a chance.

“I know him through his work he’s done as a surgeon, I think he’s a fantastic surgeon, he’s saved some lives and done some great things,” said Martha Scott, a longtime Detroit politician who serves as a Wayne County commissioner. But she was surprised, she said, when she started hearing about his political views. And she laughed when she was initially asked what she made of Carson, adding, “Just let me say, I don’t like his politics.”

That’s a familiar refrain in Detroit and also from many in the broader African-American community who knew Carson mostly through his medical work — he earned international acclaim for separating conjoined twins — and his philanthropic efforts. It wasn’t until a fiery speech he gave at the 2013 National Prayer Breakfast, decrying the Obama administration as the president looked on, that his conservative politics came to the forefront, catching many more liberal admirers off-guard.

“Before Ben Carson took a real political turn, there was a lot of hometown pride,” said Susan Demas, the editor and publisher of the publication Inside Michigan Politics. “He was definitely well-known in Detroit. But the fact is, his politics are so far from those of most people who live in Detroit, criticizing the first African-American president we’ve ever had — you’d have a hard time finding anybody who’s really part of the power base in Detroit backing him.”

Carson’s sometimes sharp and over-the-top language — often issued in soft-spoken tones — does, however, play well with the most conservative elements of the GOP base, where Carson has enjoyed some popularity. To them, his lack of office-holding experience is an asset in a field of current and former elected officials.

“People say, ‘You can’t do this, you don’t have the experience,’” Carson said in his announcement, a religious revival-style event complete with gospel singers. “I don’t have a lot of experience busting budgets…I do have a lot of experience solving problems, complex surgical problems that have never been done before.”

To his supporters, his politics and personal story, which began here in a dangerous and disadvantaged neighborhood, are compelling enough.

But Ron Edwards, an African-American radio host who admires Carson, also lamented that in his hometown, Carson would face an uphill climb, saying he was very skeptical of Carson’s chances in this city.

“I pray, hope and believe [the city’s Democratic tendencies] can turn around, but the jury is way out on that,” said Edwards, who attended an event for Carson at the city’s African American Museum, though he is leaning toward supporting Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker’s likely presidential bid.

Carson himself sees Detroit as an obvious choice, even if his politics aren’t a natural fit.

“It’s my hometown, it’s where I grew up, where I initially developed a desire to become a physician, it’s where I got my can-do attitude so that I don’t listen to people who tell me something can’t be done, or else I wouldn’t be talking to you today,” he said in an interview Sunday night at a rehearsal for his announcement. “We can win everywhere because I think people at some point will listen and begin to think for themselves, rather than to the pundits and people that try to manipulate them … even liberals can learn to recognize the truth.”

He pointed to his appearance several weeks ago at the liberal Rev. Al Sharpton’s National Action Network conference, saying that he ultimately earned a standing ovation there — which happened when he invoked his life story.

It’s an account of a man who, through sheer grit, self-reliance and a watchful mother, overcame a deeply troubled childhood in Detroit to achieve international renown as a Johns Hopkins neurosurgeon and a philanthropist. Carson’s allies believe that narrative will resonate with, and inspire, others in poor and minority communities. Those themes figured prominently in his announcement speech, where the slogan is “heal, inspire, revive,” and Carson’s announcement day was constructed with the goal of outreach in mind.

Ben Carson’s

2016 power players Former pediatric neurosurgeon Ben Carson has never held elected office, and several of his key staffers have most recently been taking a break from politics. Here’s a look a few of the people who will matter most in his presidential campaign. Click here to read a fuller list with details. Barry Bennett, campaign manager Ed Brookover, senior strategist Doug Watts, communications director Amy Pass, national finance director Michael Brown, national political director

Deana Bass, press secretary Don Green, heading Carson’s research outfit Ruth Sherlock, directing Carson’s South Carolina efforts Ryan Rhodes, running Carson’s Iowa effort Armstrong Williams, helping shepherd Carson’s political efforts

His campaign kicked off Monday with an early breakfast with pastors and community leaders at the Charles H. Wright Museum, the country’s largest museum of African-American history. The breakfast was followed by an assembly at Benjamin Carson High School of Science and Medicine and then his announcement address at Detroit’s Music Hall.

Carson is reserved when it comes to working a room, displaying a low-key sense of humor.

During his announcement swing, he appeared most comfortable at the high school, where he plopped down next to a ninth grader to chat with her about what book she was reading.

At the school, where a plaque bearing Carson’s picture hung on the wall, several students sported scrubs in a show of support. He sat for a 30-minute assembly where he was interviewed by students about life advice. He connected with the crowd by relaying an anxiety dream he had about a chemistry final, to laughs.

Carson opened his announcement speech in a slightly more formal setting — onstage at the Music Hall — where he paced back and forth without a teleprompter, recounting his tough childhood, and reflecting on his mother’s example of exhausting work in order to give her children a better life.

“Many people are critical of me because they say, ‘Carson wants to get rid of all the safety nets and welfare programs even though he must have benefited from them,’” he said. “This is a blatant lie. I have no desire to get rid of safety nets for people who need them. I have a strong desire to get rid of programs that create dependency in able-bodied people.”

Carson was scheduled to go on a swing through Iowa immediately after his announcement, but he canceled his Monday events on Sunday after receiving word that his mother, who suffers from Alzheimer’s, is seriously ill. He often talks about his mom on the stump, detailing how she got him to start reading and stay out of trouble, and he’s headed to Texas to see her later Monday. Earlier in the day, he told reporters he expected that this visit to his mother would likely be the last one before she died. After seeing her, he’s expected to do events in Iowa and South Carolina, and next week in New Hampshire.

Exploratory committee chairman Terry Giles, who is expected to eventually join pro-Carson super PAC efforts, told POLITICO earlier this year the team expects to raise $65 million between this spring and next year’s Florida primary — an ambitious goal for a long-shot candidate. In the first month of the exploratory committee’s existence, it pulled in about $2 million.

His team sees Iowa and South Carolina, places with deep pockets of social conservatives and tea party activists, as particularly good fits for Carson, though a group that initially started as a draft campaign for Carson has laid groundwork in New Hampshire, and has a paid staffer in Nevada.

It’s not clear what kind of reaction he’ll receive in those early-voting states — after generating much grassroots buzz in 2014, he hasn’t spent as much time on the trail as activists expected. He waited until May to announce for president because he still had obligations on the paid speaking circuit, something that has not gone unnoticed among early-state operatives.

“I don’t know if he missed his moment, but he made his path in Iowa much more difficult by not being more aggressive,” said Craig Robinson, a former political director of the Iowa GOP and the editor and founder of TheIowaRepublican.com, an influential blog. “If you’d asked me about Carson in July of 2014, I would have said, “Hey, really watch this guy, there’s a lot of interest.’ But as the race has started … it’s a little different because he hasn’t been here. Out of sight, out of mind.”

In New Hampshire, where the climb is even steeper for Carson, one knowledgeable GOP strategist said bluntly, “No, he doesn’t have a chance, mostly because he’s not putting any time into the state.”

Carson on Monday cast his campaign as less of a Republican operation, but as one driven by the need to change the culture of politics.

“We have to take the White House in 2016,” Carson said before clarifying, “When I say ‘we,’ I’m not talking about Republicans—I’m talking about anyone who has common sense.”