Obama aides: Warren 'baseless' on trade
So far in her battle against President Barack Obama’s trade agenda, Sen. Elizabeth Warren has raised the specter of shady international courts invalidating U.S. laws and a cabal of business interests writing trade agreements in secret, smoky rooms.

Now she has a new complaint: If Congress gives Obama what he wants on fast-track trade authority, says Warren (D-Mass.), some future Republican president could use that power to gut the Dodd-Frank financial reform law and let Wall Street run wild once again.

Story Continued Below

Supporters of the Trans-Pacific Partnership in the White House, Congress and the business community are growing increasingly alarmed at the escalating rhetoric. Warren’s arguments, these people say, are increasingly wide of the mark and easily rebutted. But administration officials are at odds over how aggressively to take her on, knowing that a sustained attack would only arouse her supporters in the progressive and labor movements.

Obama has already called Warren “wrong” on trade. But in private, administration officials fume in much more colorful terms over Warren’s attacks, calling them “baseless” and “desperate,” with “no bearing or relation to anything we are doing.” They also suggest the Massachusetts senator knows going after trade deals will only further energize the “Draft Warren” movement that desperately wants her to run for president.

The Massachusetts Democrat has been a thorn in the side of the administration on other issues, including recently torpedoing the president’s nomination for a top Treasury Department post. But the stakes are far higher on the trade deal. The fast-track bill still lacks the estimated 20 to 40 Democratic votes necessary for passage in the House, creating the very real possibility that the president’s own party will deny him what he considers a key legacy-building achievement.

This week, Obama has increased his efforts to sell the deal to his own party.

“Are [Warren’s] arguments a sign of desperation given the tide shifting among the public, particularly Democrats?” one person close to the White House said, citing recent poll numbers showing the public growing less wary of possible negative effects of international trade accords.

On the record, of course, administration officials, wary of Warren’s outsize ability to ignite the liberal base on issues she cares about, are much more polite.

“The White strategy here is to let Warren vent all she wants. You may remember Bill Clinton had a rather vocal Byron Dorgan doing exactly this,” said Jimmy Williams, a Democratic consultant. “Those voices matter, but in the end it all comes down to the votes, and he doesn’t need her vote to pass this.”

But the White House does not want Warren to start bringing along fence-sitting Democrats, so they take her attacks seriously, especially when she invokes the words “Wall Street,” a trigger for progressive passions.

Asked about Democratic opposition to trade deals on Wednesday, White House press secretary Josh Earnest said the administration’s case for fast-track authority and the TPP should be “strongest among those who are concerned about the impact that previous trade agreements [had] with unenforceable labor and environmental provisions.”

Brendan Buck, a spokesman for House Ways and Means Chairman Paul Ryan (R-Wis.), who is leading the trade push in the House, was more blunt about Warren: “I don’t know which is worse: If she actually believes this nonsense or that she’s just so willing to spread misinformation.”

The latest Warren salvo to rock the White House came Tuesday night in a speech to the Institute for New Economic Thinking in which she said giving Obama fast-track authority to submit trade deals to Congress that cannot be amended would allow a future Republican president to gut Dodd-Frank.

“I very much hope that a Democrat wins the White House in 2016 and again in 2020. But what happens if we have a Republican president in 2016 or 2020?” Warren said. “Ted Cruz has already said flatly, ‘We need to repeal Dodd-Frank,’ and other Republican contenders have already joined in. Republicans have been itching to tear down Dodd-Frank from the moment it passed.”

Warren added that “a Republican president could easily use a future trade deal to override our domestic financial rules. And this is hardly a hypothetical possibility: We are already deep into negotiations with the European Union on a trade agreement, and big banks on both sides of the Atlantic are gearing up to use that agreement to water down financial regulations. A six-year fast-track bill is the missing link they need to make that happen.”

The problem, White House and pro-trade officials on the Hill say, is that the fast-track bill currently before Congress includes language that expressly forbids changing U.S. law without congressional action. According to the Senate Finance Committee, the bill “ensures that any provision of a trade agreement that is inconsistent with federal or state law will have no effect. Second, it states specifically that federal and state laws will prevail in the event of a conflict with a trade agreement.”

A Treasury spokesperson on Tuesday night flatly rejected any suggestion that passing six-year fast-track legislation could eventually lead to the repeal of Dodd-Frank.

“The Dodd-Frank Act is a signature achievement of the Obama administration that the president fought long and hard to pass into law,” the spokesperson said. “Nothing we’re doing in any of our trade agreements would weaken our ability to implement Wall Street reform now or in the future.”

This is not the first time the White House and other trade deal supporters have blasted Warren’s arguments as off the mark. In February, the Massachusetts senator warned that inclusion of the obscure Investor-State Dispute Settlement process in TPP could allow multinational corporations to sue in secretive international tribunals to gut U.S. laws while winning big taxpayer-funded awards.

The administration responded that ISDS provisions are already included in over 50 trade deals the U.S. is party to and are meant to protect U.S. companies operating in nations with underdeveloped legal systems. In addition, they noted that the U.S has never lost a case when challenged by a multinational company over a U.S. law or regulation.

They said it would be foolish to reject the trans-Pacific deal, which covers 40 percent of global gross domestic product, over unfounded fears of international tribunals.

Warren then went on to blast the “secretive” nature of TPP negotiations, noting that only members of Congress can access the working draft but only without taking notes or disclosing what they read. And she said the drafting of the agreement was dominated by corporate executives and their lobbyists.

This one clearly got under Obama’s skin and he let reporters know it.

“The one that gets on my nerves the most is the notion that this is a secret deal,” Obama said on conference call with reporters on Friday. “Every single one of the critics saying this is a secret deal, or send out emails to their fundraising base that they’re working to stop a secret deal, could walk over and see the text of the agreement.”

The administration has also repeatedly noted that all major trade agreements are negotiated in private in order to allow other nations to make offers and disclose information that they would not want shared publicly. And they have pointed to heavy input from labor, environmental and other progressive groups in drafting TPP language.

They also say that TPP, once it is complete, will be publicly available for up to four months before Congress votes on it and 60 days for public comment before the president signs it. In addition, the fast-track bill includes language allowing for a 60-vote Senate majority to shut off fast track and amend any trade bill that “fails to meet the objectives laid out by Congress.”

And supporters of the trade bill say Warren proposed an impossible standard for approving a fast-track bill. She said in order to get it, the administration should make the TPP provisions public. But in order to get the TPP done, the administration says, it needs fast-track authority in order to assure other nations that things they agree to will not get changed by Congress.

Proponents of Obama’s trade agenda say Warren is using diversionary tactics and setting up wildly unlikely scenarios to influence Democrats to join opposition to the fast-track bill, which has relatively strong prospects in the Senate but could fall in the House.

“A number of these charges seem to be diversionary tactics,” said John Murphy, vice president for international policy at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which strongly supports trade deals. “It reminds me of the Central American Free Trade Agreement and charges that it would put dentists in North Carolina out of business. We had to make the case that it was not anti-dentite, to quote Seinfeld.”

Still, while Warren is driving the administration and its Hill trade allies crazy, she is again thrilling supporters in the labor, environmental and financial-reform movements who want to stop Obama’s trade agenda.

Damon Silvers, associate general counsel for the AFL-CIO, said he believes Warren is on the mark with her criticism of fast-track legislation as a vehicle for future Dodd-Frank erosion.

“The issue here is not whether TPP or [a European trade agreement] negotiated by Obama would blow up Dodd-Frank,” Silvers said. “It’s true the administration has been good about not allowing that to happen. But what happens next time? What happens in the next administration? You are changing the congressional process for effectively amending Dodd-Frank from a requiring a filibuster-proof majority to a simple majority.”

Silvers rejected the language in the current fast-track bill saying any trade deal could not change existing U.S. law. “That’s all trade deals do, is change U.S. law,” Silvers said.

Simon Johnson, a professor at MIT and an expert in financial regulation, said Warren’s complaints should be taken seriously. “[Trans-Atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership] absolutely can and likely will involve changes in U.S. law. We know that regulatory convergence is central to the negotiating agenda. The question is whether financial regulation should be included,” he said. “The fast-track authority under the currently proposed [fast-track authority] would last 6 years — well into the next presidency. The issues at stake are precisely as stated by Sen. Warren.”

And a senior Democratic Senate aide noted that international trade deals are often used as vehicles to erode existing financial regulations in nations party to the agreements. Warren supporters note that even Treasury Secretary Jack Lew has made the case for keeping financial regulation issues out of the European Union trade deal negotiations over fears that they would weaken U.S. laws. Many financial firms and some EU negotiators are pushing strongly to include financial services changes in the EU deal.

“Normally in a trade agreement, the pressure is to lower standards on things like that, and that’s something that we just think is not acceptable,” Lew told the House Financial Services Committee in December.

Warren supporters say Lew’s admission underscores that there is a real possibility that a future Congress and a future president could use the EU deal to slice up Dodd-Frank, making six-year trade-promotion authority too big a window. A senior administration official conceded in an interview that while it is theoretically possible a future president could use a European deal to alter U.S. financial law such a scenario was very unlikely.

Getting every negotiating partner on board to change financial regulatory laws would be very difficult, this official said, adding that a direct attack on Dodd-Frank by a future GOP president would be far more likely than a complicated end run via a trade agreement.

That has not swayed anyone in Warren’s orbit. “These issues are not crazy,” one Warren aide said. “They need to be taken seriously.”