Terry McAuliffe's other job
Terry McAuliffe tells political associates that he’s focused on his day job as Virginia governor, so he won’t have any formal responsibilities in his friend Hillary’s campaign.

But the Clinton loyalist, fundraiser and 2008 campaign chairman is already shaping a significant role for himself — and it will be front and center Friday evening when he introduces Hillary Clinton at the Virginia Democrats’ fundraising event in Fairfax.

Story Continued Below

It’s the most public sign yet that McAuliffe, a former Democratic National Committee chairman and a consummate political animal, just can’t keep his fingers away from the flame. Despite the daily demands of running the state he was elected to lead in 2013, he’s emerging as Hillary’s informal liaison to governors and the party’s biggest donors, while also keeping a finger on the pulse of the camp’s central operations in Brooklyn.

It’s a different vantage point than he’s accustomed to. As Clinton pursues the White House for a second time, McAuliffe is in the cosseted confines of Virginia’s governor’s mansion, obliged to watch the action unfold from Richmond, far from the New York and Washington nerve centers where he operated in 2008.

McAuliffe insists to friends that the best thing he can do for the Clinton campaign is build Virginia’s state Democratic infrastructure ahead of its 2015 state senate elections, thereby strengthening Democrats’ position in a state that Barack Obama won twice. But, according to people close to him and the Clinton fundraising operation, he’s also likely to start calling donors on behalf of the pro-Clinton super PAC and has taken on the role of reaching out to other Democratic governors to lock down their political cooperation.

“He’s going to be all-in, it’s just a question of how public-facing it’s going to be,” explained one Clinton ’08 alum who worked closely with McAuliffe.

As the 2008 Clinton campaign’s top official, McAuliffe played a highly visible role that frequently involved putting a positive spin on an operation that had no shortage of internal troubles. His allies in both Richmond and Brooklyn — more than half a dozen of his former staffers, including campaign manager Robby Mook, now work for Clinton — are relieved that he won’t cut such a high-profile this time, and has no plan to show up on Sunday shows every week. They recognize that McAuliffe is a less-than-ideal spokesman for Clinton at the moment, in part because he can’t afford the perception that his attention is wandering from his responsibilities as governor but also because his ebullient money-chasing and insider credentials could prove problematic for her.

In public, McAuliffe is all-Virginia-all-the-time — including when he represented the pro-Clinton perspective at April’s South Carolina Democratic Party convention and on Meet The Press that month — but he remains in close contact with the now-Brooklyn-based Mook, who manages Clinton’s operation.

The posture is the result of a long consideration of McAuliffe’s role before the campaign began as he weighed how to maximize his political usefulness. He is a close friend of both Clintons — he guaranteed the mortgage on their first post-White House home and chaired presidential campaigns for both of them.

The conclusion was that Hillary would need strong and well-oiled Democratic machinery in Virginia come November 2016, and that it made little sense to divert his attention from Richmond with state senate races and a redistricting battle looming — especially with swirling rumors in Virginia that McAuliffe has said he’d like to be Treasury secretary in a Clinton administration after leaving his current office.

“He’s focused on his day job. He’s focused on governing,” said Mo Elleithee, a veteran of national and Virginia Democratic politics who worked on Clinton’s 2008 campaign and who now directs Georgetown’s Institute of Politics and Public Service. “He’s made it pretty clear that he’s a supporter of hers, but that he’s focused on his day job.”

McAuliffe’s gubernatorial office didn’t respond to multiple requests for comment for this story.

The governor’s attempt to build a more durable political infrastructure in Virginia — where Democrats in 2015 have a coordinated campaign committee for the first time ever in a year without a statewide election — is a response to longstanding worries of both Bill and Hillary Clinton that crucial swing states have weak Democratic infrastructures.

Before deciding to run again, Hillary asked about the state of Democratic leadership in Ohio, Florida, and Pennsylvania and since she’s been a candidate Mook has been on a swing-state tour: he met with operatives in Cleveland earlier this month, and he is due to raise money in Florida next week.

In Virginia, where state parties are known for being exceptionally dependent on sitting governors, a tight alliance with Richmond has proven useful to presidential candidates, including both George W. Bush, who was friendly with Jim Gilmore in 2000, and Obama, who was close with Tim Kaine in 2008.

“It’s a huge difference having an incumbent governor, because your state party organization is stronger, it’s better funded,” explained former Pennsylvania Gov. Ed Rendell, a close Clinton ally. “It makes a huge difference.”

McAuliffe has also looked beyond his own borders and reached out to Democratic governors in pivotal states to discuss how to utilize their own political infrastructures — among them, Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper. Hillary Clinton has told campaign donors and fundraisers that she is closely monitoring state-level leadership in a handful of toss-up states, according to two of them.

McAuliffe is also likely to jump back into the world of presidential fundraising before long. Alums of Bill and Hillary Clinton’s three presidential campaigns recall McAuliffe making hundreds of donor calls when he was formally employed by them — and in some cases, jumping on multiple flights to reach as many as five cities in a single day to rake in campaign cash. While no one expects the governor to reprise this role in 2016, he will likely hand his own donor list to the Clinton camp and be called in to woo a handful of billionaires, according to multiple people briefed on the campaign and PAC fundraising strategies.

“My guess is they’ll give Terry 20-to-25 calls for Priorities, to the big hitters he has a relationship with,” explained Rendell. “He’ll be asked, like I’ve been asked, to help out with $2,700 or $5,400 campaigns. But you can’t expect a sitting governor to sit around making too many phone calls.”

Still, a handful of Clinton fundraisers told POLITICO they doubted McAuliffe could restrain himself from jumping into the campaign money game wholeheartedly when he finds the time.

“He was just a machine [in 2008],” said a former Hillary aide. “To the extent that this job enables him time-wise to do it, he’ll do whatever he can. There’s no doubt he’ll be super-duper intensely invested in this. … I have no doubt he’s going to be raising a shit-ton of money for them.”

“On the fundraising side, you’ll see the [expletive] crazy machine he was,” the former aide said.

The topic of his affection for the Clintons — and their affection for him — is never far from any Macker discussion, even if he is concentrating on this fall’s Virginia’s state senate races.

“He occupies his own territory. He is a Clinton. He’s like Chelsea,” said a close family ally. “He doesn’t need a title or a place in the campaign.”

Rendell explains Hillary Clinton’s Friday visit to Virginia this way.

“They are extremely loyal people who are loyal to people who are loyal to them. I’m not sure Hillary gets much out of the [Virginia fundraiser] except maybe a little help for next fall,” he said. “She’s doing this as a favor to Terry.”