Iraqi ambassador: Ernst's military aid proposal a 'dangerous precedent'

The Iraqi government is lobbying against a little-noticed amendment by Sen. Joni Ernst to allow direct U.S. military aid to Kurdish peshmerga forces battling the Islamic State in Iraq.

The Iowa Republican’s amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act is set to be considered on the Senate floor Tuesday with a 60-vote threshold.

Story Continued Below

“The Senate amendment, in its current form, would pit elements of our society against one another and would create a dangerous precedent that would undermine Iraq unity and sovereignty at this critical time,” Iraq’s ambassador to the United States, Lukman Faily, said in a statement to POLITICO.

The Obama administration is also urging senators to vote against the amendment. Defense Secretary Ash Carter, for instance, sent a letter to Congress, saying the measure could push the government of Iraq closer to Iran.

“This type of legislation risks fracturing the government of Iraq,” Carter told Senate Armed Services Chairman John McCain (R-Ariz.). “Directly arming the Kurds or other groups within Iraq is inconsistent with the longstanding U.S. foreign policy of working to maintain a stable, unified Iraq and could be viewed by the government of Iraq as directly interfering in Iraq’s internal affairs.”

Carter also said the amendment “fuels false narratives in Iraq and elsewhere in the region that the United States intends to partition the country.”

At the State Department, spokeswoman Pooja Jhunjhunwala said it was U.S. policy that all arms transfers to Iraq “must be coordinated via the sovereign central government.”

The provision pits the new Iraqi government led by Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi against the Kurdistan Regional Government in Northern Iraq, with both sides employing high-powered Washington lobbyists to press their interests.

The Iraqi government is represented by the Podesta Group, according to disclosure forms, while the Kurds have retained Squire Patton Boggs, Greenberg Traurig and other firms.

Ernst declined to discuss her amendment while walking to a Senate vote, but last month she said on the Senate floor the Iraqi central government has been too slow to get aid to the Kurds.

“This has had a negative impact on the Kurds’ ability to defend Iraqi territory and provide security for those Iraqis and Syrians who have sought refuge in Iraqi Kurdistan,” she said. “Iraqi Kurdish peshmerga forces — our critical partner in the fight against ISIS — need U.S. weapons as quickly as possible.”

Her measure — co-sponsored by Sens. Barbara Boxer (D-Calif.), Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) and Marco Rubio (R-Fla.), among others — would provide temporary, emergency authority for the president to provide weapons and training directly to Kurdish security forces for the purpose of fighting the Islamic State.

A draft of the amendment specifies that assistance may include “anti-tank and anti-armor weapons, armored vehicles, long-range artillery, crew-served weapons and ammunition, secure command and communications equipment, body armor, helmets, logistics equipment, excess defense articles and other military assistance.”

The House version of the NDAA, passed last month, also included provisions seeking to ensure direct U.S. aid to the Kurds.

“We saw how the House amendment generated a perception among ordinary [Iraqis] that the United States seeks to partition Iraq along ethno-sectarian lines,” Faily said. “The Iraqi government remains committed to working closely with the international coalition to ensure that all Iraqis — whether Arab, Kurds, Sunnis, Shias or Christians — receive the necessary military support to confront ISIS.”

Jeremy Herb contributed to this report.