Marco Rubio sells his house of horrors
2016 Marco Rubio sells his house of horrors Though he lost money, the sale saves him from bills and upkeep, which had become a burden.

Marco Rubio finally sold his money-pit of a home in Tallahassee on Tuesday, freeing the presidential candidate from a nagging financial liability and allowing him to distance himself from his scandal-plagued co-owner, former Rep. David Rivera, Florida Republican sources familiar with the transaction tell POLITICO.

Rubio and Rivera closed on the home with an as-yet-unnamed buyer who purchased the home for $117,000 — $8,000 less than the asking price and $18,000 less than the two men paid for it in March 2005 when they both served as state legislators, sources said.

Story Continued Below

"Free at last," one Rubio friend told POLITICO.

Rubio’s campaign had no comment. Rivera couldn’t be reached late Tuesday.

Though Rubio ultimately lost money on the deal, the sale saves the Florida senator from having to worry about the bills and upkeep of the property, which had become a burden over the years — at one point, the home flooded. At other times, Rubio had to rely on a friend in Tallahassee to help keep it rented. And, most embarrassingly in 2010, the bank that held the mortgage on the three-bedroom house initiated foreclosure proceedings against Rubio and Rivera amid a dispute. Rubio was running for Senate at the time and Rivera for the House. Both won.

Just as they had in Tallahassee when they were state lawmakers, Rivera and Rubio briefly lived together in Washington when they won seats in Congress. But the two grew apart and stopped living together. Soon after the election, Rubio’s star began rising nationally while Rivera became mired in scandal. Rivera lost his 2012 House race for a redrawn district amid a campaign-finance case involving secret money that his former girlfriend said he gave her to help a little-known candidate attack a rival.

The girlfriend, Ana Alliegro, and the other candidate, Justin Sternad, both pleaded guilty in federal court to committing campaign finance crimes. Alliegro said she testified before a grand jury about Rivera’s role in the conspiracy. Like other friends and associates of the two men, Alliegro told POLITICO in March that Rubio was distancing himself from Rivera.

“Marco wants little to do with David, and you can’t blame him — who would want that guy by their side as they’re running for president?” Alliegro said.

Rivera, though twice named in open court by a federal prosecutor as the main conspirator in the case, denied wrongdoing and said he was not even under investigation. Prosecutors have yet to charge him, leading many to believe he may escape indictment, just as he had in an unrelated state investigation of his personal and campaign finances as a state legislator. Florida’s ethics commission in April recommended that Rivera should pay nearly $58,000 in fines for double billing state taxpayers for travel as a Florida legislator. Rivera is appealing the ruling.