Trump backs off Planned Parenthood defunding push
'The abortion aspect of Planned Parenthood should absolutely not be funded,' Trump said. Trump backs off Planned Parenthood defunding push

Donald Trump on Tuesday appeared to back off his demands to defund Planned Parenthood.

After saying last week it’s worth having Congress shut down the federal government unless Planned Parenthood is stripped of its $528 million in government funding, the Republican presidential candidate changed his tune.

Story Continued Below

Speaking on CNN’s “New Day” Tuesday morning, Trump said that before defunding Planned Parenthood entirely, he would look at the positive aspects of the organization.

“I would look at the good aspects of it, and I would also look because I’m sure they do some things properly and good for women. I would look at that, and I would look at other aspects also, but we have to take care of women,” he said. “The abortion aspect of Planned Parenthood should absolutely not be funded.”

However, under current law, no government funding is allowed to go to abortions, which Planned Parenthood says make up 3 percent of its services.

Trump’s comments set him in a different category than many of his Republican competitors who are advocating to shut down the organization entirely and move all funds to community health centers that do not perform abortions. The latest defunding push came after a series of undercover, edited videos showing Planned Parenthood officials talking about the sale of fetal tissue.

Trump’s shift on the funding issue follows a tumultuous few days, during which he viciously attacked Fox News moderator Megyn Kelly for her pointed questions during the first prime-time debate about whether Trump is waging a war on women.

Planned Parenthood commended Trump’s remarks — sort of.

“Donald Trump seems to have realized that banning all abortions, shutting down the government, and defunding Planned Parenthood are extreme positions that are way too far outside the mainstream for even him to take,” Eric Ferrero, vice president of communications for Planned Parenthood, said in a statement. “We hope that the rest of the GOP field will wake up and reconsider their extreme and unpopular positions on defunding preventive care, abortion bans, and the other economic issues that women and their families care about.”

Trump also has faced questions in the past about his shifting views overall on abortion. The real estate mogul used to support abortion rights, including partial-birth abortions. During the GOP debate last week he said he had a change of heart after a friend decided not to have an abortion.

“And what happened is friends of mine years ago were going to have a child, and it was going to be aborted. And it wasn’t aborted. And that child today is a total superstar, a great, great child. And I saw that. And I saw other instances,” Trump said during the debate when asked about his flip-flop. “And I am very, very proud to say that I am pro-life.”

Trump, who said on “New Day” that he is now “strongly” pro-life, disagreed with Sen. Marco Rubio’s comments that there should be no exemption for rape or incest. He used someone he has cited often in relation to his change in abortion views – former Republican President Ronald Reagan.

“I am pro-life and I am strongly about pro-life, but I also feel that you go with the exceptions,” he said. “I’m for the exceptions and the health of the mother and the life of the mother and so is Ronald Reagan for the exceptions, by the way.”

Trump, who said if he were president he would be “so good to women,” took a jab at fellow Republican contender former Gov. Jeb Bush.

Bush questioned the amount of money going to women’s health issues at a Southern Baptist conference earlier this month. Bush has since apologized for the statement and said that he misspoke.

“Well that’s an awfully big issue to misspoke. I will be so good to women, I cherish women.” Trump said.

Trump also addressed the pay gap between women and men, saying he would have a policy on it soon.

“The concept of it, I love. I just don’t want it to be a negative where everybody ends up making the same pay because that’s not our system,” Trump said.

After host Chris Cuomo asked Trump four times whether women were paid equal wages as men in his organization, Trump said they were and that, in some cases, they earned more.