Marco Rubio flies under the radar
AP Photo Marco Rubio flies under the radar The Florida senator is running a low-key campaign. Smart strategy, or missed opportunity?

Where is Marco Rubio?

The Florida senator has remained firmly in the top tier of Republican presidential candidates in terms of polling and fundraising. But while his fellow GOP contenders are grabbing the mic at every opportunity, he’s mostly taking a different approach: lying low.

Story Continued Below

Rubio has raised perhaps the third-most of any Republican 2016 candidate — $45.2 million, split between his official campaign and several other entities supporting his candidacy. He hasn’t made any major gaffes so far this cycle, unlike most of his rivals. On Thursday, the RealClearPolitics polling average had Rubio at 7 percentage points, putting him in fourth place behind Donald Trump at 18.2, Jeb Bush at 13.4 and Scott Walker at 12.0 in national polls.

But Rubio hasn’t done everything possible to capitalize on his strong position, Republican strategists say.

“Right now you’ve got 16 candidates all fighting Trump for stage time. This is a long race. He clearly believes in one of his greatest strengths, which is his charisma,” said Florida Republican strategist Adam Goodman, who is not supporting a candidate. “You might say he’s also trying to figure what the rest of his message is.”

It’s not that GOP voters don’t like Rubio — one poll released Monday ranked him second in net favorability behind only Walker — it’s that he’s hardly anyone’s first choice.

“I’ve been keeping track of him. I like him a lot,” said Jorge Dreusicke, who attended a Rubio event in New Hampshire in late June. Dreusicke said he had not picked a specific candidate and that Rubio was near the top of his list, “but he’s not the top.”

Instead of launching some kind of major strategic blitz to try and gain ground, Rubio is opting to just sit tight. This week, Rubio’s campaign canceled a two-day swing through New Hampshire, citing illness. A week earlier Rubio also conspicuously ducked out of the crosshairs of Capitol Hill reporters seeking a hallway interview, saying “I don’t do them anymore” as an aide pointed to his “busy schedule.”

Rubio’s campaign stressed to POLITICO that Rubio is accessible in the hallway and on the campaign trail, and regularly does interviews with local and national press. His aides say they plan to play the long game, not getting overly excited about polling dips or increases, or the latest shiny bauble in the press. Their focus, they say, is getting Rubio’s message out and staying competitive in the early primary states.

“We believe we could win in each of the first four early states,” Rubio campaign communications director Alex Conant said.

But while those early contests are still months away, for now, Rubio is polling worse in each of those states than he is nationally. On Thursday, the RealClearPolitics average put him in eighth place in Iowa, in fifth place in New Hampshire, and in seventh place in South Carolina. (RealClearPolitics does not track polls in Nevada.)

And unlike his two main opponents, Rubio hasn’t shown a clear focus among the early states. Since Jan. 1, according to POLITICO’s count, Bush has been to Iowa four times, New Hampshire eighth times, and South Carolina four times for a total of 16 early-state visits. Walker has been to Iowa seven times, New Hampshire four times, and South Carolina three times for a total of 14 early state visits. Rubio has been to Iowa five times, New Hampshire four times, and South Carolina three times for 12 early state visits.

The Rubio campaign’s approach to the news cycle has been equally cautious. In early July, the Tampa Bay Times noted that Rubio, a Cuban-American, had not yet weighed in Donald Trump’s mid-June claim that Mexico is sending drugs, rapists and other criminals to the United States.

“Why didn’t Jeb Bush, whose wife is Mexican and whose children are Mexican-American, be livid about this and come out swinging immediately,” National Hispanic Foundation for the Arts co-founder Felix Sanchez said on CNN. “Why didn’t Rubio and [Ted] Cruz look at this and say ‘We’re Cuban but this is a Mexican-American community, let’s align with the Mexican-American community … and go after this issue?’”

Only days later did Rubio’s campaign send out a statement bashing the media mogul’s comments as “not just offensive and inaccurate, but also divisive.”

Sanchez, in an interview on Tuesday, said that Rubio had missed a key opportunity to come out early and aggressively against Trump. Rubio, he said, “had the most to win” but did not quickly “align himself with an issue important to Mexican Americans.”

Immigration has been a topic of where Rubio has made sure to tread especially carefully. In a stark contrast to the days when Rubio was working with the Senate “Gang of Eight” to pass a comprehensive immigration reform bill, in his 2015 book “American Dreams: Restoring Economic Opportunity for Everyone” the Florida senator wrote that the 2013 immigration push was “simply not realistic.”

Rubio isn’t avoiding the topic, exactly. But his rhetoric has shifted from talking about a broad bipartisan deal to fix the nation’s immigration system to emphasizing the problems posed by undocumented immigrants.

“Immigration is a legitimate issue. I mean it’s a big problem for the country,” Rubio said in an interview on Fox & Friends on Wednesday. “You have people that are committing crimes, they’re deported, we allow them back in, and we have cities that refuse to deport them. Legitimate issue. We have a porous border, meaning not just the border with Mexico but 40 percent of people in this country, illegally, are overstaying visas. Legitimate issue. Broken legal immigration issue. We’re accepting people on the basis of who they know, they have a relative living here. Not what they can contribute. Legitimate issue.”

Rubio went on to jab at Trump, but refrained from centering his attack on Trump’s Mexico comments.

“I don’t think the way he’s behaved over the last few weeks is either dignified or worthy of the office he seeks,” Rubio added.

Unlike some of his competitors, Rubio has also been careful to avoid direct attacks on his Florida neighbor and one-time mentor: Jeb Bush. While Ted Cruz has blasted Bush as too much like failed presidential nominees Mitt Romney and John McCain and Scott Walker has tangled with Bush on Iran, the most disparaging remark Rubio has made about Bush has been to say that the election is a choice between the past and the future.

Rubio has also held his fire even as Bush has started to make subtle digs at his Senate record.

The Bush campaign’s first indirect swipe at Rubio came when the former governor announced his presidential bid. Florida Sen. Don Gaetz spoke to the crowd and bashed first-term U.S. senators – a statement that many viewed as a ding on Rubio as well as Obama. Two days later, in an interview with ABC News, Bush said “there’s no question at all” that he’s got more experience than Rubio. On Monday, Bush proposed withholding the salaries of elected officials who miss votes — another swipe at Rubio, who has missed more votes this year than any other U.S. senator running for president.

Largely, Rubio has kept his gunsights trained on President Barack Obama — especially on foreign policy, which he considers his area of expertise. Rubio has bashed the president’s nuclear deal with Iran and his decision to establish an embassy in Cuba, even while new polling shows that seven in 10 Americans support opening up new ties to Havana.

But it’s been tough for him to distinguish his position from that of the other Republicans, all of whom express alarm over Obama’s policies abroad. On Thursday, during a Senate hearing on the Iran deal, Rubio made sure to come out with guns blazing.

“The Iranian regime and the world should know that this deal is your deal, your deal with Iran — I mean yours meaning this administration. And the next president is under no legal obligation to live up to it,” Rubio told Secretary of State John Kerry. “The Iranian regime and the world should know that the majority of members of this Congress do not support this deal and that the deal could go away on the day President Obama leaves office.”

It was an exchange that showed Rubio is willing to throw a punch, if it’s at a target he prefers. Sooner or later, though, he’s going to have to go after his fellow Republicans.

“We’re moving into the phase of the campaign where both Walker and Rubio and the candidates who are arguably in that top tier will have to start engaging each other pretty soon,” said Steve Schmidt, who was a top adviser for Sen. John McCain’s 2008 presidential campaign. “I think Marco Rubio’s challenge is to articulate a governing vision, a path for the country, a path for renewal a lot more than it is to microcast.”

Marc Caputo and Hadas Gold contributed to this report.