Feud in Florida over Clinton backer He’s supporting a Republican congressman, much to the chagrin of some Democrats.

Supporters of a Miami congressional candidate want Hillary Clinton to punish a top Hispanic media consultant and fundraiser because he has endorsed an incumbent Republican congressman and has worked for Donald Trump in the past.

The telenovela-like drama has an only-in-Miami feel, replete with disarrayed Democrats, backbiting, the specter of Trump and Cuba policy — and even a cameo from a former ventriloquist and adult movie-store worker.

Story Continued Below

At the center of the controversy: Freddy Balsera, a Democrat and Clinton campaign surrogate who was President Barack Obama’s 2008 Hispanic media manager and served as a national finance committee member for both of his presidential campaigns. Balsera stoked the ire of some local Democrats after he endorsed his longtime friend and one-time business associate, Republican Rep. Carlos Curbelo — much to the chagrin of Annette Taddeo, the Democrat who was preparing to run against the freshman congressman in 2016.

Taddeo’s supporters complained about Balsera’s endorsement to the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, where executive director Kelly Ward raised the issue with the office of Clinton’s political director, Amanda Renteria.

“It wasn’t a formal complaint [that Ward submitted], it was more of passing on a message,” said one source familiar with the conversation.

The Clinton campaign declined to comment on the record, though one staffer described Balsera as a “supporter” but did not elaborate.

Taddeo didn’t want to discuss what others have said to the Clinton campaign but stressed that she bore no animus toward Balsera, who nevertheless suspects her in the effort to denigrate him in D.C.

“I have nothing negative to say about Freddy. I look forward to working with him when I get to Congress,” she told POLITICO. “This is not connected to me in any way. It’s sad he’s supporting Curbelo. I didn’t know people were speaking ill of him. I honestly have bigger fish to fry.”

But another Taddeo supporter called Balsera’s endorsement of Curbelo “disgusting” and he wants the consultant blacklisted from the presidential campaign. For his part, Balsera blasted Taddeo for being “selfish” and said her fundraising was so anemic last quarter — relative to Curbelo’s — that former Congressman Joe Garcia might run for his old seat against Curbelo, who won it from him in 2014.

The behind-the-scenes schism has troubled Democrats, who worry that a fractured party in Miami-Dade County could make it tough for them to carry a winnable congressional seat — and perhaps dampen enthusiasm for Clinton in part of the most populous, most Democratic county in the nation’s most important swing state.

The bad blood began to publicly surface Friday morning on “Prohibido Callarse,” a morning show on Spanish-language radio station Actualidad.

There, a Democratic activist named Carlos A. Pereira — upset with Trump’s statements about Mexican and illegal immigrants — was discussing his push to have the Doral City Commission declare Trump “persona non grata” in the city, where the New York billionaire owns a golf course and where the city had given him $2.5 million for this year’s Miss Universe contest. Pereira then went out of his way to point out that Balsera had worked for Trump.

Balsera suspected Pereira of working in concert with Taddeo because the activist ran for local legislative office in the Miami area when she tried to recruit candidates to compete in every seat last year. Taddeo denies involvement in that race or in Pereira’s Friday comments. But Balsera was miffed nonetheless and hit back at Pereira, saying Pereira was an “embarrassing” candidate because he had been a ventriloquist and sex-shop worker before he ran — unsuccessfully — for a legislative seat.

Within an hour of Pereira’s appearance, consultants and political insiders from Washington to Miami began sending out copies of Facebook messages from Balsera Communications that praised Trump. One posting showed Balsera and Trump hanging out together; the most recent posting, Feb. 20, called Trump “our client and friend.”

About the same time on Friday, both Balsera and Taddeo were VIP guests of Clinton at a Miami speech at which she called for an end to the Cuban embargo. Balsera and Taddeo didn’t talk, and they walked by each other with little eye contact in front of a reporter.

Balsera said his firm no longer works with Trump.

“When we were hired to work with him, it was before he ran for president and before he made all of these crazy comments about immigrants,” Balsera said.

Balsera’s former Trump connections came at an awkward time for him.

On Thursday, he hosted the Clinton campaign’s Latino outreach director, Lorella Praeli, an immigration activist who’s known as a Dreamer because she lived in the U.S. after she was brought to this country unlawfully by her parents. On that same day, Trump called for deporting all illegal immigrants, including Dreamers, though he’d let some back in the country immediately.

Balsera has yet another indirect tie to Trump: Curbelo. The congressman had accused Trump of being a Democratic ringer who’s doing Clinton’s dirty work to frame Republicans as immigration know-nothings. Curbelo is also a vociferous opponent of Clinton’s new anti-embargo Cuba policy, which both Balsera and Taddeo back. But unlike most congressional Republicans, Curbelo is pro-immigration reform and pro-gay rights; he also believes man-made climate change is a problem that needs to be addressed.

“Carlos is a friend, and on almost all of the major issues, his politics are right for this community,” Balsera said, explaining his endorsement. “I have busted my butt and taken the hits as a Cuban-American Democrat in this town when it wasn’t popular. All of this noise shows how selfish Annette can be. I am one of the most active Democratic spokespeople and fundraisers in the state, but she tries to undermine me and prevent me from being a resource to them for purely personal reasons. There is too much at stake in this presidential election for this kind of selfishness.”

Balsera pointed out that numerous Democrats endorsed Curbelo in April, before Taddeo formally joined the race, including Clinton fundraiser Ira Leesfield.

Because of Taddeo’s relatively poor fundraising, Balsera said the DCCC might not list her in its “Red-to-Blue” program targeting vulnerable Republicans. And he noted that former Rep. Garcia might seek the seat. Balsera had backed Garcia, also a longtime friend, in 2014 against Curbelo.

Asked about running again for his old Miami-Key West congressional seat, Garcia didn’t tamp down speculation: “I’m not running for anything right now.”

So that’s not a no? “That’s absolutely right. But it doesn’t mean I’m running either. Right now, I’m walking out of Publix with some fried chicken. That’s what I’m doing right now,” Garcia responded. He pointed out that the 26th Congressional District will have to be redrawn due to a Florida Supreme Court ruling last month that found the Legislature unconstitutionally gerrymandered. The district is already Democratic leaning, and could be more so after the redrawing later this month during a special legislative session.

Taddeo sounded surprised by the news of Garcia’s potential interest but said, “I’ve always been a friend of Joe’s, and I do look forward to having his support.”

But not everyone affiliated with Taddeo pulled punches. Former Hialeah Mayor Raul Martinez — who ran unsuccessfully against Rep. Lincoln Diaz-Balart in 2008, when Curbelo was the congressman’s campaign spokesman — blasted Balsera, a former Martinez supporter.

Martinez said he was on a conference call with Garcia, Balsera and others with the Clinton campaign over its Cuba policy and he kept wondering, “Why is Freddy here if he endorsed Curbelo, who’s against the policy?”

Martinez accused Balsera of being a turncoat and said he has spoken to unidentified Clinton officials and asked that Balsera be kept away from the presidential campaign because of disloyalty to the party.

“Freddy is backing a candidate who says that Trump is in league with Hillary and who is against her Cuba policy. This makes no sense,” Martinez said. “This endorsement is just disgusting. All it’s going to do is hurt us in the campaign to come.”