GOP millionaire launches pro-Rubio super PAC with new ad
AP Photo GOP millionaire launches pro-Rubio super PAC with new ad

Republican multimillionaire John Jordan is getting behind Florida Sen. Marco Rubio hours before the next Republican presidential debate and launching a super PAC to help boost Rubio's campaign.

Jordan, who has spent millions on past political campaigns, would not say how much he was planning to spend on the new venture but he is launching a 60-second television ad that he said will initially air on Fox Business and Fox News. Jordan said the spot is scheduled to first run ahead of the debate Tuesday night on Fox Business.

Story Continued Below

The ad is being paid for by a new group called Baby Got PAC, which filed paperwork with the Federal Election Commission earlier this month. The ad was posted on YouTube by Florida Republican political strategist Rick Wilson, who has worked for Jordan before. Wilson did not immediately return a call for comment.

The ad casts Rubio as the Republican candidate that Democrats fear most.

“When we started to make this ad, we had to decide which conservative candidate for president to support,” a narrator says over an image of a past debate stage. It goes on to praise Ted Cruz, Donald Trump and Ben Carson but then pivots to Rubio.

“It’s a tough choice. So you know who we asked? Hillary Clinton and the Democrats,” the narrator continues. “For once, they told the truth. They admitted there’s one candidate who scares Hillary Clinton and that’s Senator Marco Rubio.”

Jordan, in an email announcing the ad, said, “I am very picky and more than a little judgmental about the quality of political commercials these days. I hope that the below is a marked improvement and that it will be helpful in reframing the race.”

Jordan had previously raised money for Scott Walker’s presidential campaign, hosting the Wisconsin governor at his northern California winery. Asked how much he planned to spend helping Rubio, Jordan wrote in an email, “Depends on debate and how things unfold between now and Turkey Day.”