Donald Trump's free media bonanza
Donald Trump reserved nearly $2 million for a seven-day ad blitz in Iowa and New Hampshire this week. But the billionaire real-estate mogul and master media manipulator also got hundreds of thousands of dollars' worth of free airtime on Monday — and even more in seemingly endless coverage and discussion of what amounts to a glorified press release touting his candidacy.

Trump’s new 30-second spot, released Monday morning, was played in its entirety 40 times on the cable news networks between Monday and Tuesday morning, according to POLITICO’s count. Using hour-by-hour prices provided by ad tracking firms for 30-second ads on CNN, Fox News and MSNBC, POLITICO estimated that the 40 airings would have cost Trump $330,000.

Story Continued Below

But that number doesn't even include the many times all the major channels aired large chunks of the ad. Significant portions of the spot were played at least 20 times in the same period across the cable networks in that same 24-hour period. Though none of the broadcast networks played the full ad in either their blockbuster morning shows or evening news programs, all of them, from NBC’s “Today" to CBS' “Evening News,” dedicated multiple segments to it, often airing 10- to 15-second clips.

It all amounted to a promotional coup for the author of “The Art of the Deal,” whose guerrilla marketing strategy —hype up his first ad buy, invest a little, and get even more back for free — paid huge returns in what campaign operatives call “earned media.”

“Trump's paid media launch is a twofer: His ads keep his campaign momentum going, and the coverage that they generate make it harder for others in the race to get coverage during this critical time,” said Evan Tracey, senior vice president at National Media Inc., a GOP TV-ad-buying firm.

MSNBC and Fox News each played the ad 14 times in its entirety between Monday and Tuesday morning. CNN played the ad 12 times in the same time period. On Fox, which dominates the cable ratings, that would amount to about $200,000 in free ad time. The ad, if aired in full during the morning shows and nightly newscasts, would have cost hundreds of thousands more.

Trump hasn't been shy in boasting about his ability to drive media coverage, often tweeting about how his frequent appearances boost TV ratings, while benefiting from unfiltered livestreams of his campaign events.

"I've spent zero on advertising because you and Fox and all of the others — I won't mention names, but every other network, I mean they cover me a lot, to put it mildly," he told Fox News host Neil Cavuto in October. "And in covering me, it's almost like if I put ads in on top of the program, it would be too much. It would be too much Trump."

Indeed, Trump has completely dominated media mentions since the summer, accounting for 41 percent of television news mentions of Republican candidates, according to the 2016 Campaign Television Tracker. Meanwhile, Jeb Bush, whose campaign and super PAC have spent a combined $49 million on advertisements across the country through Jan. 9, has accounted for just over 17 percent of television news mentions.

Seeking to explain why his campaign had pulled its ads in Iowa and South Carolina, Bush mused on Monday, "Advertising in this world doesn't work to the same extent it probably did in the past. So we're making adjustments."

As of Tuesday, Trump stood at 35 percent in the Real Clear Politics average of national polls. Bush was at 4.3 percent.

Eliza Collins and Nolan McCaskill contributed to this report.