Koch brothers’ D.C. guru joins Marco Rubio team
Marco Rubio's addition of Marc Short, a top political adviser to the Koch Brothers, to his campaign signals the start of ramped up efforts to attack front-runner Donald Trump. | AP Photo Koch brothers’ D.C. guru joins Marco Rubio team A deeply-connected operative plunges into the establishment’s race to stop Trump.

Marc Short, the Koch brothers’ top political adviser in Washington and a trusted member of their inner circle for five years, is making a surprise move to the Marco Rubio campaign as a senior adviser as the Republican establishment ramps up efforts to stop Donald Trump.

Short — president of Freedom Partners, the Kochs’ umbrella political organization — will join the campaign in about a week and brings deep connections to the donor and grass-roots worlds.

Story Continued Below

“Marc has been running the most sophisticated political operation for the last few cycles, and really knows the mood of the electorate," said Scott Reed, senior political strategist at the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. "This is a big sign of consolidation by the party.”

Charles and David Koch have not endorsed in the presidential race and are unlikely to while there are still multiple viable candidates running against Trump, according to GOP sources. Top backers in the brothers' network include supporters of Rubio and Sen. Ted Cruz. Any decision to get involved in the nomination race would likely come only if it narrowed to Trump and one of those senators, the sources said.

Mark Holden, chairman of Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce, said in a statement: "Marc Short has advised me that he is resigning effective immediately … Marc has been a valued leader and contributor to Freedom Partners’ and our network’s success for the past five years.”

Holden continued: “Marc leaves behind a strong leadership team at Freedom Partners and working with them, we will continue to work to further our goal of a free and prosperous society for all Americans. We look forward to continuing our work with our partners to further these goals in 2016 and beyond.”

Ward Baker, executive director of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, said Short is “a man of integrity and faith.”

“No one understands data and how data works better than Marc," Baker said.

Phil Cox, former executive director of the Republican Governors Association, called Short “a steady, respected hand at the top of a complex, multifaceted organization.”

“This is a big get for Rubio,” Cox added. “Marc brings a unique perspective as one of the few people who have had one foot in traditional Republican Party politics and another in more movement-conservative efforts.”

SUBSCRIBE to Politico Playbook http://politi.co/1M75UbX