Trump defies GOP litmus test on Israel
In a break with standard Republican rhetoric on a politically charged foreign policy issue, Donald Trump insisted at Thursday's debate that he would not take "sides" in peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians, drawing attacks from his rivals and even a charge that his position was "anti-Israel."

"It's probably the toughest negotiation anywhere in the world of any kind," Trump said when asked about his recent comment that he would be a "neutral" broker between Israel and the Palestinians. "But it doesn't help if I start saying, 'I am very pro-Israel, very pro, more than anybody on this stage.' " Trump added.

Story Continued Below

"With that being said," Trump added, "I am totally pro-Israel."

Despite that pledge, Florida Senator Marco Rubio pounced on Trump's assessment of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

"The position you've taken is an anti-Israel position," Rubio said. "And here's why. Because you cannot be an honest broker in a dispute between two sides in which one of the sides is constantly acting in bad faith." Rubio said the Palestinian Authority has "walked away from multiple efforts to make peace" and cited Palestinian terrorist activity.

"The next president of the United States needs to be someone like me who will stand firmly on the side of Israel," Rubio said.

Ted Cruz struck a similar note, throwing in a swipe at the Democratic presidential front runner for good measure: "Both Donald and Hillary Clinton want to be neutral, to use Donald's word, between Israel and the Palestinians," Cruz said. "Let me be clear. If I'm president, America will stand unapologetically with the nation of Israel."

Neutrality has long been the official U.S. negotiating position in talks it has mediated between Israel and the Palestinians, though politicians in both parties — and particularly Republicans — typically emphasize Israeli security over Palestinian grievances.

Many experts, especially on the left, dispute Rubio's claim that the Palestinians have repeatedly walked away from "generous" Israeli peace offers, though it is a virtual article of faith among conservative Republicans.

Rubio and Trump argued at some length about the nature of the peace talks, with the Floridian saying that Trump sees the peace talks as "a real estate deal" and saying that "a deal is not a deal when you're dealing with terrorists."

"You are not a negotiator," Trump retorted.

While insisting that President Barack Obama has "treated Israel horribly," Trump defended his own bona fides. "I was the grand marshall down Fifth Avenue a number of years ago for the Israeli Day Parade, I have very close ties to Israel. I've received the Tree of Life Award and many of the greatest awards given by Israel," Trump boasted.

The GOP candidates tackled several other foreign policy issues in Thursday's CNN debate. Ohio Governor John Kasich offered an unclear answer when asked about his recent call for the U.S. to examine the possibility of "regime change" in North Korea, which recently tested a long-range ballistic missile in violation of U.N. resolutions.

Asked whether he would risk war to remove North Korea's leadership, Kasich said, “It would depend exactly what, you know, what was happening. What the situation was ... I'm also aware of the fact that there's 10 million people living in Seoul. So, you don't just run around making charges.”



On Libya, Cruz said that both Trump and Rubio "agreed with the Obama-Clinton policy of toppling the government in Libya. That was a disaster."

That prompted Trump to angrily deny that he had weighed in at the time on Obama's military intervention in the north African country. "He said I was in favor of Libya? I never discussed that subject," Trump said.

But Buzzfeed has reported that Trump said in 2011 of Libyan dictator Muammar Qaddafi that "we should go in, we should stop this guy, which would be very easy and very quick."

"[W]e have go in to save these lives; these people are being slaughtered like animals. It’s horrible what’s going on it has to be stopped.” Trump added in that 2011 discussion on a personal video blog.

Onstage, Cruz challenged Trump's denial of any past position on Libya, saying that he would post Trump's 2011 interview on his website.

"You can see and hear the exact words from Donald's mouth," Cruz said. "And I assume when he sees that interview, maybe he forgot about it, but I assume Donald will apologize where he sees that he said exactly that."