New GOP claim of illegal handling of fetal tissue
Rep. Marsha Blackburn said the Select Investigative Panel on Infant Lives is looking to paint a picture of the whole industry instead of suggesting that specific companies have engaged in criminal activity. New GOP claim of illegal handling of fetal tissue

Congressional Republicans say they have evidence that suggests an unnamed abortion provider and an unnamed fetal tissue company may have run afoul of federal laws that ban them from profiting from handling fetal tissue.

The allegation stems from documents collected by the Select Investigative Panel on Infant Lives, which was established by House Republicans in the wake of the sting videos against Planned Parenthood last summer.

Story Continued Below

"Concern has been raised about following the law and how the procurement companies operate within the framework of the law. There has been sufficient doubt raised around these relationships and the pricing schedules," Chairman Marsha Blackburn (R-Tenn.) told POLITICO. "Anytime Congress sees something that is violation of law, it behooves us to get in there and look at that."

Democrats, as well as one of the companies described in the report, describe it as part of a smear campaign and say some of the documents in it appear to have been obtained illegally.

At a hearing Wednesday, Republicans plan to present a report containing accounting, marketing and other business documents that they say indicate the unnamed procurement company and abortion clinic likely made a profit off the handling of fetal tissue.

Several former U.S. prosecutors are expected to testify that federal laws have been violated. Republican Sen. Ben Sasse and Democratic Sen. Jeanne Shaheen are slated to testify as well.

According to the Republican report, a tissue company procurement technician working out of the abortion clinic is responsible for the collection and distribution of the fetal tissue. She or he gets consent from a patient, collects the fetal remains and ships them out.

The committee says that since all of the work is done by the technician, there is no reasonable cost to the abortion clinic — so any money they collect is profit. Committee members also released pricing information they say shows a profit for the tissue company.

A 1993 law prohibits anyone from acquiring, receiving or transferring fetal tissue for "valuable consideration." It specifically does not include payments for transportation, processing or storage.

The report is the latest in an escalating battle between House Republicans and participants in the fetal tissue business, an issue that prompted congressional investigation after anti-abortion activist David Daleiden released a series of videos last summer alleging illegal activity.

No congressional committee or law enforcement office has concluded there is evidence of wrongdoing by Planned Parenthood or the fetal tissue handlers. Daleiden, however, was charged with using false government documents and trying to buy fetal tissue — allegations that he denies.

Democrats on the committee say the documents, some of which lack sourcing information, have led to "inaccurate and misleading" conclusions.

"Nevertheless, we anticipate that the Republicans will claim — and invite their witnesses to agree — that these documents indicate possible criminal misconduct that warrants this Panel’s and the Justice Department’s investigation," the Democratic committee staff wrote in a memo to members. "In reality, the documents themselves are not evidence of unlawful conduct as any dollar amounts that they contain or discussion of pricing and costs may represent lawful, reimbursable costs associated with fetal tissue research."

In the documents, the committee redacted the names of the abortion clinic and tissue procurement company. Blackburn said the committee is looking to paint a picture of the whole industry instead of suggesting that specific companies have engaged in criminal activity.

"There will be a time for further work" on identifying the specific companies and whether they should be turned over to law enforcement, she said. "For right now what we want to do is establish what did or did not transpire and what is considered to be a standard business practice in this area."

But it is clear from the documents — which have been scrubbed of the tissue company's name but not easily identifiable information like its website banner or founding information — that they are talking about StemExpress. The committee has focused specific attention on StemExpress — one of its former employees is in Daleiden's videos.

In a sharply worded letter Tuesday, StemExpress' lawyers questioned the documents' authenticity and said at least one screen shot appeared to have been illegally made from an internal part of the company's website. Some of the documents, the company said, appear to have been obtained by Daleiden.

Democrats on the committee have chided Republicans for collecting personally identifiable information on the people involved in the tissue procurement business, saying it is reckless given the death threats issued in the wake of the sting videos.

On Tuesday, a Washington state man pleaded guilty to making death threats against StemExpress and its employees. The man posted several threats on a news website in which he threatened to go to California to kill the employee and offered money to anyone who "beat" him to it.