Wealth of Congress
Click to see in graph view

Rank Net worth Minimum assets Minimum liabilities This year #1 $254.65M $379.65M $125.00M Previous year #1 $357.25M $432.25M $75.00M Change 0 -28.72% -12.17% 66.67%

Issa is the richest member of Congress for a third consecutive year. That assures the publicity-conscious congressman will remain among the members best known to the general public, even though House Republican term limits have forced him to hand over the gavel he used to bludgeon the Obama administration as chairman of the Oversight and Government Reform Committee.

The backstory behind Issa’s fortune has become the stuff of congressional legend. After being charged — but never convicted — as a young man in two car theft cases, he invested $7,000 and loans from his family in a struggling Cleveland consumer electronics business in the early 1980s. Within a few years, he’d transformed his holdings into DEI, moved to California to take advantage of a surge in auto thefts and unveiled the enormously popular and profitable Viper car alarm. (He used his own sonorous baritone to record the system’s signature warnings: “Protected by Viper. Stand back,” and, “Please step away from the car.”)

Issa sold the business in 2000, the same year he invested $2 million of his money to win an open seat just north of San Diego.

That figure drooped on paper in the past year, to $254.65 million, but there’s a likelihood the congressional reporting rules have led to an overstatement of any financial setbacks.

The forms essentially double count his biggest liability, a mammoth personal loan, even though it appears he paid off more than $50 million he owed Merrill Lynch in September 2014 and borrowed an equivalent amount the same day from UBS. It appears he financed that switch by liquidating a handful of his two dozen investment accounts.

Still, he was left at the end of 2014 with positions in seven high-yield bond funds worth $25 million to $50 million, and three other investment accounts with a minimum value of more than $50 million — the highest disclosure category. Because that category has no upper limit, Issa could be worth far more than his disclosure suggests.

The congressman’s other main investment is in commercial real estate, including stakes in several management and holding companies and a pair of sleek office parks in his district each worth between $5 million and $25 million.

Issa has used his fortune to distinguish himself as one of the bigger self-funders in modern congressional politics. Before coming to the House, he spent $11 million on a failed bid for the GOP Senate nomination in California, and in 2003 he got the state’s gubernatorial recall off the ground by spending $1.7 million on the petition drive — hoping to end up on the ballot once Democrat Gray Davis was ousted. Several GOP House colleagues persuaded Issa to step aside for the eventual winner, Arnold Schwarzenegger, and to make his career in the House.