Trump: 'No one should be judged by their race or their color'

Freedom means no one should be judged by his or race or skin color, Donald Trump said Friday.

Delivering remarks at the Faith & Freedom Coalition’s Road to the Majority conference in Washington, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee defined religious freedom as “the right of people of faith to freely practice their faith,” adding that it’s “so important.”

Story Continued Below

“Freedom of any kind means no one should be judged by their race or their color and the color of their skin — should not be judged that way,” Trump said. “And right now we have a very divided nation. We're going to bring our nation together.”

His comments come in the wake of receiving wide condemnation from Republican leaders over his controversial comments regarding an American judge with Mexican heritage.

“If I win, we're gonna bring our nation together,” he continued. “The importance of faith to the United States of society, it's really the people who go to church, who work in religious charity — so important — and share their values.”

The reality TV star was restrained for much of his speech, which lasted less than 20 minutes and was largely read from a teleprompter. But his remarks — and even his delivery — are a positive sign for a number of Republicans who have called on Trump to act like a general election candidate.

Even as the billionaire’s remarks were disrupted by protesters, Trump remained presidential, even refraining from his usual taunts.

“All right. Thank you. A little freedom of speech, please. Freedom of speech,” Trump said as protesters were being removed from the event and the crowd chanted “USA.” “Thank you. Very rude, but what are you gonna do? Thank you. Thank you, darling. I appreciate it.”



Trump slammed Hillary Clinton, accusing the former secretary of state of wanting to increase the Obama administration’s plan to take in Syrian refugees fleeing the country’s civil war by 500 percent and also attacking her on the Clinton Foundation, her campaign contributions and her policies.

“Hillary Clinton's Wall Street agenda will crush working families. She’ll put bureaucrats, not parents, in charge of our lives, and our children’s education can’t have it. She’ll be trapping kids in failing schools,” Trump said. “She’ll plunge our inner cities into even deeper poverty, if that's possible.”

“Hillary's agenda of taxation — and she wants to raise your taxes big-league, folks. Big league. Get used it. Hear it,” he continued. “She wants to raise your taxes tremendously. Regulation, bureaucracy, government control and open borders have economically destroyed our inner cities. Her policies will be a crushing blow to all poor people in this country. Her education policies, her economic policies, her immigration policies and her trade policies will plunge our poor African-Americans and Hispanic communities into turmoil and even worse, despair. Believe me. You look at what's going on.”

Authors: