Trump on Russia hack: 'I wish I had that power'
Trump suggested the DNC hack was "probably China" or possibly a "400-pound person sitting in bed." | AP Photo Trump on Russia hack: 'I wish I had that power'

Donald Trump on Wednesday mocked the speculation that Russia hacked the Democratic National Committee's servers in order to help him, suggesting that it was "probably China" or possibly a "400-pound person sitting in bed."

Speaking to supporters in Scranton, Pennsylvania, Trump commented on remarks from Hillary Clinton's campaign earlier this week tying the hack to Trump, specifically campaign manager Robby Mook's assertion that Russians hacked the DNC to boost his chances. “What’s disturbing to us is that experts are telling us Russian state actors broke into the DNC, stole these emails, and other experts are now saying that the Russians are releasing these emails for the purpose of actually helping Donald Trump,” Mook told CNN on Sunday.

Story Continued Below

“I’m sitting there watching, saying what did I do? What did I do? What did I do? Right? Trump," he said, mimicking Mook. "I wish I had that power. Man, that would be power. So he talks about Russia’s hacking.”

Instead, Trump continued, “Probably it was China or somebody else. Might be a 400-pound person sitting in bed. K? Might be. Some of the greatest hackers of all time.”

Trump's latest comments on the DNC hack came hours after he called on Russia to divulge the contents of Clinton's "30,000 emails that are missing" from her private server, drawing condemnation and alarm from national security experts and lawmakers of all political stripes.

Mook's explanation, Trump explained, reminded him of Jon Lovitz's pathological liar "Saturday Night Live" character. Delivering a brief impression of the character Tommy Flanagan, Trump remarked, "'Yeah, yeah I went to Harvard, Harvard that’s right.'"

“This was like, Russia hacked … yeah, it was Trump," the Republican nominee said. "I’m saying, ‘Whoa! Right?"

“Now these are lying, bad people, folks," Trump said. "These are bad, bad people. These are bad, bad people. And they’re incompetent people. And we want to turn our country around.”

As far as members of his own party still coming to grips with Trump as the nominee, the Manhattan mogul brushed aside any need for their approval.

While "it would be nice if the party unified," Trump said, "I don't think it matters from my standpoint ... But it would be nice. I don't know why, but it would be nice. But we have to win."