Trump campaign CEO once charged in domestic violence case
A police report says that Bannon’s then-wife claimed he pulled at her neck and wrist during an altercation over their finances. | AP Photo Trump campaign CEO once charged in domestic violence case The 1996 charges were later dropped due to witness unavailability.

Stephen K. Bannon, the new CEO of the Donald Trump campaign, was charged with misdemeanor domestic violence, battery and dissuading a witness following an incident in early January 1996, though the case was ultimately dismissed, according to a police report and court documents.

The Santa Monica, Calif., police report says that Bannon’s then-wife claimed he pulled at her neck and wrist during an altercation over their finances, and an officer reported witnessing red marks on her neck and wrist to bolster her account. Bannon also reportedly smashed the phone when she tried to call the police.

Story Continued Below

While the case ended when Bannon's ex-wife did not appear in court, the incident presents a new problem for the Trump campaign following the hiring of the controversial Bannon. He went on leave from Breitbart News, where he is chairman, to take over the Trump campaign.

Bannon, through a spokeswoman, said he was never interviewed by the police about the incident. Bannon pleaded "not guilty" to the allegations and was represented by a local criminal defense attorney during the proceedings.

The couple — who had twin girls — were divorced shortly after the criminal charges were dropped in August 1996.

"The bottom line is he has a great relationship with the twins, he has a great relationship with the ex-wife, he still supports them," said Alexandra Preate, Bannon's spokeswoman.

On Jan. 1, 1996, according to the Santa Monica Police Department, police responded to Bannon’s home following a hangup during a 911 call. At the time, Bannon was heading up the Beverly Hills-based Bannon & Co., described in a Bloomberg profile as “a boutique investment bank specializing in media.”

Bannon’s then-wife, who POLITICO is not naming, answered the door at the home looking “very upset,” according to the police report .

According to the report, she said, “Oh, thank you, you are here. How did you know to come?” and took several minutes to compose herself.

Bannon, according to the report, was less than seven months into his second marriage, though the couple had known each other for a number of years prior to their April 1995 wedding. The couple just had twin girls seven months earlier, Bannon’s ex-wife told police at the time.

There had been a history of physical altercations in their relationship, Bannon’s then-wife relayed. "In the beginning of their relationship, she said they [had] 3 or 4 argument that became physical and they had been going to counseling. There has not been any physical abuse in their arguments for about the past 4 years. [REDACTED] said they have been arguing a lot, but no violence,” the police report states.

Bannon's ex-wife did not respond to emails and phone calls seeking comment.

According to the police report, on New Year’s morning 1996, Bannon’s then-wife asked for a credit card to go shopping, and they argued over whether she should just write a check. This quickly turned into a bigger argument about the couple’s finances and future.

"She told him that maybe he should find another place to live, that she wanted a divorce. [REDACTED] said he laughed at her, and said he would never move out,” the report states.

Bannon had gone out to their car, followed by his then-wife, the report says. She then spat at him, and Bannon “reached up to her from the driver’s seat of his car and grabbed her left wrist. He pulled her down, as if he was trying to pull [her] into the car, over the door."

"[REDACTED] said Mr. Bannon grabbed at neck, also pulling her into the car. She said that she started to fight back striking at his face so he would let go of her. After a short period of time she was able to get away from him,” the report states.

The ex-wife then entered the house and said she was calling 911. She was dialing the number when, the report states, Bannon “jumped over her and the twins to grab the phone from her. Once he got the phone, he threw it across the room,” and then left the house.

"[REDACTED] found the phone in several pieces and could not use it. She complained of soreness to her neck. I saw red marks on her left wrist and the right side of her neck. These were photographed,” the police report states, adding that the ex-wife declined an emergency protective order.

On Feb. 22, 1996, a complaint was filed against Bannon by the Santa Monica District Attorney’s office for misdemeanor domestic violence, battery, and dissuading a witness, according to Los Angeles County court dockets obtained by POLITICO.

The counts issued against Bannon in the domestic violence section include count 273.5(A), which according to the California Penal Code is “corporal injury resulting in a traumatic condition” on a victim who is either a spouse, former spouse, cohabitant, fiancé, partner, or mother or father of the offender’s children.

Another count listed in the court records, 136.1(B)(1), is for seeking to “prevent or dissuade another person who has been the victim of a crime or who is witness to a crime” from reporting it to authorities.

The third count, 242, was for battery, which is defined under California law as “any willful and unlawful use of force or violence upon the person of another.”

On March 12, 1996, Bannon was arraigned. He pleaded not guilty to all the counts and was released on his own recognizance.

A jury trial was called on July 31, 1996, though the trial was “trailed,” meaning it was delayed.

On Aug. 12, 1996, the case was transferred to a different court, and was called for trial. According to the court records, however, the “victim/witness” was “unable to be located.” As a result, the judge ordered the case dismissed.

Five months later, on Jan. 13, 1997, Bannon’s then-wife filed to dissolve their marriage, according to divorce records obtained by POLITICO. She kept physical custody of their two children, whom POLITICO is also not naming. Bannon was ordered to pay her legal fees related to the divorce, child and spousal support -- including child-care and housekeeping, medical insurance and costs, school and extracurricular activity dues, and the children’s undergraduate tuition, room and board. According to the divorce settlement, Bannon was already paying spousal and child support to a wife and child from a previous marriage.

Bannon’s defense attorney on the case, Steven R. Mandell, declined to comment.