Trump rolls out paid family leave plan
The proposal includes six weeks of paid maternity leave that an aide said would be paid for by eliminating unemployment insurance fraud. | Getty Trump rolls out paid family leave plan

Donald Trump's campaign on Tuesday is rolling out policy proposals aimed at lowering the cost of childcare, but already is facing resistance from Democrats who pointed to his business history and statements about women.

Trump will unveil the full extent of his plans at an event later in the evening in Aston, Pennsylvania, accompanied by his eldest daughter, Ivanka, who is said to have come up with part of the plan. The proposal includes six weeks of paid maternity leave that an aide said would be paid for by eliminating unemployment insurance fraud.

Story Continued Below

Democrats and supporters of Hillary Clinton mocked the first reported details of Trump's plan on Twitter.

"If @realDonaldTrump actually believed in paid leave he'd have offered it to all his workers. Has he?" tweeted Neera Tanden, a Clinton supporter and president of the Center for American Progress.

Clinton spokesman Jesse Lehrich, sharing screenshots of negative headlines pertaining to Trump's relationship with women, remarked, "somehow having trouble believing Trump will be a champion for working mothers..."

Responding to a point of clarification about the details of the maternity leave proposal from a CNN reporter, Clinton spokesman Jesse Ferguson tweeted, "hmm."





Trump boasted of a child-care program for his employees earlier in the campaign in Iowa, but The Associated Press reported in August that the two services mentioned by the Republican nominee are for the children of his hotel and golf club guests.

The plan, according to a memo reported on by The Washington Post, "will rewrite the tax code to allow working parents to deduct from their income taxes child-care expenses for up to four children and elderly dependents."

The Post reported that the deduction would be capped at the "average cost of care" in each state and not available to individuals making more than $250,000, or couples making more than $500,000. Trump's proposal will also include additional spending rebates through the Earned Income Tax Credit, expanding opportunities for stay-at-home parents to deduct their expenses and revising federal savings accounts so that people can set aside money specifically for child development and education.