Trump surrogate: He's not trying to say black communities are worse than days of Jim Crow

When Donald Trump said that African-American communities are in the worst shape they have "ever, ever, ever" been, he did not mean to compare their plight in 2016 to Jim Crow, supporter Joseph Borelli, a New York City council member, told CNN on Wednesday. Or the civil rights movement. Or to slavery.

Speaking to an audience in rural Kenansville, North Carolina, on Tuesday, Trump declared that the African-American communities of the U.S. "are absolutely in the worst shape that they have ever been in before. Ever, ever, ever. You take a look at the inner cities, you get no education, you get no jobs, you get shot walking down the street. They're worse, I mean honestly, places like Afghanistan are safer than some of our inner cities."

Story Continued Below

Asked if he was comfortable with that characterization, Borelli attempted to explain.

"I don't think he's talking about the days of Jim Crow, even the days of the civil rights movement of the '60s and obviously not slavery. But he's saying the African-American community is at times being outpaced by other communities," Borelli said. "And he was being criticized for a long time in this campaign for not actively trying to engage the African-American community. Now we see he's moving to do that, we see the poll results going, and he's talking, you mentioned three things, jobs, security, education. And when you look at things like education where 60 percent or 75 percent of African-Americans support school choice and the Democratic Party is standing in the way of these things, this is why his support is actually growing."

Later in the discussion with former Congressional Black Caucus executive director Angela Rye, co-anchor John Berman pressed Borelli.

"He said ever, ever, ever which to me indicates a long time span," Berman observed, to which Borelli said that Trump at times speaks "hyperbolically."

"There are people of color in every city who are probably naturally Republicans and I think Donald Trump is reaching out to those people with again, with three things, jobs, security and education," Borelli said.