Trump says hacking had 'no effect on the outcome of the election'
AP Photo Trump says hacking had 'no effect on the outcome of the election'

President-elect Donald Trump labeled his Friday briefing from top U.S. intelligence officials “constructive,” but, in a statement released after the meeting, he stopped short of conceding Russia’s culpability in a wave of cyberattacks on Democratic political targets. He insisted that “there was absolutely no effect on the outcome of the election.”

“While Russia, China, other countries, outside groups and people are consistently trying to break through the cyber infrastructure of our governmental institutions, businesses and organizations including the Democrat National Committee, there was absolutely no effect on the outcome of the election including the fact that there was no tampering whatsoever with voting machines,” Trump said in a statement released by his transition team Friday afternoon.

Story Continued Below

The much-anticipated meeting between Trump and the chiefs of the intelligence community was intended to be a culmination of sorts, providing the president-elect with evidence that Russia was behind election-season cyberattacks that largely targeted prominent Democrats and Democratic institutions. Though Russia’s role in the intrusions has been the public consensus of the intelligence community since an announcement in October, Trump has refused to acknowledge that conclusion, instead insisting that he needed to see all the facts.

With those facts laid before him Friday, Trump seemingly remained unwilling to admit Russian involvement.

Trump said that there had been similar attacks against the Republican National Committee but that those attacks failed because of the RNC’s “strong hacking defenses.” He said he will appoint a team upon assuming the presidency responsible for creating a plan within the first 90 days of his administration to combat cyberattacks.

“Whether it is our government, organizations, associations or businesses, we need to aggressively combat and stop cyberattacks,” he said. “The methods, tools and tactics we use to keep America safe should not be a public discussion that will benefit those who seek to do us harm. Two weeks from today, I will take the oath of office and America’s safety and security will be my No. 1 priority.”