House staffers under criminal investigation for alleged equipment theft
The identities of the staffers are still unknown but the official said they are shared House employees. | AP Photo House staffers under criminal investigation for alleged equipment theft

Five House employees are under criminal investigation amid allegations that they stole equipment from more than 20 member offices and accessed House IT systems without lawmakers' knowledge.

Access to the House network was terminated for the five employees — four men and a woman — on Thursday afternoon, but it’s up to individual lawmakers to fire the staffers in question, according to a senior House official. The official said most members are proceeding with termination.

Story Continued Below

The staffers have not been arrested.

All lawmakers targeted by the alleged scam were victims and had no idea what crimes might have been committed by their employees, House sources said.

The identities of the staffers are still unknown, but the official said they are shared House employees, meaning they work for multiple members, not contractors.

BuzzFeed News first reported the incident. However, the senior House official disputed some of the details in the story.

More than 20 members were victimized by the alleged procurement scam and chiefs of staff for the lawmakers were briefed on the matter Thursday.

A source in the briefing said the Sergeant-at-Arms confirmed the U.S. Capitol Police is conducting an active criminal investigation but said no arrests have been made. The source said the FBI is not involved in the investigation.

U.S. Capitol Police would not comment on the investigation but noted that House staff affected have been alerted to update their security systems.

"At the request of members of Congress, the United States Capitol Police are investigating the actions of House IT support staff. No members are being investigated. No arrests have been made.

"It should be noted that, administratively, House staff were asked to update their security settings as a best practice," said Eva Malecki, USCP spokeswoman, in a statement. "We have no further comment on the ongoing investigation at this time."

The employees allegedly stole equipment from members' offices without their knowledge and committed serious, potentially illegal, violations of House IT policies.

House sources stressed the investigation, which has been ongoing since late 2016, is focused on equipment theft and not a network hacking issue.