McCain looks to assure Australia after Trump call
Sen. John McCain issued a statement saying he called Australia's ambassador to the United States to express his support after a rough phone call between Donald Trump and the Australian prime minister. | AP Photo McCain looks to assure Australia after Trump call

Senate Armed Services Chairman John McCain sought to assure Australia on Thursday that the United States values its longstanding alliance with the country after news broke that President Donald Trump chewed out the Australian prime minister during a call last week.

McCain called Australia’s ambassador to the United States, Joe Hockey, “to express my unwavering support for the U.S.-Australia alliance,” the Arizona Republican said in a statement.

Story Continued Below

“I asked Ambassador Hockey to convey to the people of Australia that their American brothers and sisters value our historic alliance, honor the sacrifice of the Australians who have served and are serving by our side, and remain committed to the safer, freer, and better world that Australia does far more than its fair share to protect and promote,” McCain added.

He noted Australia’s deep military ties to the United States and said the partnership is critical to “maintaining security and prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region to combating radical Islamist terrorism.”

On Saturday, Trump spoke by phone for the first time with his Australian counterpart, Malcolm Turnbull — a call in which both leaders “emphasized the enduring strength” of the U.S.-Australia alliance, according to a White House readout.

But the call was much more than that, according to a Washington Post story.

Trump blasted Turnbull, bragged out his Electoral College victory and abruptly ended the call after 25 minutes, even though it was supposed to last an hour, according to the Post.

The president was reportedly angry about an agreement President Barack Obama made with Australia to accept 1,250 refugees who have sought asylum in Australia.

Trump addressed the issue on Twitter, writing: “Do you believe it? The Obama Administration agreed to take thousands of illegal immigrants from Australia. Why? I will study this dumb deal!"