Gorsuch to barnstorm the Senate this week
"We look forward to more meetings this week between Supreme Court Justice nominee Gorsuch and senators on both sides of the aisle,” said Ron Bonjean, a spokesman working on Gorsuch’s confirmation. | Getty Gorsuch to barnstorm the Senate this week

Supreme Court nominee Neil Gorsuch is ramping up his Senate charm offensive this week, scheduling meetings with a slew of red-state Senate Democrats and Democratic leaders who’ll be a major influence in determining whether he gets confirmed later this year.

Gorsuch has more than a dozen meetings starting Monday, including with a pair of key Democrats to watch: Montana Sen. Jon Tester, a moderate who is up for reelection next fall, and California Sen. Dianne Feinstein, the top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee who will lead the Democratic charge during the high-stakes confirmation hearings.

Story Continued Below

Tuesday will bring meetings with Republican Sens. Ben Sasse of Nebraska, Tom Cotton of Arkansas and Mike Crapo of Idaho, according to an official familiar with Gorsuch’s schedule. On Wednesday, he will hold private sit-downs with Sens. Jeff Flake (R-Ariz), Heidi Heitkamp (D-N.D.), John Thune (R-S.D.), Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) and Claire McCaskill (D-Mo.). Sasse, Crapo, Flake and Blumenthal are members of the Judiciary Committee

And on Thursday, Gorsuch will meet with four Senate Republicans: Susan Collins of Maine, Steve Daines of Montana, Lisa Murkowski of Alaska and Judiciary member Thom Tillis of North Carolina. A meeting with Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D-N.Y.), who declined an initial meeting request last week, is also in the works.

"We look forward to more meetings this week between Supreme Court Justice nominee Gorsuch and senators on both sides of the aisle,” said Ron Bonjean, a spokesman working on Gorsuch’s confirmation.

Republicans hope a combination of Gorsuch’s legal record, his unanimous confirmation to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals and immense political pressure on moderate Senate Democrats up for reelection will be enough to get him installed on the Supreme Court.

The National Republican Senatorial Committee launched the first ads of the 2018 cycle against Democratic Sens. Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin and Joe Donnelly of Indiana over the weekend with a pair of 30-second commercials that aired during the Indiana-Wisconsin basketball game on Sunday.

And since late last week, Wisconsin’s Republican Gov. Scott Walker has been incessantly needling Baldwin on Twitter over the Supreme Court battle.

“The folks up for reelection will prove they are only partisan politicians if they follow the misguided lead of Washington’s liberal elite and go against their own beliefs from just last year,” said NRSC spokeswoman Katie Martin. “It’s time for Senate Democrats to get serious before they cost their colleagues another election.”

Donnelly has said little on Gorsuch’s nomination beyond committing to “carefully review and consider” his record. But Baldwin has already declared her opposition to Gorsuch — citing the judge’s ruling on issues involving access to contraceptives and labor issues — and claimed that Gorsuch “will have a hard time earning bipartisan support.”

“Judge Gorsuch should be held to the same standard that Supreme Court justices have been held to previously,” Baldwin said. “President Trump needs to earn 60 votes in the Senate, but I am not one of them.”