Brazile: Leaking town hall topics to Clinton campaign 'mistake I will forever regret'
“My job was to make all our Democratic candidates look good,” Donna Brazile writes in an essay for Time magazine. “But sending those emails was a mistake I will forever regret. . | AP Photo Brazile: Leaking town hall topics to Clinton campaign 'mistake I will forever regret'

Former Democratic National Committee interim chair Donna Brazile acknowledged sending town hall topics to Hillary Clinton's campaign, calling it a “mistake I will forever regret.”

Brazile wrote in an essay for Time magazine that she shared potential topics for a CNN town hall with the Clinton campaign in her role as a Democratic operative and the DNC vice chair.

Story Continued Below

“My job was to make all our Democratic candidates look good, and I worked closely with both campaigns to make that happen,” she wrote. “But sending those emails was a mistake I will forever regret.”

WikiLeaks posted emails from Brazile to the Clinton campaign that tipped it off that a woman from Flint, Michigan, would ask Clinton about the situation there for a town hall. Brazile also told the campaign that Clinton would be asked about the death penalty at a separate town hall.

CNN dropped Brazile as a contributor after the revelations. When the email alerting the Clinton campaign about the death penalty question was released, Brazile suggested the documents were “misinformation.”

Morning Media Your guide to the media circus — weekday mornings, in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Brazile’s op-ed in Time argued that Russia’s hack of the DNC played out “exactly” as Russians hoped.

“Staff were harassed, morale suffered, and we lost weeks of planning,” she wrote. “Donors were harassed, and fundraising fell off.”

She added the emails widened the divide between Clinton supporters and Sanders supporters.

“By stealing all the DNC’s emails and then selectively releasing those few, the Russians made it look like I was in the tank for Secretary Clinton,” she wrote. “Despite the strong, public support I received from top Sanders campaign aides in the wake of those leaks, the media narrative played out just as the Russians had hoped, leaving Sanders supporters understandably angry and sowing division in our ranks.”