GOP Senate nonprofit launches Obamacare repeal radio ads
One Nation, which is controlled by allies of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, is airing the ads as the second half of a $3 million ad buy aiming to build support for the repeal of the health law. | Getty GOP Senate nonprofit launches Obamacare repeal radio ads

A major Republican nonprofit is rolling out radio ads in 10 states, pressuring senators to support the repeal and replacement of Obamacare just as a bill starts working its way through the House of Representatives.

One Nation, which is controlled by allies of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, is airing the ads as the second half of a $3 million ad buy aiming to build support for the politically explosive repeal of the health law. The group has already aired television ads in nine states, and is also spending money on digital, print and direct mail.

Story Continued Below

The ads began on Monday, two days before House Republicans are set to start marking up their bill to repeal the law, which would fulfill a major and longstanding GOP campaign promise — but also could lead to the loss of health insurance coverage for some Americans who have gotten it in recent years, which would be a big political liability.

The 60-second spots target five Democrats who are vulnerable in the 2018 elections: Florida's Bill Nelson, Michigan's Debbie Stabenow, Missouri's Claire McCaskill, Ohio's Sherrod Brown and Wisconsin's Tammy Baldwin. The radio ads will also air in two states with Republican senators who could face tough challenges of their own in 2018 — Arizona, home of Jeff Flake, and Nevada, home of Dean Heller — and in three states with four Republican senators who are considered possibly squishy on repeal: Utah (Orrin Hatch), Tennessee (Bob Corker and Lamar Alexander) and Alaska (Lisa Murkowski). Murkowski has already declared she will oppose any version of the law that repeals Medicaid expansion.

The ad targeting Democrats is entitled “Dearly” and features a female narrator declaring: “We’re paying more and getting less. Sen. Baldwin’s Obamacare vote has cost Wisconsin families dearly.” The ad suggests starting with repeal of Obamacare’s “$1 trillion in tax hikes.” It ends by telling listeners to call their Senators and encourage them to “repeal and replace this mess.”

The ad aimed at Republican senators, titled "Fighting," opens with a barrage of attacks on Obamacare before cheery music kicks in and the narrator begins heaping praise on the senator. "Tell her to keep fighting to repeal and replace the Obamacare mess," the spot backing Murkowski says.

"In the states where One Nation has polled and is running ads, there is a clear preference for Obamacare to be repealed and immediately replaced with something that focuses on lowering the cost of health care," said One Nation spokesman Ian Prior. "We look forward to continuing to advocate for common sense, health care reform to replace the costly disaster that is Obamacare."

The spots are the latest pieces of a broader outside-group effort to marshal Republican momentum to repeal Obamacare. American Action Network, a Republican nonprofit focusing on the House (and One Nation's rough equivalent on that side of the Capitol) has also spent millions on ads pressuring House members to move forward with Obamacare repeal, and other outside groups have gotten in the advertising game as well.