Trump still enforcing Obamacare mandate
President Donald Trump’s continued enforcement of the individual mandate shows the depth of uncertainty within the administration over how to use its regulatory power to weaken the health care law. | Getty Trump still enforcing Obamacare mandate

The Trump administration is still dutifully enforcing Obamacare's individual mandate, despite early signals it might undermine the unpopular linchpin of the health care law.

Weeks after the close of tax season, the IRS continues to process penalties from potentially millions of taxpayers who refused to purchase health insurance last year.

Story Continued Below

That's even though hours after taking office on Jan. 20, President Donald Trump issued a vaguely worded executive order instructing federal agencies to waive or defer parts of Obamacare that would “impose a fiscal burden” on states, individuals or health care providers. White House counselor Kellyanne Conway, in an ABC interview two days later, suggested the order could help Trump "get rid of that Obamacare penalty almost immediately."

But Trump’s continued enforcement of the individual mandate — a provision that Republicans have targeted for elimination in their repeal bill — shows the depth of uncertainty within the administration over how to use its regulatory power to weaken the health care law while the GOP struggles to enact a replacement.

Health insurers have warned that the already fragile Obamacare markets could collapse if the administration stopped enforcing the requirement to purchase coverage before a replacement plan is ready. At the same time, the administration is weighing whether to continue funding an Obamacare subsidy program that helps low-income individuals pay out-of-pocket medical costs — ending those payments would immediately blow up the insurance marketplaces, health care groups caution.

The IRS said in February that barring a legislative change, it will continue enforcing the Affordable Care Act, while "taxpayers remain required to follow the law and pay what they may owe." However, the agency said it would still process tax returns this year even if taxpayers didn't indicate whether they had health insurance, as the agency had in past years. The Obama administration instructed the IRS to reject these so-called silent returns starting this year, but the Trump administration scrapped that change — essentially leaving the status quo.

“The IRS is continuing enforcement the same way it has the past couple of years,” said Chris Condeluci, a former Republican aide on the Senate Finance Committee when Obamacare was written.

The penalty for an individual without health insurance is $695 or 2.5 percent of income, whichever is higher. For a family of four, the penalty maxes out at $2,085.

An IRS spokesperson said it was too early to know how many people paid penalties this tax season. About 6.5 million taxpayers paid a total of $3 billion in penalties for failing to have coverage in 2015, down from 8 million people who paid $1.6 billion in penalties in 2014, IRS Commissioner John Koskinen told Congress in January. The minimum penalty increased between 2014 and 2015.

Mandate enforcement has typically been light and will probably remain so this year, Condeluci said. The IRS hasn’t typically followed up on warning letters sent to taxpayers who didn’t report their coverage status or pay their fine the past couple of years, he said.

About 12.7 million people without insurance obtained an exemption from the penalty in 2015, according to the IRS.

Still, Obamacare advocates fear that Trump's Jan. 20 executive order and his continued assault on the health care law are causing confusion for consumers and may discourage them from signing up for coverage. Enrollment in Obamacare's marketplaces slightly dipped this year to 12.2 million during the sign-up period that ended in January.

“Even if they’re enforcing the individual mandate as they have been, there is a lot of confusion taking place on the consumer side because people might not think it’s being enforced,” said Elizabeth Hagan of Families USA. “And the rhetoric around repealing the law and the uncertainty in the insurance market is causing a stir.”

POLITICO Pulse newsletter Get the latest on the health care fight, every weekday morning — in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

Enforcement isn’t generating a lot of noise on Capitol Hill so far, even as Republicans push legislation that would scrap the mandate. The IRS continues to process silent returns, letting the agency follow up with taxpayers with questions, reflecting normal IRS post-filing compliance procedures, said a congressional aide who requested anonymity to speak freely about a process that’s generated confusion this year.

The leaders of House and Senate subcommittees that handle IRS oversight, Rep. Vern Buchanan (R-Fla.) and Sen. Rob Portman (R-Ohio), said they aren’t getting much feedback or information, if any, on mandate enforcement.

“Other than the initial executive order, there hasn’t been much indication from the administration how they will approach this,” Portman spokesman Kevin Smith said.