N.Y. AG Schneiderman examining Eric Trump Foundation
Spokespeople at the Trump Foundation and the Eric Trump Foundation could not be immediately reached for comment. | Getty N.Y. AG Schneiderman examining Eric Trump Foundation

New York State Attorney General Eric Schneiderman is looking into allegations of self-dealing by the Eric Trump Foundation that were raised by a recent Forbes report.

Schneiderman was already investigating the Donald J. Trump Foundation for whether or not the president personally benefited from the fundraising efforts and spending of the foundation before the inauguration.

Story Continued Below

"I can confirm that our office is looking into issues at the Eric Trump Foundation raised by the Forbes report," said Eric Soufer, the attorney general's director of communications.

Forbes reported this week that it appears the Eric Trump Foundation shifted some money from a benefit for children with cancer at St. Jude's Hospital into the Trump Organization, a move that could run afoul of prohibitions against self-dealing on the part of charities.

Amanda Miller, a spokeswoman for the Eric Trump Foundation, said the group plans to cooperate with Schneiderman's review.

“During the past decade, the Eric Trump Foundation has raised over $16.3 million for St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, including more than $3.6 million to St. Jude and other worthwhile causes just in 2016 alone," Miller said in a statement. "The Foundation intends to cooperate fully with the Attorney General's review, and looks forward to a productive and open dialogue with the Attorney General's Office to address any questions it may have."

In a previous statement to ABC News about the Forbes report, the Eric Trump Foundation pushed back against the allegations.

"Contrary to recent reports, at no time did the Trump Organization profit in any way from the foundation or any of its activities. While people can disagree on political issues, to infer malicious intent on a charity that has changed so many lives, is not only shameful but is truly disgusting. At the end of the day the only people who lose are the children of St. Jude and other incredibly worthy causes," the foundation said.