Scaramucci still stands to profit from SkyBridge from the White House
The incoming White House communications director earned $4.9 million from his ownership stake in SkyBridge. | Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP Scaramucci still stands to profit from SkyBridge from the White House The newly named White House communications director has earned millions from ownership stake since last year, according to his financial disclosure.

Anthony Scaramucci finally has his White House job, but he still stands to profit from an ownership stake in his investment firm SkyBridge Capital.

The incoming White House communications director earned $4.9 million from his ownership stake in SkyBridge in addition to more than $5 million in salary between Jan. 1, 2016, and the end of June, when he joined the Export-Import Bank, according to a financial disclosure filed with the Office of Government Ethics.

Story Continued Below

The disclosure form, which is publicly available upon request, hasn’t been previously reported.

The disclosure highlights the extensive wealth Scaramucci has accumulated in his career — much like many of Trump’s other top advisers and Cabinet secretaries — and also the challenge he faces in extracting himself from the potential conflicts his investments could pose.

Scaramucci’s financial filing values SkyBridge Capital at more than $50 million and states that he owns nearly 44 percent of the firm. When the sale of the company is completed, expected to be in the third quarter of this year, he will receive “the agreed-upon purchase price for his share of the sale proceeds,” according to the filing.

Bloomberg valued the Skybridge deal at between $200 million and $230 million when it was announced in January.

“It’s black and white that he’s going to get money,” said Austin Evers, executive director at American Oversight, a watchdog group that focuses on transparency in government.

The SkyBridge website continues to advertise Scaramucci as the firm's managing director, despite the fact that he has been a government employee for more than a month. A SkyBridge spokeswoman said Scaramucci stepped down from the executive post Jan. 17, when the company’s sale was announced. He remained an employee of the firm, collecting a salary, until starting at Ex-Im last month.

The investment firm, which Scaramucci founded in 2005, is in the process of being sold to RON Transatlantic and Chinese conglomerate HNA Group. The sale, set in motion in January when Scaramucci was shedding his holdings in anticipation of landing an administration job, has drawn the scrutiny of regulators and is taking longer than expected to close.

The interagency Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States is examining the deal to ensure that it carries no risk to national security. The panel’s review, which comes amid ramped-up scrutiny of business dealings with China, ultimately can be overruled by President Donald Trump.

Scaramucci said Friday his start date wouldn’t be until August so that everything can be “100 percent totally cleansed and clean and I don’t see an issue with it.”

White House spokeswoman Natalie Strom referred questions about Scaramucci’s SkyBridge investment to the Treasury. Treasury spokeswoman Marisol Garibay did not respond to requests for comment.

Scaramucci, a Trump fundraiser and frequent campaign surrogate whose appointment to an administration post was delayed in part because of the complicated nature of the SkyBridge sale, joined Ex-Im in June.

Ex-Im was seen as a "very temporary move," a way to get the Trump loyalist to Washington until a higher-level position could be found, according to one White House adviser.

The bank is across the street from the White House, where Scaramucci was free to come and go thanks to security credentials that gave him 24-hour access. That allowed him to elude the detection of senior White House staffers, including chief of staff Reince Priebus.

Scaramucci has been on unpaid leave from Ex-Im since the day he started there, June 19, a bank spokeswoman said, forgoing his $172,100 salary as chief strategy officer.

A friend said Scaramucci thought his stay at the bank would be longer-lived and that the White House job came unexpectedly.

In his disclosure, Scaramucci listed assets worth as much as $85 million. He has several real estate investments, including single-family rental homes on Long Island.

A minority stake in the New York Mets is worth as much as $5 million. He also is an investor in Juice Press, a chain of snack and smoothie shops in the Northeast.

Scaramucci earned $200,000 in income from a majority stake in Hastings Capital Group, according to his financial disclosure. That ownership share also will be sold as part of the SkyBridge deal with RON and HNA.

As a contributor to Fox News, Scaramucci earned about $88,000, according to his financial disclosure.

He has three mortgages with U.S. Bank for a total liability of $2.5 million to $7 million.

Josh Dawsey contributed to this report.