Fiduciary duty nonsense

FIDUCIARY DUTY NONSENSE — There’s no evidence yet that Donald Trump violated any tax laws with his mammoth $916 million reported loss in 1995. But the claim by Trump and his surrogates that he had a “fiduciary duty” to his family and investors to pay as little tax as possible is pretty silly. Fiduciary duty, of course, applies to public company executives who have to maximize shareholder value by paying the lowest legal rate. But these are personal returns, not corporate returns. Are his family members going to sue him for paying too much tax? That would be … novel.

University of Delaware’s Charles Elson tells MM: “It's a stupid answer. In a corporate setting you have an obligation to pay the lowest tax rate you can, but not in a personal setting. It doesn't apply to his family. I think he misspoke on that one.”

Story Continued Below

FLASH: CLINTON TO HIT WELLS FARGO — Reuters: “Hillary Clinton on Monday will unveil a plan to make it easier for consumers to take legal action against ‘bad corporate actors,’ citing Wells Fargo & Co and Mylan Pharmaceuticals, according to a campaign official.

“While campaigning in Ohio, the Democratic nominee will explain how she would, if elected on Nov. 8, curb the prevalence of contractual clauses that require consumers, employees and other individuals to resolve legal disputes in private arbitration proceedings instead of in courts, her campaign said” Read more.

TRUMP DEFENDED (SORT OF) — Cumberland Advisors’ David Kotok emails: “He and every other taxpayer has a duty to comply with law and pay only the minimum required under the law. If they want to volunteer to pay more, they are able to do it. … If a politician or candidate wants a different outcome, go lobby the Congress and get the votes to change the tax code.”

TRUMP FRIENDS: GENIUS! — POLITICO’s Ben Schreckinger: “For now, it’s Trump’s closest allies dealing with the fallout of a bombshell. And they remain isolated in arguing that the tax revelations vindicate the billionaire businessman, with party leaders conspicuously silent so far on a story that threatens to create a second consecutive week of negative coverage of Trump’s flailing campaign. ‘My response is he’s a genius,’ Rudy Giuliani said on ABC’s ‘This Week’ with George Stephanopoulos. …

“Despite Giuliani’s professed pride in Trump’s returns, the Republican nominee has resisted calls to release them, something a majority of Americans say he should do. He and his surrogates have offered various rationales, including the claim that Trump is under audit by the IRS, but an audit did not prevent Richard Nixon from releasing his returns in 1973, and Trump is the first nominee in four decades to keep his returns hidden” Read more.

MANY QUESTIONS, FEW ANSWERS — POLITICO’s Brian Faler: “The campaign-shaking disclosure … raised more questions than it answered. It's not surprising that Trump would use losses to minimize his tax bill, which is perfectly legal. But their sheer magnitude has many tax experts wondering about the details of how they were racked up, how much Trump pushed the envelope on tax law and what it says about Trump's business acumen … Many tax experts expect Trump’s more detailed tax returns, should he ever disclose them, to reveal more exotic tax-avoidance techniques than this” Read more.

THE STORY THAT STARTED IT ALL — NYT’s David Barstow, Susanne Craig, Russ Buettner and Megan Twohey: “Donald J. Trump declared a $916 million loss on his 1995 income tax returns, a tax deduction so substantial it could have allowed him to legally avoid paying any federal income taxes for up to 18 years … The 1995 tax records, never before disclosed, reveal the extraordinary tax benefits that Mr. Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, derived from the financial wreckage he left behind in the early 1990s through mismanagement of three Atlantic City casinos, his ill-fated foray into the airline business and his ill-timed purchase of the Plaza Hotel in Manhattan.

“Tax experts hired by The Times to analyze Mr. Trump’s 1995 records said that tax rules especially advantageous to wealthy filers would have allowed Mr. Trump to use his $916 million loss to cancel out an equivalent amount of taxable income over an 18-year period. Although Mr. Trump’s taxable income in subsequent years is as yet unknown, a $916 million loss in 1995 would have been large enough to wipe out more than $50 million a year in taxable income over 18 years.” Read more.

BUSTED TAX CODE — NYT’s James B. Stewart: “It’s hard to imagine a starker contrast with the vast number of Americans who struggle to both pay taxes and make ends meet, or a more damning indictment of a tax code that makes that possible. If Mr. Trump’s pattern of generating losses and using them to offset other income has continued, as seems likely, it’s obvious why he has not released his tax returns: not because he is being audited, or because the returns are too complicated, but because he hasn’t paid any taxes.

“Even if Mr. Trump was correct when he asserted that he only took advantage of what the law allows, such a huge loss undermines one of his central campaign themes, which is … Douglas Holtz-Eakin, an economist who served as director of the Congressional Budget Office and is now president of the American Action Forum, a conservative pro-growth advocacy group … : “It’s either a unique combination of bad luck or he’s a terrible businessman or both. I don’t understand how you can lose a billion dollars and stay in business.” Read more

DEBT PARKING? — John Hempton on his Bronte Capital blog: “Either the loss is a real loss and the Donald was really was out of pocket by $916 million (in which case he has legitimate NOLs) or the loss was passed on to someone else by The Donald defaulting on debt - in which case Donald Trump should be assessed for income from debt forgiveness. After all if the debt is forgiven it is not Donald Trump's loss. The loss is borne by the person who lent Donald money and did not get it back. …

“Here is how debt parking works. Suppose the debtor (in this case The Donald) is going to get his debt cancelled for (say) 1c in the dollar. When he gets the debt wiped out the debtor (ie The Donald) will have to report assessable income equal to the debt wiped out … The alternative though is for the debtor to set up a dummy party. The dummy party might be his wife or children or some company or trust set up by them or more likely some completely opaque offshore trust” Read more.

RIGGED! — WP’s Allan Sloan: “Trump is right when he says the system is rigged. What he doesn’t say is that it’s rigged in his favor and in the favor of people like him — and against regular people, those of us who earn money, pay income tax on it, and financially support the country in which we live. … [T]he $900-plus million loss reported by the New York Times — which vastly exceeds any cash losses that Trump would have suffered in the collapse of his casino-hotel-airline empire, which fell apart in the early 1990s and resulted in four bankruptcies. (He had two more bankruptcies, in 2004 and 2009, from a publicly traded company in which he was the primary shareholder.)

“I’m guessing, but I can’t tell for sure — there’s not enough information — that the loss has to do with the collapse of his empire. I don’t understand how Trump, who had very little of his own cash invested in his projects in the 1990s but did personally guarantee part of their debt, could end up with tax losses of that magnitude. They’re almost certainly paper losses rather than out-of-pocket losses” Read more.

LeBRON FOR HRC — POLITICO’s Rebecca Morin: “Cleveland Cavaliers star LeBron James endorsed Hillary Clinton Sunday evening, the day before the Democratic nominee is scheduled to visit James' Ohio hometown of Akron, campaigning on the economy. Read more.

LBJ’s op-ed: here.

FIX THE FED — Larry Summers in his latest blog post offers four things the Fed could do differently including “acknowledge at least to itself that it has damaged its credibility by repeatedly holding out the prospects of much more tightening than the market anticipated, being ignored by the market, and then having the market turn out to be right.” Read more.

GOOD MONDAY MORNING — Roger Stone tweeted cryptically over the weekend that Hillary Clinton’s campaign would be “done” following a new Wikileaks release on Wednesday. Then Wikileaks reportedly canceled its planned announcement. What’s going on here? Who knows! But stay tuned. Email me on bwhite@politico.com and follow me on Twitter @morningmoneyben

DRIVING THE WEEK — VP candidates Tim Kaine and Mike Pence debate Tuesday night at 9:00 p.m. at Longwood Univ. in Farmville, Va. … September jobs report out Friday at 8:30 a.m., the last likely to have much impact on the 2016 race, is expected to show a gain of 170K, no change in the 4.9 percent jobless rate and a 0.3 percent increase in wages … Hillary Clinton campaigns Monday in Toledo and Akron, Ohio … Donald Trump campaigns Monday in Pueblo and Loveland, Colo. … Supreme Court hears arguments in critical insider trading case on Wednesday … IMF and World Bank meetings take place in D.C.

THIS MORNING ON POLITICO PRO FINANCIAL SERVICES – Victoria Guida on what's next for banks' living wills -- and to get Morning Money every day before 6 a.m. -- please contact Pro Services at (703) 341-4600 or info@politicopro.com.

MARKETS MOSTLY YAWN AT 2016 — Bloomberg’s Matthew Winkler in a piece up Monday a.m.: “Prices of U.S. debt and equities are showing the narrowest fluctuations for any presidential election year in at least two decades, according to data compiled by Bloomberg. That's an unlikely scenario for markets fearful of radical change. As Donald Trump vanquished 16 opponents in the Republican primaries, movements in U.S. markets showed no correlation with his ups and downs in the polls.

“When the volatility of stocks and bonds are combined, the financial markets come closest to following the pattern of 2012, when Barack Obama became the first president since Ronald Reagan to be elected and re-elected by a majority of voters.”

WARREN RIPS PUERTO RICO BOARD — POLITICO’s Colin Wilhem: “Sen. Elizabeth Warren (D-Mass.) took to social media Friday to lay into Puerto Rico’s federal oversight board, which held its first meeting in New York City. `If this unelected Board wants Puerto Rico to believe it takes their crisis seriously, they can start by leaving NY. Start by showing up,' she tweeted. The board, appointed by …

“Obama with most members nominated by congressional leaders of both parties, has been criticized on the left by those concerned that it will cut workers’ pensions during the restructuring of Puerto Rico’s $70 billion debt.” Read more.

DON’T COUNT ON STEADY, SLOW GROWTH — Mohamed A. El-Erian in the FT: “Last week’s downward revisions to the Federal Reserve’s growth and interest rate projections are yet another reminder of the growing consensus in favour of a prolonging of the global economy’s recent period of lacklustre but relatively stable performance. You would be forgiven for thinking that the next few years are likely to be a repeat of the ‘new normal’ of the past seven.

“The reality is likely to be different. Right now there are broadly three possible scenarios for the global economy in coming years — a continued muddle-through; a significant economic and financial downturn; or a favourable lift-off. Of these, a continuation of the recent tepid performance is becoming the least likely. This is because for things to continue as they are, you need to be confident that the economic, financial, political and social tensions spawned by low growth will not become the defining drivers of the economy.” Read more.

TAX AVOIDANCE IN THE SPOTLIGHT — WSJ’s Richard Rubin: “The latest revelation could increase the pressure on Mr. Trump to fill gaps in his business record, the extent of his liabilities and how he has accounted for it all in the eyes of federal tax collectors. … The big loss revealed in the filing blurs Mr. Trump’s campaign image as a successful New York real-estate developer. The documents also highlight the gulf between Mr. Trump and voters who have taxes withheld from their wages with little opportunity to alter the timing of their income or hire lawyers and accountants to seek the best possible outcome.

“The U.S. taxes income, not wealth, and savvy taxpayers often try to avoid reporting much of the former while generating the latter. They don’t usually try to do so, however, by actually losing money.” Read more.

CAMPAIGN “ABLAZE” — WP’s Philip Rucker: “Trump is scrambling to rescue his campaign after a week in which the Republican nominee’s White House hopes were effectively set ablaze by his own erratic behavior and the discovery that he may not have paid federal income taxes for as many as 18 years. … With only five weeks until Election Day and voters in some states, including battleground Iowa, already beginning to cast ballots, Hillary Clinton and her campaign will labor this week to keep Trump in a downward trajectory.

“But Trump hopes to recover by driving a contrast, starting Monday at campaign rallies in Colorado, between how he and Bill and Hillary Clinton made their fortunes. Trump plans to argue that he built a global real estate empire and employed thousands of people, while the Clintons got rich delivering paid speeches to financial institutions and other corporate interests, according to his aides.” Read.

COLOMBIA REJECTS PEACE DEAL — Reuters: “Colombians narrowly rejected a peace deal with Marxist guerrillas in a referendum on Sunday, plunging the nation into uncertainty and dashing President Juan Manuel Santos' painstakingly negotiated plan to end the 52-year war. The surprise victory for the ‘no’ camp poured cold water on international joy, from the White House to the Vatican, at what had seemed to be the end of the longest-running conflict in the Americas. The ‘no’ camp won by 50.21 percent to 49.78 percent. Voter turnout was only 37 percent, perhaps partly owing to torrential rain through the country.

“Both sides in the war immediately sought to reassure the world they would try to revive their peace plan. Santos, 65, said a ceasefire already negotiated would remain in place. He vowed to sit down on Monday with the victorious ‘no’ camp to discuss the way forward, and send his chief negotiator back to Cuba to meet with FARC rebel leaders

… Santos recently said a ‘no’ vote would mean a return to war, and opinion polls had predicted he would win comfortably.” Read more.

BREXIT PLANNED BY 2019 — FT’s Kate Allen and George Parker in London and Alex Barker in Brussels: “Theresa May has set Britain on course to leave the EU by 2019 in her first major speech on Brexit, saying that the UK would become a ‘fully independent, sovereign’ country in the clearest sign yet that she wants a clean break from Europe’s single market. The prime minister told cheering Conservative supporters at the Tory party’s annual conference that Britain would insist on taking full control of immigration and refuse to accept the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice.

“Although Mrs May’s team denied she had decided to quit the single market, the EU sees the free movement of workers and oversight of a single court as indispensable pillars of a common market. .. Mrs May said she wanted to give ‘British companies the maximum freedom to trade and operate in the single market’, but not at the expense of allowing free movement or accepting the jurisdiction of judges in Luxembourg. Meanwhile she told the conference that the UK would trigger Article 50, the official legal notification to its EU partners that it is going to leave the bloc, ‘no later than the end of March.’” Read more.

NO WELLS WHISTLE BLOWERS? — Labaton Sucharow’s Jordan A. Thomas in the NYT: “In the case of Wells Fargo, several employees raised concerns about these troubling practices within the bank and suffered retaliation for doing so. Unfortunately, these employees had little incentive and no way of safely alerting regulators without risking their careers.

“Unlike other financial police, banking regulators either have no whistle-blower programs that provide incentives and protections for individuals to break their silence about wrongdoing they witness, or these regulators have little-known programs with comically small awards” Read more.

POLITICO LAUNCHES BREXIT FILES: Are you following the latest news and insight on Brexit? Introducing Brexit Files, a new daily newsletter from POLITICO’s European newsroom focusing on the forces and people in politics and policy who are reshaping Britain’s relationship with Europe and the world. Receive tomorrow’s issue by registering here.

EVENT ALERT — Boomer Women and The Election: What's at Stake? — A deep-dive conversation on the concerns of women over 50 and how the candidates plan to meet them. We’ll discuss how boomer women will influence elections, candidates’ plans on Social Security and how they reflect women’s economic concerns, policy options to address Alzheimer’s Disease and more. Speakers include Lake Research Partners President Celinda Lake, CAP CEO Neera Tanden and more. Thursday, Oct. 6-8 a.m., The Mayflower Hotel. RSVP: here