Gary Johnson’s education ideas

With help from Mel Leonor, Caitlin Emma, Kimberly Hefling and Benjamin Wermund

GARY JOHNSON’S EDUCATION IDEAS: The Libertarian Party’s Gary Johnson is selling himself as the golden alternative in an election year of unpopular major-party presidential candidates. Double-digit poll numbers and a couple of newspaper endorsements have brought unprecedented attention to the former governor of New Mexico — a self-professed “fringe” candidate campaigning on a platform of small government and social liberalism. On education, Johnson’s most popular proposal is to disband the Department of Education entirely. POLITICO’s Mel Leonor caught up with Johnson to talk about his education proposals and the Libertarian ideal for American schools: http://politico.pro/2c85QJC

Story Continued Below

— We asked Johnson what the federal government's role is in public education. “I don’t see one,” he responded. The third-party candidate, who strongly supported universal vouchers in New Mexico, is a backer of full-blown school choice, which he believes would kick-start competition and, in turn, drive better performance. “I do think ultimately it would be the end of traditional public schools and that would be for the better. Public schools are not going to go away, but they are going to embrace the innovation that would occur if students had a choice.” On the student debt crisis, Johnson backs a federal investment to refinance existing debt at lower interest rates to relieve students hurt by a crisis “caused” by the federal government: “If there were no guaranteed government student loans, higher education would be much more affordable.”

GOOD WEDNESDAY MORNING. WELCOME TO MORNING EDUCATION. I’m heading out to Phoenix later this week for an Education Writers Association higher education conference. What are some good places I should check out? Drop me a line: mstratford@politico.com or @mstratford. Share event listings: educalendar@politicopro.com. And follow us on Twitter: @Morning_Edu and @POLITICOPro.

FOR-PROFIT COLLEGES LOOM LARGE IN 2016 RACES: The high-profile collapse of ITT Tech and Corinthian Colleges. Sinking enrollments. An ever-growing list of lawsuits and investigations. The for-profit education industry is facing a day of reckoning — and so are some of the politicians who’ve supported it.

— At the top of the ticket, Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump are both defending their associations with for-profit education ventures. Hillary Clinton's been facing questions about her husband's $17.5 million payout as "honorary chancellor" for Laureate Education. Trump’s real estate seminar venture, Trump University, is facing fraud lawsuits on both coasts and opponents have used the allegations as a frequent line of attack against his presidential campaign.

— The issue is also entangling some Senate GOP incumbents in key races who took money from or invested in for-profit colleges. For example, Sen. Kelly Ayotte, who’s locked in a tight re-election battle, returned campaign donations from Bridgepoint Education, a for-profit chain. That action came after her opponent, New Hampshire Gov. Maggie Hassan, called Bridgepoint a "Trump-Style" university that "targets veterans, single parents and the elderly."

— In Pennsylvania, Sen. Pat Toomey's small investment in and previous membership on the board of a now-defunct online education venture called Yorktown University barely garnered attention in his first race in 2010. But this year, Toomey's Democratic opponent, Katie McGinty, held a media call with reporters to showcase his ties to it. Toomey's campaign has called his involvement "minimal." Kimberly Hefling and I have more: http://politi.co/2c8CLOb

LAWMAKERS START COLLEGE FOOTBALL CAUCUS: Reps. Roger Williams (R-Texas) and Rep. Terri Sewell (D-Ala.) today are launching a Congressional College Football Caucus. Williams, who played baseball at Texas Christian University as a student and later returned as the team’s head coach, said the goal is to bring lawmakers together in a bipartisan way over college football. “What we want to do is be open and talk about any issue that the government may have with college football,” he told Morning Education. He said player safety is the main political issue: “This gives us a chance to talk about how college football is very safe.” Also attending today’s launch: GE CEO Jeffrey R. Immelt, Big 12 Conference Commissioner Robert A. Bowlsby, II, Southeastern Commissioner Gregory A. Sankey, and other members of the National Football Foundation board.

TRUMP OUTLINES CHILD CARE PROPOSAL: Donald Trump on Tuesday evening made an overt appeal to the women voters he is struggling to win over, outlining a family leave plan for new mothers and flushing out a proposed child care tax credit that he says were both inspired by his daughter, Ivanka, reports POLITICO’s Eli Stokols. Trump announced new details to his plan to make childcare tax deductible. He said he would try to cap the deduction at the average cost of care in each state. The wealthiest Americans — individuals earning more than $250,000 annually and families whose combined yearly income exceeds $500,000— wouldn’t qualify for the credit, he said. Trump also proposed allowing families to contribute up to $2,000 a year, tax-free, to dependent care savings accounts that could also be used for their children’s education. Read more: http://politi.co/2cHuLqa.

NEW YORK TO JOIN STATE AUTHORIZATION RECIPROCITY AGREEMENT: New York is the newest state to join an interstate agreement allowing higher education institutions from other states to offer online courses in New York, and expand the opportunities for New York State colleges and universities to do the same in other states. The state Board of Regents Tuesday approved regulations allowing New York State institutions to join the State Authorization Reciprocity Agreement, known as SARA, a shared system that regulates online higher education. Some consumer advocates have previously questioned whether such arrangements offer enough protections for students. POLITICO New York’s Keshia Clukey has more: http://politico.pro/2cX1AyZ

NEW GRANTS FOR ‘SUPER SCHOOLS’: XQ: The Super School Project is announcing the winners today of its yearlong competition that aims to “reimagine American high schools.” The project will announce which schools will each receive $10 million over the next five years. The goal is to invest in innovative ways to reshape high school education. Nearly 700 schools applied for the contest, which is funded by the Emerson Collective, the philanthropic organization founded by Steve Jobs' widow, Laurene Powell Jobs. The winners will be announced at 3 p.m. ET via livestream on the group’s Facebook page: http://bit.ly/2cY5xGv.

TODAY: WHITE HOUSE COMPUTER SCIENCE SUMMIT: The White House today will host a computer science summit, celebrating progress on expanding access to computer science education after President Barack Obama called for it during his State of the Union address earlier this year. The College Board will be on hand to discuss AP Computer Science and new principles for the course [http://bit.ly/2cVzUu1]. The organization says that more than 2,300 teachers have submitted AP Computer Science syllabi for the 2016-17 school year to undergo alignment review by the College Board. That could expand access to computer science for about 25,000 students, the College Board notes. The Computer Science Education Coalition will also have a presence at the event. The summit comes as Code.org this week announced that a total of 43,700 teachers have gone through the nonprofit’s professional learning programs to teach computer science to more than 1 million students. The summit starts at 1 p.m. ET. Watch live: http://bit.ly/1cdakhv.

THE TENETS OF SCHOOL TURNAROUND: The Center for American Progress and the nonprofit Education Resource Strategies are out with seven “tenets” for the always-challenging issue of school turnaround. The recommendations come after both groups brought together federal, state and school district leaders for a discussion on how states can best seize new flexibility under the Every Student Succeeds Act. States will also be able to funnel more Title I funding into school turnaround than in previous years. A few of those recommendations include: “Grant districts, and ultimately the state, the authority to intervene in failing schools,” “create pipeline programs for developing and supporting effective turnaround school leaders,” and “embed evaluation and evidence-based building activities in school implementation.” More: http://ampr.gs/2cGDQQ7.

CLINTON RADIO ADS TOUT HBCU PLAN: Hillary Clinton is hitting the airwaves in North Carolina and Florida to tout her plan to invest $25 billion in new federal money at historically black colleges and universities and other minority-serving institutions. The Clinton campaign on Tuesday unveiled a new radio ad featuring Terrence J, a former BET personality and North Carolina A&T alumnus. “Hillary will make sure that HBCU grads don’t enter the workforce with ridiculous amounts of debt,” he says in the ad. “Her plan will dramatically reduce debt for both public and private HBCU students.” Listen: http://bit.ly/2cY4eXW.

A PLAYBOOK FOR FREE COLLEGE: The Obama administration on Tuesday rolled out recommendations to states and local leaders for how to go about starting free community college programs in their communities. Read “America’s College Promise Playbook”: http://bit.ly/2cXSOU3.

MOVERS AND SHAKERS

— Jonathan Elkin, a legislative assistant to Sen. Mazie Hirono, is leaving the Hill to work in D.C.'s Office of the State Superintendent, helping with ESSA implementation.

— Aaliyah Samuel is now the interim director of the National Governors Association Center for Best Practices Education Division.

REPORT ROLL CALL

— Just 42 percent of Americans think a college degree is necessary for success in the workforce, down from 55 percent in 2009, according to a new survey by Public Agenda. [http://bit.ly/2cWxSwM]

— State and local leaders should meet regularly with the parents of English language learners and “empower” parents by providing them information about the Common Core and the American school system, the Collaborative For Student Success says in a new report: http://bit.ly/2cH2Zdz.

SYLLABUS

— Colorado education officials are considering lifting a ban on diet sodas in schools. The Denver Post: http://dpo.st/2cY0x4t

— Kansas Supreme Court hears oral arguments over law that stripped teachers of due process protections. The Topeka Capital-Journal: http://bit.ly/2cXZEch

— New York Attorney General reaches settlements with four companies over tracking technology on popular websites for children. WABC: http://7ny.tv/2cXZUrR

— State audit finds public contract improprieties at Iowa Department of Education. The Des Moines Register: http://dmreg.co/2cY11HL

— Massachusetts Gov. Charlie Baker defends a $100,000 donation by the head of the state’s board of education to a group pushing a pro-charter school ballot question. The Associated Press: http://bit.ly/2cY0aXJ

— Brown University will expand financial aid options for undocumented students. The Providence Journal: http://bit.ly/2cY1LN3

— Lawsuit accuses Detroit Public Schools of failing students, violating their state constitutional right to literacy. The Wall Street Journal: http://on.wsj.com/2cY1XMh

Rebel rebel [http://bit.ly/2cWNtt7]. Follow the Pro Education team: @caitlinzemma (cemma@politico.com), @khefling (khefling@politico.com), @mstratford (mstratford@politico.com) and @mrmikevasquez (mvasquez@politico.com).