The transatlantic cost of Russia sanctions
Russian workers throw peaches off a truck outside the city of Novozybkov, Russia. | AFP/Getty The transatlantic cost of Russia sanctions U.S. keen to remind European allies that all sides have suffered from sanctions on Moscow.

WASHINGTON — When the U.S. Treasury Department’s top sanctions official visits Europe this week, he’ll get one more chance to urge Europeans to renew the punishing sanctions regime against Russia. By all accounts, he won’t need it.

It’s a point of pride among U.S. and European officials that in an otherwise fractious Europe, nobody — even skeptics like Hungary and Greece — will veto the sanctions imposed after the Russian invasion of Crimea. For the moment, at least. And despite Russian attempts to poke holes in the alliance, EU leaders are this month expected to renew the sanctions for another six months.

But in private, the conversations may be more complicated.

Since day one, maintaining unity on Russian sanctions hasn’t been easy, according to U.S. and EU officials. While countries like Poland and the U.K. want a tougher line against Russia, some governments want the sanctions to end soon. It’s taken a mix of EU cash for affected industries, political wrangling by Germany, and reassurance by American officials that U.S. companies are also suffering as a result of the sanctions.

Behind the scenes, Obama administration officials often find themselves pushing back against a storyline they say has emanated from Moscow over the past year: That the U.S. is making its European partners bear the economic brunt of a sanctions regime that has little impact on the United States.

The U.S. response? We feel your pain.

"There is a false narrative out there that the U.S. is taking advantage.… There are such things as facts. U.S. trade and European trade both have been hit,” a senior U.S. official told POLITICO, noting that U.S. financial institutions have lost business and U.S. energy companies have been frozen out of Russian Arctic and shale drilling projects thanks to the sanctions aimed at cutting off financing to some Russian companies.

A drop in the (Atlantic) ocean?

Analysts agree that the impact on the EU and U.S. economies has been relatively minimal. But there are clear differences. According to Commerce Department data, U.S. exports to Russia dropped from $11.4 billion (€10.4 billion) in 2013 to $10.8 billion (€9.9 billion) in 2014 — a 3.5 percent decline — with a 10 percent drop in two-way trade. The decrease is on track to be far larger from 2014 to 2015.

The European Union’s trade with Russia, which was roughly 10 times the size of U.S.-Russia commerce, dropped by 13 percent from 2013 to 2014, according to the European Commission.

So far, Europeans have resisted what some see as Russia’s efforts to win sanctions relief in return for military help in Syria. But sanctions experts say that the dynamics could become more difficult. In France, the far-right National Front, whose leader Marine Le Pen is opposed to Western sanctions on Russia, is a party on the rise following its first place showing in Sunday's regional elections.

“We don’t want to bring Russia down to its knees economically. We don’t want a more nationalist Russia. We want a Russia that is part and parcel of the common European order” — Peter Wittig, German ambassador to the U.S.

Elizabeth Rosenberg, a former senior advisor on sanctions policy at the Treasury Department and now a fellow at the Center for a New American Security, calls U.S.-EU unity on sanctions a success. But she sees an “inflection point” coming.

“We’ve already seen European business leaders and thought leaders who would like to see Russia welcomed back,” she says, as well as European governments who seem inclined to find ways to circumvent sanctions. “There is a lot of confidence that the European Union will roll over sanctions in January — there’s not much confidence about what the EU will do when it comes back [to the issue] next summer."

Over here, under pressure

Adam Szubin, the acting U.S. Treasury undersecretary for terrorism and financial intelligence, is visiting Italy, Germany and the U.K. this week to talk about a range of sanctions issues, including the fight against ISIL and the Iran nuclear deal. From some quarters, he may also hear concerns on Russia sanctions.

Marietje Schaake, a Dutch member of the European Parliament, said that when Daniel Fried, the State Department coordinator on Russia sanctions, met with MEPs in Brussels last week, part of the discussion dwelled on how “the economic impact has weighed more heavily on European companies and citizens.”

Still, Schaake says that “most people feel very strongly that the reasons sanctions are in place unfortunately have not changed. … No one likes sanctions, and they are not a goal in and of themselves, but hopefully they encourage the Kremlin to act according to international law.”

That wasn’t always the case. Although Russia invaded Crimea in early 2014, it wasn’t until after the downing of Malaysian Airlines flight MH17 that Europeans rallied behind sanctions.

Earlier U.S. calls for tougher EU action had run into European resistance, including from German business interests. U.S. Vice President Joe Biden argued in a 2014 speech that “it was America’s leadership and the president of the United States insisting, oft times almost having to embarrass Europe to stand up and take economic hits to impose costs.”

German Chancellor Angela Merkel soon took the lead in pushing the sanctions through, drawing on her personal relationship with Vladimir Putin to become the EU – and the U.S. — point person on Ukraine.

“It was not an easy assignment — all of them act differently,” Peter Wittig, the German ambassador to the United States, told POLITICO in a recent interview. “I think the Ukrainian crisis was for us a signature moment, because it propelled us into a leadership role that the chancellor had not sought — it just happened by events,” Wittig said. “We wanted to make sure that the U.S. and Europe were in sync.”

U.S. officials like to say that the Russia sanctions program is larger than all other sanctions programs combined. So the goal for the EU and the U.S. was to write a joint sanctions program that would hurt Russia’s economy by cutting its banks and energy companies off from Western financing — but not so much that it would disrupt the global financial system, or European and American economies.

“It’s not an end in itself. It’s a tool to achieve a political result,” Wittig said. “We don’t want to bring Russia down to its knees economically. We don’t want a more nationalist Russia. We want a Russia that is part and parcel of the common European order.”

Suffering but stubborn

Few dispute that damage has been inflicted. Russia’s GDP in October fell 3.6 percent compared to a year before. The International Monetary Fund has projected that “prolonged sanctions could lead to a cumulative output loss over the medium term of up to 9 percent of GDP.”

That said, Russia hasn’t pulled out of Crimea.

For the U.S.-EU alliance, the bigger issue has been managing the fallout for European economies.

Assessing the impact of the sanctions, and the counter-sanctions that Russia imposed in retaliation, is difficult, largely because it requires disentangling their impact from other factors involved in Russia’s economic problems, including the drop in global oil prices and the weakening of the ruble.

The European Commission expected the European Union’s GDP to drop by 0.3 percent in 2014 and 0.4 percent in 2015 due to sanctions. According to an October report from the European Parliamentary Research Service, EU exports to Russia dropped by 12.1 percent from 2013 to 2014, and imports from Russia fell 13.5 percent.

“Although the overall impact on the EU economy has been rather limited, certain sectors and countries are more significantly affected,” the report said.

That’s particularly true of the agricultural sector, where exports to Russia dropped precipitously in the first months of sanctions, before exporters began finding new markets for their goods. EU agriculture and food exports to Russia fell by 43 percent between August 2014 and July 2015, according to the European Parliament report.

Sanctions "have a detrimental impact on the Russian economy, they of course have some detrimental impact on EU economies. We have used our collective budget to soften that impact ... particularly on the agricultural side," Kristalina Georgevia, the European Commission’s budget chief, told POLITICO.

An October report from the Center for Strategic and International Studies — authored by French diplomat Simond de Galbert, who worked on the Iran nuclear deal — argues that the hundreds of billions in euros of trade that the EU is expected to lose due to sanctions is “significantly higher than what Iran sanctions cost the European economy in the past decade, and markedly greater than the cost to the U.S. economy of Russia sanctions.… U.S. policymakers should acknowledge the price to their European partners; transatlantic solidarity on sanctions would be undermined if European perceived that the United States was outsourcing to its allies the lion’s share of the cost of handling the crisis.”

We're all in it together

U.S. officials sympathize. “It’s a huge transatlantic success story,” Anthony Gardner, the U.S. ambassador to the European Union, told POLITICO. “Who would have imagined a couple of years ago that 28 EU member states together with the U.S., together with other partners around the world, would do that when the interests, the culture, the history, the exposure to Russia are so different.”

When he gets an earful from European companies, “we say that yes, while companies have suffered, this is the price we need to pay to support absolutely basic principles of international law and decency,” Gardner said. “Sometimes European companies have tried to say that ‘we’ve suffered more than our American friends’ and we have statistics to show that U.S. trade and U.S. businesses have also taken a hit.”

High-profile European deals have been scuttled, like France’s €1.2 billion contract to deliver Mistral amphibious helicopter carriers to Russia.

And it’s important to note that opposition to sanctions doesn’t always line up along economic lines. Frontline states like Poland and the Baltic states who have seen a bigger economic impact are some of the biggest supporters of reining in Russia.

Some high-profile European deals have been scuttled, like France’s €1.2 billion contract to deliver two Mistral amphibious helicopter carriers to Russia. Indeed, French officials, including President François Hollande, have at times signaled a desire for a quick end to sanctions.

Still, Hollande hasn’t challenged the sanctions. “I don’t doubt that French companies are concerned — but at each stage France has not only joined but helped shape the European consensus,” said the administration official.

Even Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán told POLITICO last month that while he will voice his opposition to the sanctions, he won’t use his veto power to stop the extension. The ultimate decision, he said, rests with the Germans.

Despite European divisions about the sanctions, no EU government has yet challenged their extension — even in the aftermath of the Paris attacks, they have agreed to demand that Russia fully implement the so-called Minsk Accord governing a Ukrainian ceasefire, said Karen Donfried, a former senior director for European affairs on the National Security Council who is now president of the German Marshall Fund in Washington.

She notes, however, that the length and nature of the EU sanctions will be an increasing question. “I think the EU will continue to revisit that sanctions regime on very regular basis,” she said, “and I think you’ll see a lot of people in the U.S. being vigilant about the EU commitment to continuing to extend those sanctions.”

Joseph J. Schatz is editor of the POLITICO Pro Europe Brief in Washington, DC.