FARA complaint alleges pro-Russian lobbying

With help from Taylor Gee and Mary Lee

HOW A BILL BECOMES A LAW: The Global Magnitsky Act is on track to pass the Senate today as a rider to the defense authorization bill and head to the president's desk. Sponsored by Sens. Ben Cardin and John McCain (with the House version sponsored by Reps. Chris Smith and Jim McGovern) the bill authorizes the president to freeze assets and deny visas to foreign officials responsible for corruption and human rights violations.

Story Continued Below

The bill is a legislative sequel to the Magnitsky Act of 2012, which sanctioned Russian officials connected to the 2009 death of Russian whistleblower Sergei Magnitsky. The law is despised by Russia's leaders, and an extensive lobbying campaign tried to derail it earlier this year. The lobbying effort, as Ben Oreskes and I recently wrote, targeted Rep. Dana Rohrabacher, the most pro-Putin member of Congress who's now talking himself up for Donald Trump's secretary of State (and clashing with a Yahoo reporter who was born in Moldova when it was part of the Soviet Union).

Bill Browder, the American-born investor who employed Magnitsky and lobbied for the original sanctions law in his honor, has lodged a formal complaint with the Justice Department alleging that some of the anti-Magnitsky lobbyists violated disclosure requirements. The office that oversees the Foreign Agents Registration Act declined to comment.

The lobbying effort was commissioned by Denis Katsyv, who owns a company that the Justice Department has accused of laundering money from a tax fraud that Magnitsky uncovered. Katsyv and two other Russians organized the effort through a Delaware nonprofit and hired a lobbyist named Rinat Akhmetshin, disclosures show. But other people tied to the effort never showed up in filings either with Congress or the Justice Department.

Akhmetshin recruited Lanny Wiles, a McCain campaign hand who has known Rohrabacher since their Reagan days. Wiles said he told Akhmetshin he didn't want to work for a foreign entity, which would require registering under FARA. Akhmetshin told Wiles he wouldn't have to register because he would be working for the law firm BakerHostetler, according to Wiles. Wiles said Akhmetshin paid him but not in full. Akhmetshin denied paying him.

BakerHostetler represented Katsyv in the money-laundering case at the time. The lead attorney, Mark Cymrot, briefed congressional staff about the case, people familiar with the discussions said. Cymrot's defense strategy paralleled Akhmetshin's lobbying effort in Congress: trying to discredit the U.S. government's version of events and pin the tax fraud of Magnitsky and Browder. (The firm was later disqualified from the case because it had previously represented Browder.)

BakerHostetler hired a private research firm known as Fusion GPS led by Glenn Simpson, a former Wall Street Journal reporter. (The firm also discussed information with journalists about Trump and his associates’ ties to Russia.) Simpson and his firm found records on Browder’s property and finances and tracked down potential witnesses, the company said in a statement to POLITICO. Fusion GPS also discussed the case record with several reporters, according to the statement.

Both Cymrot and Fusion GPS said they didn't lobby or do anything that required registering under FARA.

“From time to time, we received inquiries about the lawsuit from the media and others and would respond by providing information on the public record,” Cymrot said in an email. He did not answer whether he communicated with congressional staff, but added, “We did not engage in lobbying and did not pay any lobbyists.”

As Cymrot pointed out in his email to POLITICO, FARA does contain an exception for lawyers. But it doesn’t apply if their work goes beyond the courtroom to include influencing public officials or journalists, according to the Justice Department’s website.

"The so-called lawyers' exemption does not extend as widely as it might originally seem," said William Minor, an attorney at DLA Piper who specializes in lobbying rules. "The exception doesn’t carry on to others who might be engaged in public relations or lobbying activities simply because the main firm is itself exempt."

BUT WAIT, THERE'S MORE: The Global Magnitsky Act was also opposed by the Family Research Council, the influential Christian conservative group led by Tony Perkins. In May, the FRC sent a letter, obtained by POLITICO, to House leadership warning that the bill could be used to promote LGBT rights overseas. Interest groups usually publicize their letters to Congress but this one has stayed secret until now.

“We are greatly concerned that the reconsideration of the Global Magnitsky bill will be used as an opportunity for the Administration to once again re-direct priorities away from protecting tradition human rights concerns — most notably the protection of religious liberty for religious minorities,” the letter reads. “Therefore, we again urge you to take no further action on this well-intended bill until a new Administration is in place.”

Asked why the Family Research Council intervened, Perkins said he was alerted to the bill by House members, but declined to name them. His spokesman subsequently referred questions to Smith, the bill’s sponsor and an outspoken critic of Obama’s initiatives on LGBT rights. Smith's spokesman said he supports the bill and declined to comment on the letter.

HAPPY THURSDAY. Send tips to iarnsdorf@politico.com.

PENCE AT NAM: Vice President–elect Mike Pence met with members of the National Association of Manufacturers Executive Committee at the trade group’s headquarters today to discuss domestic manufacturing, tax reform, infrastructure, deregulation, health care and energy. Pence asked NAM to help the administration prioritize which regulations should be reviewed for repeal.

CAREER CENTER:

— Capitol Counsel hired Jennifer (Debes) Bang for its financial services and telecommunications teams. She was associate staff member to the House Appropriations Committee and deputy chief of staff to Rep. Ander Crenshaw, chairman of the House Appropriations Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government, which has jurisdiction over Treasury and the IRS, SEC, FCC, CFPB, OMB and FTC. Capitol Counsel's financial services and telecom clients include New York Life, JPMorgan, SIFMA, Comcast and NCTA.

— Rep. Patrick Meehan (R-Pa.) named Michael Kirlin, formerly his legislative director, as his new chief of staff.

— WMATA tapped former Rep. Thomas Davis of Virginia, a director of government affairs at Deloitte, to help secure more federal funding for the Metro system, Lori Aratani reports in The Washington Post. In an email, Davis told PI he hopes Trump’s infrastructure proposal could be an opportunity for WMATA to get federal funding.

The transit agency already employs a full-time government relations staff, and anonymous officials told the Post they wondered how much pull Davis still has. WMATA spokeswoman Sherri Ly pointed to the presidential transition as justification for taking on the extra help.

— Jason Maloni, who until last August led the Data Security & Privacy Team at the LEVICK public relations firm, has started a new crisis communications firm called JadeRoq catering chiefly to cyber and privacy matters. The firm is already providing PR help to clients of insurance broker Beecher Carlson.

— Joshua Shields, who managed Sen. John Thune's reelection campaign, is returning to electric utility Black Hills Corporation as manager of federal government affairs.

— Executive search firm DHR International hired Eugene Patrone, who for the last two years has been COO at the Epcore Group. Patrone is also a former staffer for Rep. Chris Collins of New York, the first congressman to endorse Donald Trump and now a member of his transition team. He'll specialize in job moves between government and the private sector.

AS SEEN IN PLAYBOOK:

— Republican operatives Mike Shields and Rob Simms are starting a new consulting firm called Convergence Media. Full story.

— Danielle Burr, director of external affairs for House Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy, is leaving for Peck Madigan Jones. More here.

HOT DOC: Former Sen. Chris Dodd's $3 million compensation from the Motion Picture Association of America (from a tax form obtained by the Center for Public Integrity).

LAYOFFS KOCH WORLD: The Koch brothers’ network is laying off 81 people and creating a for-profit communications firm called In Pursuit Of, owned by parent non-profit group Freedom Partners Chamber of Commerce, Ken Vogel reports for POLITICO. “We’re always looking to tinker with things and optimize our efforts to try to become more effective,” said James Davis, an official at Freedom Partners who will serve as the president of In Pursuit Of. The network’s consolidation efforts include merging the Generation Opportunity, the LIBRE Initiative and Concerned Veterans for America, and cutting ties with the nonprofit Institute for Faith, Work & Economics and political consulting firm Aegis Strategic.

PROTO-TRUMPS: Liberal mega donors — Florida attorney John Morgan, Illinois philanthropist J.B. Pritzker, and Californian climate activist Tom Steyer — are now eyeing their own gubernatorial bids POLITICO’s Gabriel Debenedetti reports. “There seems to be a feeling that we need to look beyond the normal folks we always look to, the normal types,” said Elisabeth Pearson, the Democratic Governors Association’s executive director, who said the party was discussing a “need to look beyond the type of people who have been elected before, and look at who else might be out there." Some progressives chafing at the idea.

HOSPITALITY SECTION: Guess where the RNC is holding its Christmas party?

SPOTTED at the Dubliner with Rep. Richard Neal: Abby Jagoda of ICSC, Joe Harris of NAR, Andy Fishburn of ELFA, Jen McPhillips, Adam Goldberg of Anthem; Kelley Williams, Chris Davis of Express Scripts; Javier Martinez of Davita; and Reps. Seth Moulton, Linda Sanchez, Joe Crowley, Joe Kennedy and Elizabeth Esty.

Spotted at CTA's Christmas Party at the CTA Innovation House on Capitol Hill: Reps. Barbara Comstock, Blake Farenthold with daughter Morgan, Bill Foster, Darrell Issa, Bob Dold, Billy Long, Will Hurd, Renee Ellmers, Gerry Connolly, Bill Shuster and Cedric Richmond, CTA's Gary Shapiro, Jeff Joseph, Izzy Santa, Tyler Suiters, Michael Petricone, Tiffany Moore, Endeavor Strategies' Kurt Bardella, Team Issa's Jason Scism and Tyler Grimm.

NEW PACs:

Pennsylvania Liberty Pac: Non-Qualified Non-Party, Unauthorized

Terra Firma Pac: Unknown

NEW LOBBYING REGISTRATIONS:

Atlas Advocacy: WorldVentures Holdings

Carmen Group Incorporated: Washington Science Center Joint Venture

Mercury: DLT Solutions, Inc.

Ogilvy Government Relations: FedEx Corporation

Ogilvy Government Relations: LifeLock, Inc.

Squire Patton Boggs: Atlas Copco North America LLC

Strategies 360: Alterna Capital Partners LLC

Van Scoyoc Associates: National Association of Workforce Boards

NEW LOBBYING TERMINATIONS:

The National Industrial Transportation League: National Industrial Transportation League

Van Scoyoc Associates: Capitol Decisions, Inc. (University of Central Oklahoma)

Van Scoyoc Associates: Radiometrics

Foley Hoag LLP: eHealth, Inc.

JEH Government Services, Inc.: Phoenix Nuclear Labs, LLC

Marshall Consulting, LLC: Spectrum Five LLC

Peduzzi Associates, LTD.: Smith & Nephew Wound Division

The Wrenwood Group, LLC: A C Center INC DBA Trillium Health

Follow us on Twitter Theodoric Meyer @theodoricmeyer

Follow Us