Trump’s tax return soap opera, cont’d

WHAT’S IT ALL MEAN?: Did you read that four-paragraph letter from Donald Trump about his tax returns and come away with more questions? Don’t worry — you weren’t alone!

Katy O’Donnell and your Morning Tax author also weren’t quite sure what it all meant. Here’s what we found out as Trump continues to make his case that his tax returns have to stay hidden:

Story Continued Below

— It certainly seems like Trump gets audited a lot. The letter the GOP frontrunner released, from Morgan, Lewis & Bockius partners Sheri Dillon and William Nelson, doesn’t use the word “audit,” but notes that Trump’s returns have basically been under examination (an interchangeable term) since at least 2002. John Koskinen, the IRS chief, said in an interview a few weeks back that it would be “rare” for a single taxpayer to be audited so many years in a row. But maybe it’s best not to think about Trump that way. As his own lawyers say, Trump is the owner of about 500 pass-through companies, meaning they're taxed through Trump himself. So it might not seem as strange if some of those companies are getting audited each year.

— Trump likes to sell himself as a big dealmaker. As it turns out, his taxes aren’t that much different. One of the few glimpses we got about Trump’s taxes from his lawyers’ letter is that the real estate magnate and the IRS basically negotiated his taxes between 2002 and 2008 to a point where both sides thought they had cumulatively broken even. “They're not saying that every year is perfect. It's more art than science,” said one law professor.

— But what about the argument that Trump shouldn’t even release returns, like those between 2002 and 2008, where the IRS’s audit is closed? That’s a slippery slope, tax experts said, as they noted there’s nothing in his lawyers’ letter that would ban the release of Trump’s returns. Trump’s lawyers suggested there are portions of those returns that affect the returns from 2009 forward that are still under audit. But Dave Kautter of RSM said given how many companies Trump has under his umbrella, he could basically use that as an excuse to not release any of his returns going back decades. (More pointedly, Kautter said that Mitt Romney, the 2012 GOP nominee who’s suggested that Trump’s returns might have something disqualifying, could have, but didn’t, use a similar excuse.) A lot more here: http://politico.pro/1qi2jQE

WELCOME TO MONDAY, where your Morning Tax author has various cousins who attended Villanova and a wife who went to North Carolina. One guess as to where our loyalties lie tonight.

With the congressional recess breaking up, let us know what’s going on.

Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com, kodonnell@politico.com.

Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

WHAT’S THE MATTER WITH PANAMA?: It’s not like it was exactly a secret that the wealthy will sometimes go to great lengths to squirrel their money away in tax havens, outside of the prying eyes of tax collectors. But we’ve now got a lot more details to sift through after the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists released some 11 million documents connected to the Panamanian law firm Mossack Fonseca. (Panama’s bank-secrecy laws have led some to call it a Switzerland of the Western Hemisphere.)

"I think the leak will prove to be probably the biggest blow the offshore world has ever taken because of the extent of the documents," said Gerard Ryle, ICIJ’s director. Certainly some of the names involved are pretty eye-catching: President Vladimir Putin of Russia, President Bashar Assad of Syria, the late Libyan strongman Muammar Gaddafi, Argentine soccer star Lionel Messi and many more. Within hours, Prime Minister Sigmundur Davíð Gunnlaugsson of Iceland was under pressure to call new elections after revelations that he and his wife owned a company offshore “that held millions of dollars in Icelandic bank bonds during that country’s financial crisis.” Australian tax authorities are also investigating some of their taxpayers. The full story from ICIJ: http://bit.ly/1qpgSBX. Outside coverage from the BBC: http://bbc.in/1qhWEtT. And more on the Icelandic prime minister: http://bit.ly/1pYbKUN

AT THE OTHER END OF THE SPECTRUM: Honestly, if Donald Trump’s reasons for not releasing his tax returns are at one end of the spectrum, then Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont is clear on the other side. "You know who does our tax returns? My wife does our tax returns. We have been a little bit busy lately," Sanders told CNN’s “State of the Union,” per POLITICO's Connor O’Brien. Link: http://politico.pro/1Y9zikK

Hillary Clinton, Sanders’s rival for the Democratic nomination, has already released a full eight years of tax returns — a level of transparency not matched by Sanders or any of the three Republicans still in the race. But while CNN’s Jake Tapper said that he was “kind of surprised” that Sanders was holding out on his tax returns, the Vermont senator said they would be a pretty boring read. "There ain't going to be very much exciting in that. I get a salary from the United States Senate," Sanders said. "Our financial situation, to the best of my knowledge, has not changed very much, but we will get out all of that information as soon as we can.”

** A message from the Intuit Tax and Financial Center: With Tax Day less than two weeks away, it’s important to take a moment and reflect on how taxpayers can take advantage of this annual opportunity to jumpstart their savings by setting aside part of their refund, thanks to our Voluntary Compliance system. http://bit.ly/2BNqn5V **

TRUMP AND THE DEFICIT: Trump told The Washington Post in an interview published Saturday that the U.S. is about to have a “very massive recession.” But it was his comments that he would erase the $19 trillion debt over eight years that really caught the eye of budget and tax wonks. Trump, you might recall, is also proposing a tax cut in the neighborhood of $10 trillion over a decade. For that reason and more, Stan Collender in Forbes said Trump was guilty of “fiscal irrationality.”

“Put it all together and Trump is irrationally saying that he’ll pay for his massive tax cuts by reducing all domestic federal departments and agencies — everything from veterans to national parks to homeland security to border control to the National Institutes of Health and the Center for Disease Control — by a preposterous amount given their continual bipartisan support in Congress.” Trump interview: http://wapo.st/239tMlD. Forbes link: http://onforb.es/1UC9Lm7.

LAHOOD TAKES A SWING AT REPUBLICANS: Former Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood took the GOP’s federal transportation policy to the woodshed during a speech he gave last week at the Greater Phoenix Chamber of Commerce. “Republicans were once the party of innovation,” LaHood said, via the Phoenix Business Journal. “Ronald Reagan raised the gas tax twice. George H.W. Bush raised it again and pushed for funding the largest transportation bill ever. … Not one Republican legislator has been tossed out of office because of voting in favor of gas tax increases. … Voters don’t object when they know that an increased tax delivers something they can see. Republicans used to know this.” (Something to keep in mind: LaHood’s own son is a House Republican, representing some of the same areas his dad did.) More: http://bit.ly/1W3TGFg

INTERNATIONAL UPDATE

CHINA’S NEW PROTECTIONIST TAX: The WSJ — “China is tightening its grip on cross-border e-commerce, imposing a new tax system on overseas purchases that form a growing business catering to Chinese consumers with an appetite for foreign goods.” As the WSJ added, analysts viewed the policy change as an effort to boost domestic products and “could dent a small, but growing, market for foreign goods sold by Alibaba Group Holding Ltd., JD.com Inc. and other e-commerce players.” http://on.wsj.com/1SLTWWC

STATE NEWS

THE SODA TAX’S NEW FRONTIER: The idea of taxing sugary drinks has been around for awhile, but the NYT’s Margot Sanger-Katz writes that Mayor Jim Kenney of Philadelphia is trying to change the politics with his version that would raise taxes on a 20-ounce soda by about 60 cents. It’s not about obesity for Kenney — Instead, it’s all about what that revenue windfall can fund (universal preschool and maybe much more). “In other words, this soda tax isn’t for the nanny state; it’s for the needy state.” Link: http://nyti.ms/1RTrP7V

IT’S ON: Amazon is ending a program that gave financial bonuses to Louisiana bloggers and others who referred customers to the online warehouse, the Advocate reports. The move came after Louisiana, facing a steep budget gap, implemented a new provision that would force online sellers like Amazon to collect sales taxes if they have local merchants that sell more than $50,000 a year. Amazon has pulled similar moves in other states that have sought to maneuver around the requirement that an Internet outfit has to have a physical presence in the state to collect sales taxes. More here: http://bit.ly/1RHqrms

QUICK LINKS

Donald Trump, Bernie Sanders and the promise of tariffs. http://politico.pro/1RyAe1t

Paul Ryan used to be more into big ideas. http://bit.ly/1Y9A9So

Phishing is the newest frontier in the tax-fraud cybersecurity fight. http://on.wsj.com/1UCdose

Second homes and rental properties are getting hit with a new tax in Britain. http://bit.ly/1ZXKF0v

DID YOU KNOW?

A Welsh private and privateer named Henry Morgan (yes, he was a captain) invaded and sacked Panama City in 1671.

** A message from the Intuit Tax and Financial Center: Tax Day is less than two weeks away, and while it’s likely not a day that many of us look forward to, it’s a critical component of performing our tax compliance duties. Like voting in our elections, voluntary compliance is one of the basic characteristics of participatory citizenship in the United States. Beyond the refunds and returns, it’s important to reflect on what filing your taxes really means. It’s the one time of the year when we all must take stock of our whole financial picture. Direct citizen participation in this tax time moment, and leveraging the opportunity that tax refunds can represent, can make a real difference in a family’s financial health. And saving even a portion of a family’s annual tax time refund can move the needle on the economic health of the nation as a whole. To read more, visit http://bit.ly/2BNqn5V. **