Political Surveys and Election Polls, Trends, Charts and Analysis
Democracy Corps As you may have heard, President Obama is preparing a plan to change the health care system. From what you have heard about this plan, do you favor or oppose Obama's health care proposal?



3/15-18/10: As you may have heard, President Obama has proposed a plan to change the health care system that passed in the House of Representatives and the Senate. From what you have heard about this plan, do you favor or oppose Obama's health care proposal?

Pew As of right now, do you generally favor or generally oppose the health care proposals being discussed in Congress?

NBC / WSJ From what you have heard about Barack Obama's health care plan, do you think his plan is a good idea or a bad idea? If you do not have an opinion either way, please just say so.

Rasmussen Generally speaking, do you strongly favor, somewhat favor, somewhat oppose or strongly oppose the health care reform plan proposed by President Obama and the congressional Democrats?

NPR As you may have heard, President Obama and the Democrats in Congress are preparing a plan to change the health care system. From what you have heard about this plan, do you favor or oppose Obama and the Democrats' health care proposal?

Fox Based on what you know about the health care reform legislation being considered right now, do you favor or oppose the plan?

CNN: 6/26/09 - 11/1/09 From everything you have heard or read so far, do you favor or oppose Barack Obama's plan to reform health care?

CNN: 11/13-15/09 As you may know, the U.S. House of Representatives recently passed a bill that would make major changes in the country's health care system. Based on what you have heard or read about that bill, do you generally favor it or generally oppose it?

CNN: 12/2-3/09 As you may know, the U.S. Senate is considering a bill that would make major changes in the country's health care system. Based on what you have read or heard about that bill, do you generally favor it or generally oppose it?



3/19-21/10: As you may know, the U.S. House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate are trying to pass final legislation that would make major changes in the country's health care system. Based on what you have read or heard about that legislation, do you generally favor it or generally oppose it?

Gallup Would you advise your representative in Congress to vote for or against a healthcare reform bill similar to the one proposed by President Obama?



Before 3/9/10: Thinking about health care legislation now being considered by Congress, would you advise your member of Congress to vote for or against a healthcare bill this year, or do you not have an opinion?



3/22/10: As you may know, yesterday, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill that restructures the health care system. All in all, do you think it is a good thing or a bad thing that Congress passed this bill?

AllState / National Journal And, on the topic of health care, as you understand it, do you support or oppose the current legislation to reform health care in the U.S.

PPP Do you support or oppose President Obama's health care plan, or do you not have an opinion?

ABC/Post Overall, given what you know about them, would you say you support or oppose the proposed changes to the health care system being developed by Congress and the Obama administration? Do you feel that way strongly or somewhat?



After 3/23-26: Overall, given what you know about them, would you say you support or oppose the changes to the health care system that have been enacted by Congress and the Obama administration?

Ipsos/

McClatchy As of right now, do you favor or oppose the healthcare reform proposals presently being discussed?

YouGov Overall, given what you know about them, do you support or oppose the proposed changes to the health care system being developed by Congress and the Obama administration?



2/28-3/2: Overall, given what you know about them, do you support or oppose the proposed changes to the health care system being proposed by the Obama Administration?

Public Opinion

Strategies From what you have heard about Barack Obama's health care plan, do you think his plan is a good idea or a bad idea? If you do not have an opinion either way, please just say so.

AP-GfK In general, do you support, oppose or neither support nor oppose the health care reform plans being discussed in Congress?

Harris Even if you don't know the details of his plan, how do you feel about President Obama's proposals for health care reform?

OnMessage Do you favor or oppose the current health care legislation being pushed by President Obama and the Democrats in Congress?



3/9-11/10: Do you favor or oppose the health care reform bill currently being considered by Congress?

Bloomberg In general, do you favor or oppose President Obama's plan for health care reform?



3/19-22/10: Do you favor or oppose the health care overhaul plan currently under debate in Congress? (Language changed 3/22 to:) Do you favor or oppose the health care overhaul plan passed by the U.S. House of Representatives last night?

CBS/Times Do you mostly support or mostly oppose the changes to the health care system proposed by Barack Obama, or don't you know enough about them yet to say?



CBS 3/18-21/10: From what you've heard or read, do you approve or disapprove of the current health care reform bill?

Kaiser As of right now, do you generally support or generally oppose the health care proposals being discussed in Congress?