Don't Blame the Marines: Here's Who is Supposed to Protect U.S. Diplomats
AFP/Getty Images

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

After four Americans, including an ambassador, were killed at the U.S. consulate in Benghazi, Libya, this week, the first question some have asked was: "Where were the Marines?" But that question underlies a fundamental misconception about who is actually responsible for protecting diplomats and diplomatic buildings abroad, whether embassies or consulates.

When it comes to protecting the perimeter of a diplomatic building from attack, the primary responsibility falls on the host country. But when that protection fails, there are other personnel involved in keeping the buildings safe. Here's a breakdown of who does what:

Marine Security Guards: Contrary to popular belief, Marines aren't really stationed at embassies or consulates to protect diplomats. They are there primarily to protect secret information—embassy buildings often process classified information, and many host CIA personnel as well. Marines are there to protect—and if necessary destroy—any classified information so it doesn't fall into enemy hands. Foreign officers are told in their initial training not to think of the Marines as their personal bodyguards in case of an attack.

The Marine Corps itself makes this clear: "The primary mission of the Marine Security Guard (MSG) is to provide internal security at designated U.S. diplomatic and consular facilities in order to prevent the compromise of classified material vital to the national security of the United States."

That said, the Marines can and do provide security in case the embassy is attacked and other security measures fail. "[T]he MSGs' mission is to delay any hostile group long enough to destroy classified material and aid in safeguarding the lives of diplomatic personnel," according to the State Department.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Fleet Anti-Terrorism Teams, or FAST teams: The administration has reportedly sent about 50 Marines to Libya as part of a FAST team deployment to shore up security in the aftermath of the Benghazi attacks. The teams, which are meant to respond to terrorist threats, are not part of an embassy's regular security, however.

Diplomatic Security: Diplomatic Security Officers are members of the Foreign Service, designated as "specialists." Although Diplomatic Security officers are law enforcement special agents, their role is more of a management one when it comes to protecting the embassy and its staff—they work with the host country to provide security. Diplomatic Security also has other responsibilities, ranging from investigating visa fraud to screening potential local employees interested in working for the embassy.

Private Security Contractors: Although the host country is responsible for maintaining security outside the embassy, the U.S. State Department will typically employ private guards at the perimeter. Those guards are often residents of the country, or third-country nationals, who are responsible for initial screening measures such as checking cars for weapons or bombs. The State Department also employs companies to provide highly trained protective security details to diplomats. "Diplomats will often have private security details that are ex-military, such as former SEALs," says Doug Brooks, president of the International Stability Operations Association (ISOA), a group representing private contractors.

But in 2009, amid growing criticism for its heavy reliance on private security contractors like Blackwater Worldwide, the State Department moved to hire government specialists to beef up diplomatic security. One of the four Americans killed in this week's attack has been identified as a former Navy SEAL, but he was in the region on a mission to track weapons, not to protect the consulate.