Gov. Nikki Haley to visit India to promote S.C. tourism, trade
Gov. Nikki Haley is congratulated by her mother, Raj Randhawa, after being re-elected to office Tuesday. One of Haley's first post-election tasks is to lead a trade trip to her parents' homeland of India.

With the campaign trail behind her, Gov. Nikki Haley is now following her family roots to India, where she hopes to strike new trade relationships and promote the Palmetto State's tourism industry.

Haley, whose native Indian parents moved to the United States before she was born, hasn't been back to their homeland since she was 2 years old.

There won't be any time for visiting distant relatives or sightseeing, said Bobby Hitt, head of the S.C. Commerce Department who discussed the $50,000 trade mission on Friday.

The delegation of eight state officials, including Haley, and 10 private-sector partners from around the state, will attend 90 meetings and events during the trip from Nov. 11-Nov. 21. The itinerary includes business meetings in New Delhi, Chandigarh, Amritsar, Hyderabad, Mumbai, Chennai and Bangalore.

But Haley's heritage may work in the delegation's favor as they meet with mostly Indian manufacturers and pharmaceutical companies.

"There's a lot of excitement about her coming," Hitt said. "Of course, Gov. Haley is pretty well-known in India now after having met with Prime Minister (Narendra) Modi during his U.S. visit. ... There's a lot of excitement amongst our partners in India in advance of her visit and we think this trip will go a long way towards putting our state on the map with Indian companies and decision makers."

Staffers from Haley's office and Hitt's agency will be part of the entourage. Representatives from the state Parks, Recreation and Tourism Department will also be on board to promote the visitor industry to travel agencies and publications throughout the country.

Several other private companies and economic development organizations from around the state will join the delegation. Commerce did not specify which ones. Allison Skipper, spokeswoman for the department, said none is from the Lowcountry.

All of the economic alliances in the state were offered a spot on the trip, Hitt said.

India ranks at No. 16 on the list of top foreign investors and trade partners in South Carolina, and the state hopes next week's trip will take the relationship with the country to a new level.

Foreign companies have contributed to 34 percent of new jobs and 60 percent of new capital investments in South Carolina since 2011, according to Commerce.

Hitt said the delegation aims to meet with manufacturers such as Tata Motors Limited and others about opportunities to open factories in South Carolina.

The state is also promoting South Carolina-made products to enhance its trade relationship with the country. South Carolina exported $352 million in goods to India last year, which put the state at No. 14 for top exporters in the U.S.

Total U.S. exports to India have more than doubled since 2006, and the state's exports to the country have more than tripled since 2005.

"What this means is the export pie is getting bigger, and as is South Carolina's slice of that pie," Hitt said. "It's our job at the commerce department to ensure we get our share, or as we like to say, a little more than our share."

He added that Commerce staff have traveled to India four times in the past two years, and that next week's trade mission will not be the state's last visit to the Asian nation.

Reach Abigail Darlington at 937-5906 and follow her on Twitter @A_Big_Gail