Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker signs tax cut bill into law
MADISON — Companies that relocate to Wisconsin won't have to pay income taxes for two years under a bill signed into law Monday by Gov. Scott Walker.

The measure joins three others Walker has signed in his first month in office that he said will send a message that Wisconsin is more business friendly. Walker, a Republican, has seen his legislative agenda speed through the Republican-controlled Legislature even though he has yet to explain how he'll pay for everything in light of the state's projected $3 billion budget shortfall.

Walker is expected to tout the early successes— and start talking about how he'll tackle the budget — in his first State of the State address tonight.

Even though the tax cut bill he signed Monday and other agenda have garnered bipartisan support, Democratic critics say much of what Walker is doing is more symbolic than substantive.

For example, only $1 million in tax breaks is expected to be distributed to qualifying businesses that relocate to Wisconsin under the bill Walker signed Monday. Another tax cut Walker is backing that's tied to every new job created would come with a tax benefit of only between $90 and $315 per job.

But Walker argues the changes will improve the state's business climate.

Aid to public schools, the University of Wisconsin System, local governments and Medicaid programs were expected to be big targets for cuts in the budget Walker will release on Feb. 22.

For his first month in office, though, Walker's been focused on spending money through tax cuts. Two tax cuts he's already signed — along with one that's passed the Assembly — would add about $117 million to the state's budget problem over the next two years.

The $1 million tax cut bill he signed Monday takes effect this tax year and affects taxes due in 2012. Companies that have not operated in the state for two years could essentially get their corporate and personal income tax obligation in Wisconsin erased for a two-year period. At least 51 percent of the workforce's payroll, or at least $200,000 in wages, must be paid to the workers in Wisconsin to qualify.