Baldwin disciplines chief of staff, 2 aides over Tomah
Buy Photo Outside of the Tomah Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Tuesday, March 10, 2015. (Photo: Megan McCormick/News-Herald Medi)Buy Photo

WASHINGTON – Sen. Tammy Baldwin said Friday she is disciplining her chief of staff and two other aides for failing to take appropriate action on complaints about improper care of veterans at the Veterans Affairs' medical center in Tomah where a veteran died in August.

In an interview Friday, the Madison Democrat said that at every level, her office made mistakes in handling an inspection report, which found "serious concerns" about "unusually high" opiate-prescription rates in Tomah. She said subsequent pleas from a whistleblower also were mishandled.

As a result, Baldwin said, she is fining her chief of staff, demoting the director of her Wisconsin offices, reassigning a veterans'-outreach staffer and looking for a new aide in Milwaukee.

"Mistakes were made, and I'm taking the action that I need to assure the people of Wisconsin that we are not going to make these mistakes again, and I'll renew my reputation for excellent casework," she told USA TODAY.

RELATED: Baldwin breaks silence, says reviewing Tomah response

RELATED: Johnson: My office could have done more on Tomah

Baldwin said her chief of staff, Bill Murat, and others did not properly brief her on the report by the Veterans Affairs' inspector general or the complaints from the whistleblower, former Tomah employee Ryan Honl, who repeatedly emailed her office in November and December pleading that she take action on the report. Her office received the report last August.

She said she doesn't remember if they told her specifically about Honl, but she said they expressed general concerns about her staff's interaction with constituents about veteran issues.

"What I recall being told is that there were significant concerns that our VA casework was not being handled well," she said.

The senator said she personally did not get a copy of the report and read it until January, after news reports outlined its contents and revealed that 35-year-old Jason Simcakoski died as an inpatient at Tomah on Aug 30 after doctors decided to add another opiate medication to the 14 drugs he was already prescribed. An autopsy ruled he died of "mixed drug toxicity."

Baldwin is fining Murat one month's salary, demoting Doug Hill from state director to outreach coordinator, and reassigning Mike Helbick from veterans' outreach aide to another role that will be determined after he undergoes more training, she said.

Baldwin fired her deputy state director and top aide in Milwaukee, Marquette Baylor, in January, after USA TODAY first reported that the senator's office had the report for four months but didn't act on it despite Honl's emails.

Baldwin took the latest actions after receiving the findings of a review conducted at her request by Washington lawyers she hired, Marc Elias and Jonathan Berkon.

The review found her aides in Wisconsin notified her staff in Washington last August that an independent investigation backed up whistleblower complaints they had received, but the aides did not reveal that the complaints concerned opiates at Tomah, and no one followed up on it.

In November, after Honl first asked Baldwin's office about the report,the Wisconsin aides also gave Baldwin's chief of staff the report outlining the high rates of opiate prescriptions. They also told Murat about complaints they were receiving from Honl.

But Murat focused on the report's findings that, although there were serious concerns about the opiate rates,there was no conclusive evidence of wrongdoing, and so Muratdidn't follow up on the opiate concerns.

"In retrospect this was a mistake," Elias and Berkon concluded.

Baldwin said she was disciplining rather than firing Murat, Helbick and Hill because the review did not find evidence of deliberate wrongdoing.

"This external report didn't find anything willful or unethical," she said. "It found mistakes. It found mistakes in communication, it found mistakes in missing opportunities to move forward more swiftly with this, and it found mistakes in judgment."

The senator said she is also overhauling the way her office handles constituent complaints, including instituting a system to better track and manage them and implementing policies that differentiate complaints about an individual's personal problem with a federal agency from those alleging systemic issues. The systemic complaints will now be handled by more senior staff.

"These are changes that were implemented within my office, that I can assure you are well in place now and moving forward," Baldwin said.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1GAkcfm