Bio, Christian, Michael D.
CHRISTIAN, MICHAEL DURHEN

Died in fire at home September 1983

Name: Michael Durhen Christian

Rank/Branch: O2/US Navy

Unit: Attack Squadron 85, USS KITTY HAWK

Date of Birth: 07 October 1940

Home City of Record: Huntsville AL

Date of Loss: 24 April 1967

Country of Loss: North Vietnam

Loss Coordinates: 212400N 1061900E (XJ364667)

Status (in 1973): Released POW

Category:

Aircraft/Vehicle/Ground: A6A Other Personnel in Incident: Lewis I. Williams, Jr. (released POW)

Source: Compiled by Homecoming II Project 15 April 1990 from one or more of the

following: raw data from U.S. Government agency sources, correspondence with

POW/MIA families, published sources, interviews. Updated by the P.O.W.

NETWORK. 2019

NOTE: Several different middle names appear in files. The original POW/MIA listings after

loss showed DURHEN.

REMARKS: 730305 RELSD BY DRV

SYNOPSIS: The Grumman A6 Intruder is a two-man all weather, low-altitude,

carrier-based attack plane, with versions adapted as aerial tanker and

electronic warfare platform. The A6A primarily flew close-air-support,

all-weather and night attacks on enemy troop concentrations, and night

interdiction missions. Its advanced navigation and attack system, known as DIANE

(Digital Integrated Attack navigation Equipment) allowed small precision

targets, such as bridges, barracks and fuel depots to be located and attacked in

all weather conditions, day or night. The planes were credited with some of the

most difficult single-plane strikes in the war, including the destruction of the

Hai Duong bridge between Hanoi and Haiphong by a single A6. Their missions were

tough, but their crews among the most talented and most courageous to serve the

United States.

Lt. Lewis I. Williams was a pilot assigned to Attack Squadron 85 onboard the USS

KITTY HAWK (CVA 63). On April 24, 1967, he launched in his A6A Intruder attack

bomber with his bombardier/navigator, Lt. Michael D. Christian, on a daylight

strike mission into North Veitnam.

Approximately 3 miles from the target, their port (left) wing was hit by 85mm

anti-aircraft fire and was subsequently engulfed in flames. Lt. Williams

reversed course and jettisoned his ordnance before both crewmen ejected. Both

men were seen to land in an open field about 100 yards apart and established

radio contact with airborne aircraft. The crewmen appeared uninjured and

reported their condition as good. The ejection occurred in a well-defended,

populated area near the city of Kep in Ha Bac Province, and capture was almost

immediate.

Williams and Christian were held in various locations in Hanoi, North Vietnam

before they were released in March 1973. Christian received an award for a

birthday during his captivity for being "The Best Bull Shooter in the Whole

World." Williams' and Christian's lives followed very diverse courses after

their release.

Lt. Williams remained in the Navy and attained the rank of Captain. In 1989, his

duty assignment was with the office of the Chief of Naval Operations at the

Pentagon in Washington, D.C.

Lt. Christian was promoted during his captivity to the rank of Lt. Commander. He

voluntarily retired on February 1, 1978 while at the Armed Forces Staff College.

His resignation was as a protest to president-elect Jimmy Carter's amnesty plan

for draft dodgers. In protest, Christian threw his medals on the grave of a

veteran. He had been awarded two Silver Stars, three Bronze Stars, four Air

Medals, the Legion of Merit, and the Navy Commendation Medal.

In September 1983, Michael D. Christian died in a fire in his home in Virginia

Beach, Virginia.

Williams and Christian were among 591 lucky Americans who were released in 1973

from Vietnam prisoner of war camps. Unfortunately, nearly 2300 are still

prisoner, missing and otherwise unaccounted for from the Vietnam war. As

Williams must surely be aware, thousands of reports relating to these men have

been received by the U.S. Government. The thought that some of their comrades

are still alive is very disturbing to most returnees. They had a code among them

that none of them could honorably return home unless they all came home.

Today, many authorities who have reviewed the largely classified information

relating to missing Americans in Southeast Asia have reluctantly concluded that

hundreds of Americans remain alive today in captivity. It's long past time our

men were home.

SOURCE: WE CAME HOME copyright 1977

Captain and Mrs. Frederic A Wyatt (USNR Ret), Barbara Powers Wyatt, Editor

P.O.W. Publications, 10250 Moorpark St., Toluca Lake, CA 91602

Text is reproduced as found in the original publication (including date and

spelling errors).

UPDATE - 09/95 by the P.O.W. NETWORK, Skidmore, MO

MICHAEL D. CHRISTIAN

Lieutenant Commander - United States Navy

Shot Down: April 24, 1967

Released: March 4, 1973

Family: Father, William D. Christian of Huntsville, Alabama. My mother died

during the last year of my captivity. Sister, Pat Endres of

Colonie, New York. Brother, Lary Alan Christian, age 11, of

Huntsville, Alabama. Wife, Charlotte Strong Christian of Virginia

Beach, Virginia. Children, Deborah Kaye, age 13, Sandra Dawn, age

11, Pamela Joan, age 8.



Education: Pre High School, Schenectady, New York; Butler High School,

Huntsville, Alabama; University of Alabama (1 semester); Purdue

University, BSEE 1964.

Navy: Enlisted 28 January 1958-Aviation electronics technician; Naval

Enlisted Scientific Education Program (NESEP) a commission program;

one and a half years surface Navy in the USS Dahlgren DLG-12; B/N

Wings in 1966; A-6A B/N in VA-85 aboard the USS Kitty Hawk (CVA-63).

Interests: Music, Languages, Literature, Travel, and mainly - my family.

My pilot was Lt. Lewis Irving (Irv) Williams. We were shot down 24 April 1967

at Kep Airfield about 30 miles northeast of Hanoi.

I frequently found myself in the wrong place at the wrong time. I got to know

the Vietnamese and their methods quite well during five major and various

minor pain sessions. Their attempts at propaganda and indoctrination taught

me, as it did so many, just how strongly I support the ideals and policies of

my country and our system of government. I learned a great deal about myself

and my fellow man. I saw Americans function under conditions of great stress

and report with pride their tremendous courage and resourcefulness . Perhaps

the two strongest lessons I learned are: One, look around and find those who

love you. Be aware of their love and react to it while you still can. Two, the

International Communist Revolution is a deadly serious business and we MUST

become aware of it. We need not panic, but we absolutely must deal with

communism from a position of strength. Peace at any price politics will

destroy us.

-------

A friend of mine forwarded me the following story. I

got to live with Mike and considered him a great roommate.

Mike was an A6A pilot, POW 4-24-67 to 3-4-73. A couple of years following

release, he was trapped in an apartment by a fire. The bars on the window

prevented him from from making an escape. He battled to get through

but lost the fight. MM (John Michael McGrath ex POW)

______



Our Flag- The Stars and Stripes "Mike's Flag"

(Condensed from a speech by Leo K Thorness, recipient of the

Congressional Medal of Honor. )

You've probably seen the bumper sticker somewhere along the road. It

depicts an American Flag, accompanied by the words "These colors don't

run." I'm always glad to see this, because it reminds me of an

incident from my confinement in North Vietnam at the Hao Lo POW Camp,

or the "Hanoi Hilton," as it became known.

Then a Major in the U.S. Air Force, I had been captured and imprisoned

from 1967-1973. Our treatment had been frequently brutal. After three

years, however, the beatings and torture became less frequent. During

the last year, we were allowed outside most days for a couple of

minutes to bathe. We showered by drawing water from a concrete tank

with a homemade bucket.

One day as we all stood by the tank, stripped of our clothes, a young

Naval pilot named Mike Christian found the remnants of a handkerchief

in a gutter that ran under the prison wall. Mike managed to sneak the

grimy rag into our cell and began fashioning it into a flag. Over

time we all loaned him a little soap, and he spent days cleaning the

material. We helped by scrounging and stealing bits and pieces of

anything he could use. At night, under his mosquito net, Mike worked

on the flag. He made red and blue from ground-up roof tiles and tiny

amounts of ink and painted the colors onto the cloth with watery rice

glue. Using thread from his own blanket and a homemade bamboo needle,

he sewed on stars. Early in the morning a few days later, when the

guards were not alert, he whispered loudly from the back of our cell,

"Hey gang, look here." He proudly held up this tattered piece of

cloth, waving it as if in a breeze. If you used your imagination, you

could tell it was supposed to be an American flag. When he raised

that smudgy fabric, we automatically stood straight and saluted, our

chests puffing out, and more than a few eyes had tears. About once a

week the guards would strip us, run us outside and go through our

clothing. During one of those shakedowns, they found Mike's flag. We

all knew what would happen. That night they came for him. Night

interrogations were always the worst. They opened the cell door and

pulled Mike out. We could hear the beginning of the torture before

they even had him in the torture cell. They beat him most of the

night. About daylight they pushed what was left of him back through

the cell door. He was badly broken; even his voice was gone.

Within two weeks, despite the danger, Mike scrounged another piece of

cloth and began another flag. The Stars and Stripes, our national

symbol, was worth the sacrifice to him. Now, whenever I see the flag,

I think of Mike and the morning he first waved that tattered emblem of

a nation. It was then, thousands of miles from home in a lonely prison

cell, that he showed us what it is to be truly free.

===============================