Planned Parenthood Advocates of Virginia Endorses Dr. Jill McCabe
For Immediate Release

Planned Parenthood Advocates of Virginia Endorses Dr. Jill McCabe

Dr. McCabe clear choice for District

Richmond, VA-Planned Parenthood Advocates of Virginia (PPAV) is proud to announce our endorsement of Dr. Jill McCabe for State Senate in the 13th District. Dr. McCabe received a 100% rating from PPAV. In the fall, Dr. McCabe faces incumbent Dick Black who has a long history of anti-women’s health positions during his tenure in the State House and Senate.

“We are delighted to endorse Dr. Jill McCabe for State Senate,” said Cianti Stewart-Reid, executive director of Planned Parenthood Advocates of Virginia.

As a wife, mother, and physician, Dr. McCabe understands the everyday challenges facing the voters in Virginia—maintaining and improving the quality of public education, eliminating traffic congestion that takes away from quality family time, and growing our economy in wake of budget cuts in DC and Richmond.

“As she has done in the past, when she sees a problem, Dr. McCabe jumps in to help fix them,” continued Stewart-Reid. “She will bring her ability to build consensus and find practical solutions to shared problems to her work in the State Senate. We are excited to work with a State Senator who understands the challenges facing our Commonwealth and is willing to be a vocal advocate to advance women’s health, public education and economic development in our state.”

"I'm honored to receive Planned Parenthood Advocates of Virginia's endorsement,” said Dr. McCabe. “As a doctor, I know how important women's health services are. I believe that a woman’s decisions about her health care are personal, and I will always fight to ensure that they stay between her and her doctor - without interference and debate from politicians."

The choice in this race could not be clearer. For four years, the residents of the 13th District have been represented in the State Senate by a man who doesn’t reflect their values. “It’s time to send a leader to Richmond from the 13th State Senate District who will fight for everyone and that person is Dr. Jill McCabe,” said Stewart-Reid.

###