John F. Kennedy: Executive Order 11002—Assigning Emergency Preparedness Functions to the Postmaster General
By virtue of the authority vested in me as President of the United States, including authority vested in me by Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1958 (72 Stat. 1799), it is hereby ordered as follows:

SECTION 1. Scope. The Postmaster General shall assist in the development of a national emergency registration system. These plans and programs shall be designed to develop a state of readiness in this area with respect to all conditions of national emergency including attack upon the United States.

SEC. 2. Cooperation with Department of Defense. In consonance with national civil defense plans, programs, and operations of the Department of Defense under Executive Order No. 10952, the Postmaster General shall:

(a) Registration system. Assist in planning a national program and developing technical guidance for States, and directing Post Office activities concerned with registering persons and families for the purpose of receiving and answering welfare inquiries, and reuniting families in civil defense emergencies. The program shall include:

1. Forms. Procurement, transportation, storage, and distribution of safety notification and emergency change of address cards in quantities and localities jointly determined by the Department of Defense and the Post Office Department.

2. Training. Conduct of training programs for postal employees which will enable them to operate emergency central postal directories and to assist in the operation of a national emergency registration system including support of local welfare activities in reuniting families.

(b) Damage assessment. Maintain a capability to assess the effects of attack on its postal service and resources, both at national and field levels, and provide data to the Department of Defense.

SEC. 3.Functional Guidance. The Postmaster General, in carrying out the functions assigned in this order, shall be guided by the following:

(a) Interagency cooperation. The Postmaster General shall work with the heads of other agencies concerned in the development of systems outlined above. He shall utilize to the maximum those capabilities of other agencies qualified to perform or assist in the performance of assigned functions by contractual or other agreements.

(b) Presidential coordination. The Director of the Office of Emergency Planning shall advise and assist the President in determining policy for, and assist him in coordinating the performance of functions under this order with the total national preparedness program.

(c) Emergency planning. Emergency plans and programs, and emergency organization structures required thereby, shall be developed as an integral part of the continuing activities of the Post Office Department on the basis that it will have the responsibility for carrying out such programs during an emergency. The Postmaster General shall be prepared to implement all appropriate plans developed under this order. Modifications and temporary organizational changes, based on emergency conditions, shall be in accordance with policy determination by the President.

SEC. 4. Emergency Actions. Nothing in this order shall be construed as conferring authority under Title III of the Federal Civil Defense Act of 1950, as amended, or otherwise, to put into effect any emergency plan, procedure, policy, program, or course of action prepared or developed pursuant to this order. Such authority is reserved to the President.

SEC. 5. Redelegation. The Postmaster General is hereby authorized to redelegate within the Post Office Department the functions hereinabove assigned to him.

SEC. 6. Prior Actions. To the extent of any inconsistency between the provisions of any prior order and the provisions of this order, the latter shall control. Emergency Preparedness Order No. 9 (heretofore issued by the Director, Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization) (26 F.R. 661-662), is hereby revoked.

JOHN F. KENNEDY

THE WHITE HOUSE,

February 16, 1962