Official web-site of President of Ukraine
Home President of Ukraine Constitution of Ukraine Constitution of Ukraine - Title X The Autonomous Republic of Crimea Article 134. The Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall be an integral constituent part of Ukraine and shall resolve issues relegated to its authority within the frame of its reference, determined by the Constitution of Ukraine. Article 135. The Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall have the Constitution of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea adopted by the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and approved by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine by no less than one half of the constitutional membership of the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine. Regulatory legal acts of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and decisions of the Council of Ministers of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall not contradict the Constitution and laws of Ukraine and shall be adopted in accordance with and in pursuance of the Constitution of Ukraine, laws of Ukraine, acts of the President of Ukraine and the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. Article 136. The Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall be the representative body of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, deputies of which are elected on the basis of universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot. The term of the authority of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, deputies of which elected at regular elections shall constitute five years. The termination of the powers of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall result in termination of the powers of its deputies. Regular elections to the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall be held on the last Sunday of October of the fifth year of the term of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea elected at regular elections. The Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall, within its competence, adopt decisions and resolutions mandatory for execution in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. The Council of Ministers of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall be the government of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. The Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall be appointed or dismissed by the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea subject to the consent of the President of Ukraine. The powers and the procedure for the formation and operation of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and of the Council of Ministers of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall be determined by the Constitution of Ukraine and laws of Ukraine, and by regulatory legal acts of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in relation to the issues within its competence. In the Autonomous Republic of Crimea justice shall be administered by courts belonging to the single system of courts of Ukraine. Article 137. The Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall effect normative regulation in the following areas: 1) agriculture and forestry; 2) land improvement and surface mining; 3) public works, crafts and trades; charity; 4) urban construction and housing management; 5) tourism, hotel business, fairs; 6) museums, libraries, theatres, other cultural establishments, historical and cultural conservation areas; 7) public transportation, roadways, water supply; 8) hunting and fishing; 9) sanitary and hospital services. In case of nonconformity of regulatory legal acts of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea with the Constitution of Ukraine and laws of Ukraine, the President of Ukraine may suspend such regulatory legal acts of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea with a simultaneous appeal to the Constitutional Court of Ukraine in regard to their constitutionality. Article 138. The following issues shall be under the authority of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea: 1) call elections of deputies to the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, approve of the membership of the electoral commission of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea; 2) organise and hold of local referendums; 3) manage property that belongs to the Autonomous Republic of Crimea; 4) elaborate, approve, and execute the budget of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea on the basis of the uniform tax and budget policy of Ukraine; 5) develop, approve, and implement programmes of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea for socio-economic and cultural development, rational exploiting of natural resources and environmental protection in accordance with national programmes; 6) grant the resort status for localities; establish zones for the sanitary protection of resorts; 7) participate in ensuring the rights and freedoms of citizens, national harmony, and promote the protection of legal order and public security; 8) ensure the functioning and development of the state language and national languages and cultures in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea; protect and use of historical monuments; 9) participate in the development and realisation of state programmes for the return of deported peoples; 10) initiate the introduction of a state of emergency and establish zones of ecological emergency as needed in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea or in its particular areas. Other powers may also be delegated to the Autonomous Republic of Crimea by laws of Ukraine. Article 139. The status of the Representative Office of the President of Ukraine operating in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea shall be determined by the law of Ukraine. * * * Title I General Principles Title II Human and Citizen Rights, Freedoms and Duties Title III Elections. Referendum Title IV The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine Title V The President of Ukraine Title VI The Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine. Other Executive Authorities Title VII Public Prosecution Title VIII Justice Title Iǽ Territorial Structure of Ukraine Title ǽ The Autonomous Republic of Crimea Title ǽI Local Self-Government Title ǽII The Constitutional Court of Ukraine Title ǽIII Making Amendments to the Constitution of Ukraine Title XIV Final Provisions Title XV Transitional Provisions * * *

Print version