Long Beach 2015 crime stats released: Double-digit spikes in violent and property crimes
Long Beach saw a nearly 20 percent rise in violent crime and a 15.4 percent spike in property crime last year, according to statistics released late Friday from the city.

The Long Beach Police Department reported an 18.8 percent increase in violent crime over the prior year, and a 15.9 percent increase in crimes including murder, nonnegligent homicide, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, motor vehicle theft, larceny-theft and arson.

In a statement, city officials pointed to increases in aggravated assaults and auto thefts as some reasons for the high crime numbers.

The city, however, also saw 36 murders, its highest rate since 2009. The number of aggravated assaults increased 18.9 percent, and 17 of the 36 murders in 2015 were gang-related.

Amid increases, some drops

In a statement, the city pointed to recent historically-low crime rates: “The [rate] remains relatively low when compared to the overall historical crime statistics. The 2015 crime rate is similar to the 2011 crime rate, when Long Beach had historic lows.”

However, when compared to the five-year average, 2015 saw 19.5 percent more violent crimes and 29.3 percent more property crimes overall, according to police statistics.

Long Beach did see decreases in a number of property crimes, according to the city’s statement.

• Residential burglary decreased 11 percent

• Garage burglary decreased 7.2 percent

• Commercial burglary decreased 12.1 percent

• Arson decreased 8.2 percent

Mid-year spike

Long Beach began to see a significant increase in violent crime beginning in June. There were five murders that month, and 18 shootings.

The spike, combined with widely-circulated rumors online that alleged a local gang was calling for violence against the city’s African American residents, fanned fears that the city would see an explosion of violence.

Police perspective

Police Chief Robert Luna said he and other chiefs across the state are concerned about the increases, and pointed to recent legislative changes like state propositions 36 and 47, and AB109.

The laws are aimed at reducing prison and jail populations and have earned criticism from many in the law enforcement community because they recategorized several nonviolent felony crimes as misdemeanors.

Prop. 36 amended California’s Three Strikes Law by requiring that a crime be serious or violent — unless the prior strikes were for rape, murder or child molestation — to be considered a third strike.

Advertisement

Prop. 47 reclassified certain types of felonies as misdemeanors unless the defendant has prior convictions for violent and serious crimes.

AB109 shifted the responsibility of monitoring lower-level inmates from the state to the counties.

“These changes are viewed as having a negative impact on our ability to manage crime and without additional county and state support for alternatives to incarceration, criminal activity is expected to continue to rise,” Luna said in a statement released by the city.