Obama Intentionally Exposing YOU to Deadly Diseases
Dave Jolly

Godfather Politics

July 3, 2014

How would you like to have a job where you were shot at by drug traffickers on the ground and from aircraft and where you were exposed to serious diseases such as tuberculosis, swine flu (H1N1), Ebola, dengue fever and chicken pox? Then consider the fact that working at this job really didn’t make much of a difference because the president undermined most of what you were working for.

Welcome to the US Border Patrol.

Border Patrol agents have faced the possibility of being shot at for years, mostly by illegal drug traffickers. Ever since the Obama administration walked thousands of guns, many of them assault and assault-style rifles, the threat of being shot at have increased. Thirty-three US Customs and Border Patrol agents have died in the line of duty since Dec. 2003. One of those agents, Brian A. Terry was shot and killed by drug cartel members along the Arizona-Mexico border on December 15, 2010 with one of the assault rifles given to the cartel by the Obama administration.

A week ago, Border Patrol agents from the Tucson area took fire from a Mexican aircraft that was operating within the US border.

If their job wasn’t already dangerous enough, the huge influx of illegals is presenting a new risk to the health and lives of Border Patrol agents and all Americans. The incidence of dangerous diseases is posing a serious threat to agents and YOU. Some Border Patrol agents have already tested positive for chicken pox, tuberculosis and the H1N1 swine flu.

The dangerous dengue fever is currently sweeping through parts of Mexico and in many instances it’s the hemorrhagic form.

Consider the fact that illegals crossing the border not only come from Mexico and other Central and South American countries, but they are also coming from the Middle East and Africa. In some of the countries where these illegals are coming from some diseases such as the Ebola virus hemorrhagic fever is completely out of control.

Now consider that fact that all of the diseases I’ve listed so far are highly contagious and that many of the illegals tend to congregate together in somewhat squalid conditions when they first get here. Those types of close quarter conditions are the perfect scenario for breeding and spreading these deadly diseases.

Zack Taylor, Chairman of the National Association of Former Border Patrol Officers (NAFBPO) warns us of the dangers of these diseases to the American people as well as to Border Patrol agents:

“CDC [the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention] has not informed the Border Patrol of which types of diseases have been diagnosed, or where any ill people have been taken. We have apprehended West African illegal immigrants in the Rio Grande Valley sector coming into the U.S. through Mexico in the last few years. Right now, we are only apprehending about 3 percent of the volume coming across our border, so the danger to the American people is that no one knows who is coming in, how many there are, where they are coming from, what they are carrying and where they are going.”

With this in mind, the Obama administration is currently sending large groups of illegals to cities around the country instead of sending them back to where they came from. Consider the health risk that the hundreds of thousands of illegals pose to the American public.

Dr. Elizabeth Lee Vliet, writing for WND, poses a series of questions that need to be answered by our government:

Why is the CDC, the U.S. agency responsible for identification, tracking and overseeing issues around infectious disease outbreaks, so strangely silent? Why did the Border Patrol Union post a notice on June 29 in Local 1613 News with a list of precautions agents should take, but no such warning has been issued by CDC to the public in affected communities? What diseases are actually being identified, but not reported to the public? Why are there reports of a temporary decontamination center set up in El Paso, Texas, similar to those in use in West Africa? What is it for? What diseases have been found that would require such a facility? Why are Border Patrol agents – charged with protecting the homeland from incursions such as this – now prohibited from speaking out, often with threats of criminal prosecution? Why is the CDC not on top of – and warning – the public of these increasingly serious situations? What steps are being taken to isolate and quarantine infected individuals, or to prepare communities for a spike in serious illnesses? Why are more doctors in the southern border states not already on alert to handle sudden increase in TB, adult chicken pox, measles, H1N1 influenza, dengue, Ebola, plus other unknown but lethal diseases?

Dr. Vliet, an MD, concludes her article with:

“Americans tend to be complacent about infectious diseases but we need to keep in mind that in spite of our successes, infectious diseases remain the leading cause of death worldwide and in the top 10 causes of death in the U.S. Many of the diseases of concern, such as Ebola hemorrhagic fever, have NO effective treatments.” “Biological agents like viruses and bacteria are not like radiological weapons that decay continually once released, or chemical agents that are degraded in the environment and require threshold concentrations to be deadly. Disease-causing agents have doubling times, not half-lives. Disease agents continue to increase exponentially, as long as there are people to be exposed.” “This medical crisis on our borders is a ticking time bomb. Are we now in the early stages of (or in danger of) a ‘Plan B’ biological attack on the homeland?” “The CDC is either egregiously incompetent or complicit in hiding information from the public. Both are unacceptable. America’s CDC and media have a duty to inform the American people about a threat that transcends any political ideology.”

It seems that Barack Obama is intentionally risking the health and lives of every American citizen by not taking the necessary measures to secure our borders and stop the spread of deadly diseases. Regardless of all of the laws he’s broken in the past, this failure to protect the American people could be the most serious offense that he has ever committed. Obama is an enemy to the American people and seems determined to destroy us one way or another. The tyrant must be removed from office as soon as possible.

This article was posted: Thursday, July 3, 2014 at 11:23 am

Print this page.

Infowars.com Videos:

Comment on this article