Private Student Loans Guru
Do Not Borrow Private Student Loans

Before borrowing private student loans, review the top ten reasons why you should avoid private student loans. How to Choose the Best Student Loans

Criteria for choosing a student loan include cost, options for dealing with financial difficulty and who must repay the debt.

What is Affordable Debt?

Total student loan debt at graduation should be less than the borrower's annual income, so that it can be repaid in 10 years or less. How to Save Money on Student Loans

Learn the top 12 tips for cutting the cost of student loans, such as going on a debt diet, cutting interest and speeding up repayment.

Cosign Student Loans with Caution

More than 90% of undergraduate students and 75% of graduate students need a cosigner to qualify for a private student loan. Student Loan Discounts

Save money on student loans with interest-rate and principal reductions, such as auto-debit discounts and graduation rewards.

Cosigner Release

Apply for cosigner release after making 12, 24, 36 or 48 consecutive on-time payments and satisfying the lender's credit criteria. Student Loan Interest Deduction

Deduct up to $2,500 in interest on federal and private student loans on your federal income tax returns even if you don't itemize.

Fixed vs. Variable Interest Rates

The choice between fixed and variable interest rates often depends on whether interest rates are increasing or decreasing. Check Your Credit Scores

To get approved and a lower interest rate, check your credit reports and correct errors before applying for a private student loan.

Why Consolidate Student Loans?

Carefully consider arguments in favor and against student loan consolidation. Lower costs may not be the only consideration. In-School Payment Options

Explore options for making in-school payments on a student loan: immediate, interest-only, fixed and full deferment.

Beware of Loan Scams

Never pay a fee to consolidate student loans, change repayment plans, lower monthly payments or apply for a private student loan. Repaying Private Student Loans

When your grace period is gone, repayment begins. Get started by getting organized and looking into loan consolidation.