The Alliance for Solar Choice Applauds Oklahoma Governor Mary Fallin and Secretary of Energy and Environment Michael Teague for Leading on Distributed Generation
SAN FRANCISCO, April 22, 2014 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Oklahoma Governor Mary Fallin has signed an Executive Order to promote the growth of distributed solar and wind in Oklahoma. Governor Fallin issued the Order while signing Senate Bill 1456 into law. The Order states that "all executive entities shall support all forms of energy, including both traditional fossil fuels and renewable energy sources like wind and solar power, as outlined and mandated by the Oklahoma First Energy Plan. This plan promotes wind and solar power as important forms of clean energy which have a significant place in Oklahoma power generation."

The Order goes on to affirm that SB 1456 "does not mandate tariffs or other increases for distributed generation customers." Governor Fallin emphasizes that "prior to implementation of any fixed charges, this Bill allows the Commission to consider the use of all available alternatives, including other rate reforms such as increased use of time-of-use rates, minimum bills and demand charges."

"We commend Governor Fallin and Secretary of Energy and Environment Michael Teague for their strong leadership in defending Oklahomans' right to generate their own clean energy," said Bryan Miller, President of The Alliance for Solar Choice (TASC).

As part of the effort to protect customers, the Order also requires the Corporation Commission to conduct a "transparent evaluation of distributed generation" that "mandates inclusion of all stakeholders, including representatives of the solar and distributed wind industries, and utilities."

Governor Fallin and Secretary Teague's leadership demonstrates a commitment to distributed generation and energy choice for Oklahomans.

About The Alliance for Solar Choice

The Alliance for Solar Choice (TASC) advocates for maintaining successful distributed solar energy policies, such as retail net metering, throughout the United States. Retail net metering (NEM) provides fair credit to residents, businesses, churches, schools, and other public agencies when their solar systems export excess energy to the grid. The organization was formed on the belief that anyone should have the option to switch from utility power to distributed solar power, and realize the financial benefits therein. The rooftop solar market has been largely driven by Americans' desire to assert control over their electric bills, a trend that should be encouraged. TASC Member companies include SolarCity, Solar Universe, Sungevity, Sunrun, and Verengo. http://allianceforsolarchoice.com/

CONTACT: Susan Glick, 415-580-6874, press@allianceforsolarchoice.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130828/SF71040LOGO

SOURCE The Alliance for Solar Choice