Three Months Until Election Day, New Lifetime Networks' Every Woman Counts Poll Reveals Where Women Voters Stand, Post-Hillary, on the Presidential Nominees, the Issues and the First Woman President
Facebook Twitter Pinterest 403 Forbidden Request forbidden by administrative rules. 403 Forbidden Request forbidden by administrative rules.



NEW YORK, Aug. 5 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- As part of its nonpartisan Every Woman Counts campaign to engage women in the political process, Lifetime Networks today announced the results of a national poll of women likely voters conducted by Republican pollster Kellyanne Conway of the polling company(TM), inc./WomanTrend and Democratic pollster Celinda Lake of Lake Research Partners. The survey provides insight into women's positive and negative impressions of McCain and Obama; indicates that economic worries continue to dominate the issues driving women to the polls; and shows that putting a woman on the ticket matters little to women voters. The poll also reveals whom Hillary Clinton's primary voters now support two months after she abandoned her presidential bid, the impact of her candidacy on future women presidential candidates, and when the country will see its first "Madame President." (Logo: http://www.newscom.com/cgi-bin/prnh/20080804/NYM123LOGO) According to the survey, neither presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama nor Republican presidential nominee John McCain has secured a clear majority of women, who have decided every presidential election since 1968. Obama garnered 49% to McCain's 38%, and 6% of these women said they were only leaning toward a candidate. With 90 days to go until Election Day, 10% of women are firmly undecided, indicating either candidate has a shot at becoming the next president. Lifetime's nonpartisan Every Woman Counts campaign, first launched in 1992 and now entering its fifth presidential election cycle, ensures that issues important to women are part of the campaign dialogue during election season; encourages women to run for public office; and motivates women to register and vote. In addition to releasing the new poll, this month Lifetime has launched a 14-stop Every Woman Counts bus tour through 11 cities across the country, during which women can upload "If I were president..." videos and register to vote. The bus will also pull into Denver and Minneapolis/Saint Paul for the Democratic and Republican National Conventions, where Lifetime will host a series of high-profile Every Woman Counts events to spotlight women's leadership. Highlights of the Every Woman Counts poll include: The Race for Women Could Be Tight -- Neither Obama nor McCain has secured support from a majority of women voters. While 49% of women polled said they are supporting Obama and 38% are supporting McCain, 10% of women are undecided, suggesting the race for women could become close. -- While Obama is doing well with minority women, with support from 89% of African-Americans and 62% of Hispanics, McCain garnered support from nearly half of Caucasian women surveyed (47% vs. 38% for Obama). Hispanic women (14%) were more undecided than African-Americans (4%) or Caucasians (11%). The Veepstakes: Does Gender Matter? -- The majority of women voters polled say gender does not matter. Obama's selection of a woman running mate makes no difference to 55% of women voters, and McCain's selection of a woman as his #2 makes no difference to 62%. -- However, Obama would benefit twice as much as McCain from offering the second slot to a woman (29% more likely to support Obama if he picks a woman vs. 15% who would be more likely to support McCain). Selecting a woman #2 would result in a net negative for McCain. While 15% said they would be more likely to support McCain if he picked a woman, 20% said they would be less likely to pick him if a woman were on his ticket. -- Forty-seven percent of Hillary Clinton's primary voters said they'd be more likely to vote for Obama if he chose a woman running mate, and 4% said less likely. This is the exact breakdown of current Obama supporters overall. However, Hillary's primary supporters were largely unmoved by a woman on McCain's ticket (59%). How Barack Obama Fares: Making Inroads Among Women -- More than half the female electorate (53%) hold mostly positive views of Obama, while 28% have mostly negative views and 14% hold neutral or mixed views. -- Women like Obama largely because of his personal attributes (35%), such as his intelligence, youth, speaking ability, honesty and energy. Women also like the change and new ideas he represents to them (19%) and his general stance on issues (19%). -- Those with negative impressions of the candidate said he lacks the experience and qualifications to be president (27%), disliked his position on specific issues (19%) such as abortion, health care and national security, as well as his positions on issues more generally (18%), and his campaign style and changing positions on the issues (16%). How McCain Fares: Women Are Split -- While 37% feel mostly favorable toward McCain, 31% hold unfavorable views. One out of five women polled have mixed or neutral impressions, and these women were most likely to say they needed more information about him. -- Women with favorable impressions of McCain said it's because he has the right qualifications, including citing his experience to be president (27%), his positive personal characteristics (23%) and his stances on the issues (20%). -- Those who reported unfavorable views cited McCain's alignment with the Bush administration (28%), personal attributes, including his age (24%), his stance on specific issues (21%), such as the war in Iraq, and his political affiliation (18%). The Indie Vote -- Obama also holds an advantage among Independent women, who favor him by a twelve point margin (42% for Obama to 30% for McCain). However, one out of five Independents are still undecided. Hillary Clinton's Legacy Hillary's Women Supporters -- While the majority of women who voted for Hillary in the primary are flocking to Obama (76%), nearly one out of five (18%) says they will vote for McCain for president.* Why She Didn't Win the Democratic Nomination -- Despite all the talk about sexism in the presidential campaign, the majority of women voters laid the blame for Hillary's loss squarely on her and her strategists' shoulders; they largely reject gender as a cause of her demise. Thirty-four percent believe she lost "because of the kind of campaign she ran"; 31% said because of "who she is and what she stands for"; and 21% said "because she is a woman." -- African-American women were more likely than Hispanic or Caucasian women to say she lost because of the campaign she ran. Nearly half of African-Americans polled (48%) attribute her loss to her campaign operation, more than Hispanics (31%) or Caucasians (29%). Caucasian women (35%) were more likely to say she lost because of who she is and what she stands for (African-Americans 13% and Hispanics 18%). The Hillary Effect -- Despite losing the Democratic nomination, women credit Hillary for paving the way for tomorrow's female presidential candidates. Sixty-nine percent think her participation in the race will help women who want to run for president in the near future. The First Woman President: Women Say It's Not Far Off...but That It's Not Hillary -- Nearly half (44%) of women polled believe the country will see a woman in the Oval Office within eight years, including 23% of them who said it will happen in 2012, suggesting whomever is elected this year will be a one-term president. Three in ten still believe Hillary will be the first female president. On the Issues: The Economy is a Women's Issue -- Forty-one percent of women polled said jobs/the economy is the issue most important to their vote. The war in Iraq (24%), health care and prescription drugs (23%) and education (17%) followed. -- When asked which issues women want to hear the candidates talk more about, jobs/the economy still led the list (47%), followed by health care and prescription drugs (34%), education (31%) and the war in Iraq (28%). -- However, African-American women were 10 points more likely than Caucasians to list "war in Iraq" as a top voting issue (32% vs. 22%), and 10 points more likely to want to hear more about this issue (37% vs. 27%) from the candidates. Likeability, Trust and Comfort Level with the Presumptive Nominees Women Trust... -- Obama leads McCain by ten points (42% vs. 32%) when it comes to which candidate women trust more. However, 14% said they trust neither, and 5% trust both. -- Obama had the edge among African-Americans (85%) and Hispanics (52%) in earning women's trust (McCain: 1% African-American and 22% Hispanic), but white women were more apt to trust McCain (41% vs. 31% for Obama). Young women (18-34), Independents and undecided voters were more inclined than most to say they didn't trust either candidate. Gas is Expensive. Can She Catch a Ride? -- If they were to carpool to save money on gas, 51% of women surveyed would like to share a ride with Obama, 31% prefer McCain and 5% would be happy with either. Five percent of current Obama voters would carpool with McCain, and 17% of McCain voters would share a ride with Obama. Vacationing with the Obamas or the McCains? -- Nearly half of respondents (49%) want to join the Obama family on a summer vacation and one-quarter (26%) want to summer with the McCains. Nearly 20% would prefer to vacation without the candidates. Methodology: Republican pollster Kellyanne Conway of the polling company(TM), inc./WomanTrend and Democratic pollster Celinda Lake of Lake Research Partners conducted the scientific poll via telephone interviews July 25-29, 2008. The sample was 500 women nationwide, with 100 additional African American women and 100 additional Hispanic women. The margin of error for the main sample is +/- 4.4% at a 95% confidence level. Margins of error for the subgroups are higher. Every Woman Counts is the only public service campaign dedicated to encouraging women to speak out on the issues they care about most, vote and run for office. For the first time, the 2008 Every Woman Counts initiative will leverage the power of the #1 and #2 television networks' for women -- Lifetime and Lifetime Movie Network (LMN) -- and include the most extensive on-air programming, digital content and grassroots efforts to date. To expand the effort and reach women everywhere they live, work and play, Lifetime launched the first-ever Every Woman Counts media and advocacy coalition in partnership with REDBOOK, CosmoGIRL!, Marie Claire, celebrities, experts and hundreds of women's nonprofit organizations representing more than 15 million women from all sides of the political spectrum. LIFETIME is the leader in women's television and one of the top-rated basic cable television networks. A diverse, multi-media company, LIFETIME is committed to offering the highest quality entertainment and information programming, and advocating a wide range of issues affecting women and their families. LIFETIME Television, Lifetime Movie Network, Lifetime Real Women and Lifetime Digital (including myLifetime.com) are part of LIFETIME Entertainment Services, a 50/50 joint venture of Hearst Corporation and The Walt Disney Company. *Small N size on this question



SOURCE Lifetime Networks

NEW YORK, Aug. 5 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- As part of its nonpartisan Every Woman Counts campaign to engage women in the political process, Lifetime Networks today announced the results of a national poll of women likely voters conducted by Republican pollster Kellyanne Conway of the polling company(TM), inc./WomanTrend and Democratic pollster Celinda Lake of Lake Research Partners. The survey provides insight into women's positive and negative impressions of McCain and Obama; indicates that economic worries continue to dominate the issues driving women to the polls; and shows that putting a woman on the ticket matters little to women voters. The poll also reveals whom Hillary Clinton's primary voters now support two months after she abandoned her presidential bid, the impact of her candidacy on future women presidential candidates, and when the country will see its first "Madame President." (Logo: http://www.newscom.com/cgi-bin/prnh/20080804/NYM123LOGO) According to the survey, neither presumptive Democratic presidential nominee Barack Obama nor Republican presidential nominee John McCain has secured a clear majority of women, who have decided every presidential election since 1968. Obama garnered 49% to McCain's 38%, and 6% of these women said they were only leaning toward a candidate. With 90 days to go until Election Day, 10% of women are firmly undecided, indicating either candidate has a shot at becoming the next president. Lifetime's nonpartisan Every Woman Counts campaign, first launched in 1992 and now entering its fifth presidential election cycle, ensures that issues important to women are part of the campaign dialogue during election season; encourages women to run for public office; and motivates women to register and vote. In addition to releasing the new poll, this month Lifetime has launched a 14-stop Every Woman Counts bus tour through 11 cities across the country, during which women can upload "If I were president..." videos and register to vote. The bus will also pull into Denver and Minneapolis/Saint Paul for the Democratic and Republican National Conventions, where Lifetime will host a series of high-profile Every Woman Counts events to spotlight women's leadership. Highlights of the Every Woman Counts poll include: The Race for Women Could Be Tight -- Neither Obama nor McCain has secured support from a majority of women voters. While 49% of women polled said they are supporting Obama and 38% are supporting McCain, 10% of women are undecided, suggesting the race for women could become close. -- While Obama is doing well with minority women, with support from 89% of African-Americans and 62% of Hispanics, McCain garnered support from nearly half of Caucasian women surveyed (47% vs. 38% for Obama). Hispanic women (14%) were more undecided than African-Americans (4%) or Caucasians (11%). The Veepstakes: Does Gender Matter? -- The majority of women voters polled say gender does not matter. Obama's selection of a woman running mate makes no difference to 55% of women voters, and McCain's selection of a woman as his #2 makes no difference to 62%. -- However, Obama would benefit twice as much as McCain from offering the second slot to a woman (29% more likely to support Obama if he picks a woman vs. 15% who would be more likely to support McCain). Selecting a woman #2 would result in a net negative for McCain. While 15% said they would be more likely to support McCain if he picked a woman, 20% said they would be less likely to pick him if a woman were on his ticket. -- Forty-seven percent of Hillary Clinton's primary voters said they'd be more likely to vote for Obama if he chose a woman running mate, and 4% said less likely. This is the exact breakdown of current Obama supporters overall. However, Hillary's primary supporters were largely unmoved by a woman on McCain's ticket (59%). How Barack Obama Fares: Making Inroads Among Women -- More than half the female electorate (53%) hold mostly positive views of Obama, while 28% have mostly negative views and 14% hold neutral or mixed views. -- Women like Obama largely because of his personal attributes (35%), such as his intelligence, youth, speaking ability, honesty and energy. Women also like the change and new ideas he represents to them (19%) and his general stance on issues (19%). -- Those with negative impressions of the candidate said he lacks the experience and qualifications to be president (27%), disliked his position on specific issues (19%) such as abortion, health care and national security, as well as his positions on issues more generally (18%), and his campaign style and changing positions on the issues (16%). How McCain Fares: Women Are Split -- While 37% feel mostly favorable toward McCain, 31% hold unfavorable views. One out of five women polled have mixed or neutral impressions, and these women were most likely to say they needed more information about him. -- Women with favorable impressions of McCain said it's because he has the right qualifications, including citing his experience to be president (27%), his positive personal characteristics (23%) and his stances on the issues (20%). -- Those who reported unfavorable views cited McCain's alignment with the Bush administration (28%), personal attributes, including his age (24%), his stance on specific issues (21%), such as the war in Iraq, and his political affiliation (18%). The Indie Vote -- Obama also holds an advantage among Independent women, who favor him by a twelve point margin (42% for Obama to 30% for McCain). However, one out of five Independents are still undecided. Hillary Clinton's Legacy Hillary's Women Supporters -- While the majority of women who voted for Hillary in the primary are flocking to Obama (76%), nearly one out of five (18%) says they will vote for McCain for president.* Why She Didn't Win the Democratic Nomination -- Despite all the talk about sexism in the presidential campaign, the majority of women voters laid the blame for Hillary's loss squarely on her and her strategists' shoulders; they largely reject gender as a cause of her demise. Thirty-four percent believe she lost "because of the kind of campaign she ran"; 31% said because of "who she is and what she stands for"; and 21% said "because she is a woman." -- African-American women were more likely than Hispanic or Caucasian women to say she lost because of the campaign she ran. Nearly half of African-Americans polled (48%) attribute her loss to her campaign operation, more than Hispanics (31%) or Caucasians (29%). Caucasian women (35%) were more likely to say she lost because of who she is and what she stands for (African-Americans 13% and Hispanics 18%). The Hillary Effect -- Despite losing the Democratic nomination, women credit Hillary for paving the way for tomorrow's female presidential candidates. Sixty-nine percent think her participation in the race will help women who want to run for president in the near future. The First Woman President: Women Say It's Not Far Off...but That It's Not Hillary -- Nearly half (44%) of women polled believe the country will see a woman in the Oval Office within eight years, including 23% of them who said it will happen in 2012, suggesting whomever is elected this year will be a one-term president. Three in ten still believe Hillary will be the first female president. On the Issues: The Economy is a Women's Issue -- Forty-one percent of women polled said jobs/the economy is the issue most important to their vote. The war in Iraq (24%), health care and prescription drugs (23%) and education (17%) followed. -- When asked which issues women want to hear the candidates talk more about, jobs/the economy still led the list (47%), followed by health care and prescription drugs (34%), education (31%) and the war in Iraq (28%). -- However, African-American women were 10 points more likely than Caucasians to list "war in Iraq" as a top voting issue (32% vs. 22%), and 10 points more likely to want to hear more about this issue (37% vs. 27%) from the candidates. Likeability, Trust and Comfort Level with the Presumptive Nominees Women Trust... -- Obama leads McCain by ten points (42% vs. 32%) when it comes to which candidate women trust more. However, 14% said they trust neither, and 5% trust both. -- Obama had the edge among African-Americans (85%) and Hispanics (52%) in earning women's trust (McCain: 1% African-American and 22% Hispanic), but white women were more apt to trust McCain (41% vs. 31% for Obama). Young women (18-34), Independents and undecided voters were more inclined than most to say they didn't trust either candidate. Gas is Expensive. Can She Catch a Ride? -- If they were to carpool to save money on gas, 51% of women surveyed would like to share a ride with Obama, 31% prefer McCain and 5% would be happy with either. Five percent of current Obama voters would carpool with McCain, and 17% of McCain voters would share a ride with Obama. Vacationing with the Obamas or the McCains? -- Nearly half of respondents (49%) want to join the Obama family on a summer vacation and one-quarter (26%) want to summer with the McCains. Nearly 20% would prefer to vacation without the candidates. Methodology: Republican pollster Kellyanne Conway of the polling company(TM), inc./WomanTrend and Democratic pollster Celinda Lake of Lake Research Partners conducted the scientific poll via telephone interviews July 25-29, 2008. The sample was 500 women nationwide, with 100 additional African American women and 100 additional Hispanic women. The margin of error for the main sample is +/- 4.4% at a 95% confidence level. Margins of error for the subgroups are higher. Every Woman Counts is the only public service campaign dedicated to encouraging women to speak out on the issues they care about most, vote and run for office. For the first time, the 2008 Every Woman Counts initiative will leverage the power of the #1 and #2 television networks' for women -- Lifetime and Lifetime Movie Network (LMN) -- and include the most extensive on-air programming, digital content and grassroots efforts to date. To expand the effort and reach women everywhere they live, work and play, Lifetime launched the first-ever Every Woman Counts media and advocacy coalition in partnership with REDBOOK, CosmoGIRL!, Marie Claire, celebrities, experts and hundreds of women's nonprofit organizations representing more than 15 million women from all sides of the political spectrum. LIFETIME is the leader in women's television and one of the top-rated basic cable television networks. A diverse, multi-media company, LIFETIME is committed to offering the highest quality entertainment and information programming, and advocating a wide range of issues affecting women and their families. LIFETIME Television, Lifetime Movie Network, Lifetime Real Women and Lifetime Digital (including myLifetime.com) are part of LIFETIME Entertainment Services, a 50/50 joint venture of Hearst Corporation and The Walt Disney Company. *Small N size on this question SOURCE Lifetime Networks