NARAL Pro-Choice America PAC Endorses Rep. Kendrick Meek for Florida Senate Contest
Washington, DC – Nancy Keenan, president of NARAL Pro-Choice America, today announced that her organization's political action committee proudly endorsed pro-choice Rep. Kendrick Meek in his bid to win an open seat in Florida. "As the anti-choice attacks in the health-care reform debate are made, it is NARAL Pro-Choice America on the frontlines fighting against the false politics of choice that could cause women to lose coverage in the new health-care system," Rep. Kendrick Meek said. "I voted against the Stupak-Pitts amendment and oppose divisive language compromising our true objective – comprehensive health-care reform. I am honored to accept NARAL Pro-Choice America PAC's endorsement today and look forward to working together in this campaign for Florida's future." NARAL Pro-Choice America PAC contributed $5,000 to Rep. Meek for the primary election, and Keenan said the organization will mobilize its 58,840 member activists in Florida in support of his campaign. "Rep. Kendrick Meek represents a great opportunity for a pro-choice pickup in the Senate," Keenan said. "It is clear that Rep. Meek will be a senator who stands up for the values of freedom and privacy. He brings a distinguished record of support for a woman's right to choose to this race. Without question, voters in Florida will have a clear choice, regardless of which anti-choice candidate Meek faces in the general election." Overall, NARAL Pro-Choice America's political program has helped produce enormous gains for pro-choice forces in Congress, including the combined net gain of 44 pro-choice seats in the House and nine new pro-choice senators in the 2006 and 2008 election cycles. In its 2008 post-election analysis, National Journal ranked NARAL Pro-Choice America second among the nation's top 21 political organizations for its impressive win rate among endorsed congressional candidates in hotly contested races. For more information about NARAL Pro-Choice America's electoral work, please visit www.ProChoiceAmerica.org/Elections. Paid for by NARAL Pro-Choice America PAC, www.prochoiceamerica.org, and not authorized by any candidate or candidate's committee.