R.I. will allow undocumented students to pay in-state tuition
Hundreds of people filled the stands Monday at CCRI’s Cullen Field House, where the Board of Governors held a hearing on allowing undocumented students to attend public colleges at in-state tuition rates. The board approved the plan.

The Providence Journal / Bob Thayer

WARWICK, R.I. — After facing a contentious public for 3½ hours, the Board of Governors for Higher Education unanimously adopted a policy that allows undocumented students to pay resident tuition rates at public colleges.

The board heeded the urging of Governor Chafee and ignored the protests of several legislators and countless others in adopting the policy.

The vote, resoundingly cheered by supporters, makes Rhode Island the first state in the nation to decide the question as a matter of policy. A dozen other states have legislated in-state tuition rates for undocumented students.

Victor Capellan, a Central Falls school official, said he was “proud of the board. It took a courageous step, a step in the right direction.”

The policy change was “the right decision for the students and the state.”

Many opposed granting in-state tuition to undocumented students. The Providence Journal / Bob Thayer

A public forum that preceded the vote, in the Community College of Rhode Island gymnasium, pushed the edges of civility, as a crowd of up to 400 people faced off on an issue in which the two sides did not even have a basic agreement on the facts.

In putting the matter to a vote, the Board disregarded strenuous objections from several legislators and others, who told them the matter belonged in the General Assembly, not before a policymaking panel.

State Sen. Glen Shibley told board Chairman Lorne Adrain and others on the panel, “This is not your decision to make. It’s not a policy decision. This is wrong and everybody knows it,” he said as the crowd roared its support.

Proposed legislation failed in the General Assembly for the last seven years.

Earlier in the day, a higher-education spokesman said that the laws authorizing the Board of Governors to run the public-college system gives the panel the authority to set tuition, including the criteria for those eligible for Rhode Island resident rates.

On Sept. 19, the Government Relations Committee of the Board recommended passage of the measure, with Chairwoman Eva Marie Mancuso saying that higher-education officials are confident it can withstand legal challenges.

As the bleachers filled, one side held signs declaring “Education is Good for All.” Opponents protested “in-state tuition for illegal aliens.”

Amanda Pereira, 18, put a face on the undocumented student. A native of Brazil, she came to the United States with her parents when she was 6. She was granted permanent residency in the spring and is now a freshman at Brandeis University.

“America is our home,” she said.

About 140 undocumented students a year graduate from Rhode Island high schools, she said. About half of them are in the process of legalizing their status, but decisions take years, if not decades, says immigration lawyer Roberto Gonzalez of East Providence.

But Raymond McKay, president of the Rhode Island Republican Assembly, said any vote in favor of these students would “reward bad behavior.”

People who have been in the United States long enough to raise children have “more than enough time to become citizens of the U.S.A.,” he said.

Terry Gorman, executive director of Rhode Islanders for Immigration Law Enforcement insisted that a 1996 federal law prohibits states from granting in-state tuition rates to undocumented students. He characterized them all as “illegal alien” students.

The board’s Government Relations Committee, in background, disputes such assertions, pointing out that none of the dozen states that have passed resident tuition laws for undocumented students have been struck down by the courts, despite legal challenges in Kansas and California.

Michelle DePlante of the International Institute said the policy change makes a college education affordable to hard-working students, but does not displace other students or cost the public any money. On the contrary, she said, the experience of other states shows that tuition revenue at public colleges increases over time.

But opponents were unyielding in blaming undocumented immigrants for opportunities denied to native and naturalized U.S. citizens.

Former University of Rhode Island President Robert Carothers was drowned out by boos when he said undocumented students had little or no say in their parents’ decision to come to the United States. He characterized the young people as “all good citizens in the broadest sense of that word.”

State Rep. Anastasia Williams took the floor and said, “I don’t believe in segregation.”

But that’s the scene she described: “To my right, the perfect makeup of the State of Rhode Island,” she said of a racially integrated group that had turned out in support of the policy change.

“To my left, a group of individuals ... We’re all taxpayers, legal or not. Education is key for all of our children in the state of Rhode Island.”

Julia Cole urged the Board of Governors to dip into their own pockets to pay the college tuition of undocumented students.

“Give them your money, but don’t take it from us taxpayers and those who can’t afford it,” she said.

In a widely distributed statement, Karin Gorman, director of Rhode Islanders for Immigration Law Enforcement, suggested the board is trying to make an end-run around the General Assembly, which for seven years has refused to extend Rhode Island resident tuition rates to undocumented students.

Those who oppose the extension of in-state tuition rates challenge even the terminology used by the Board of Governors, calling the affected students “illegal” instead of “undocumented.”

In reality, say lawyers who have firsthand knowledge of the students’ status, about half are awaiting action on petitions for permanent residency.

Gorman’s statement said “no other state has forced this on citizens through the undemocratic method of an unelected board, and with one week’s notice!”

As the public debate over the issue heated up during the past week, Governor Chafee issued a statement encouraging the Board of Governors to extend resident rates to young people who, “through no fault of their own,” lack status as permanent residents.

Chafee said the measure would “improve the intellectual and cultural life of our state while strengthening our work force and helping our economy.”

The governor was in New York City Monday to appear on a panel as part of NBC News’ annual “Education Nation” presentation.

With staff reports from Bryan Rourke

gmacris@providencejournal.com