Rep. Langevin seeks 6th term in Congress
Langevin

NORTH KINGSTOWN — U.S. Rep. James R. Langevin formally announced Wednesday that he is running for a sixth term, saying that his priority would be to bolster Rhode Island’s economy by growing the state’s defense, construction, “green” and biotech industries.

Langevin, who represents the 2nd Congressional District, made the announcement at the Trades Training Center of Rhode Island, a job-training site at the Quonset Business Park. He plans a series of campaign stops this week throughout the state.

“Job creation and getting the economy back on track is job one,” Langevin said, as drivers training for commercial licenses practiced maneuvering tractor-trailers in the background.

Langevin said the training site is an example of how the state is making progress in improving its work force, creating more jobs and developing new industries.

He pointed to a $3.8-million stimulus-funded bridge project in the business park that will create temporary construction jobs and help make Quonset one of the premier industrial parks in New England.

He mentioned General Dynamics — the submarine builder that has committed to bringing 1,300 new jobs to Quonset by 2014 –– as an example of how the state is growing its defense industry.

Langevin said the Route 195 relocation project in Providence and the construction of a commuter rail stop at T.F. Green Airport show that the state is staying competitive by improving its transportation infrastructure. And he talked about the potential for Rhode Island to become a national leader in green industry by building a wind-energy farm off Block Island.

“Quonset, like Rhode Island, is on the move,” he said.

Langevin defended his support of increased government spending in the face of a rising federal deficit.

“We’re doing something important for our war fighters, something important for our national security,” he said, pointing to the increased federal spending for submarine construction. “We’re spending money, yes, but we’re also receiving a lot more that will have ripple effects throughout the state and the nation.”

On the nation’s two wars, Langevin said he supports President Obama’s plan to withdraw troops in Iraq and deploy some of them to Afghanistan.

But he says the “jury is still out” on the president’s Afghanistan strategy, which calls for a stronger troop presence to stabilize the country.

On immigration, Langevin says he favors a policy that would set illegal immigrants currently in the country on a path toward citizenship, so that they could legally pay their taxes, but he does not believe they should get in the front of the line for citizenship, and he does not favor amnesty.

A former Rhode Island secretary of state and state representative, Langevin, 46, of Warwick, was first elected to Congress in 2000.

Langevin was paralyzed in an accidental shooting when he was 16 and is the first quadriplegic to serve in the House. He is a member of the House Committee on Armed Services, the Budget Committee and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence.

He faces former state representative and Narragansett resident Elizabeth M. Dennigan in a September Democratic primary.

Three Republicans have also announced they will run for the seat: William J. Clegg III, Michael J. Gardiner and Mark S. Zaccaria.

The 2nd Congressional District covers all of Kent and Washington counties, Cranston, Foster, Glocester, Johnston, Scituate and about half of Providence.

According to the state Board of Elections, the district has 323,844 active registered voters, of which 123,375 are Democrats, 35,498 are Republicans, 115 are Moderates, and 164,856 are unaffiliated.

Langevin has proved to be popular candidate and effective fundraiser over the years.

Since 2002, his first bid for reelection, Langevin has been able to draw at least 70 percent. According to federal election records Langevin had almost $419,000 in his campaign account at the end of the first quarter of 2010.

In comparison, Dennigan had almost $138,000, Clegg had $111,169, Zaccaria had $52,668, and Gardiner had not raised any funds through the first quarter.

But Langevin is not immune to the wave of anti-incumbency sentiment sweeping the country.

Polling data from Brown University’s Taubman Center shows that the congressman has seen his job approval ratings tumble from a high of about 65 percent in June 2006 to just below 45 percent in February.

“People are tired of partisan politics in Washington and they are tired of the bickering,” Langevin said. “People know that I’m not [partisan]. They know that I try to find commonsense solutions to problems.” BIO James Langevin, 46 RESIDENCE: Warwick OFFICE SOUGHT: Democratic candidate for 2nd Congressional District EXPERIENCE: U.S. House of Representatives, 2001-present; secretary of state, 1995-2001; state representative, 1988-1994 EDUCATION: Rhode Island College, B.A., 1990; Harvard University, M.P.A., 1993 FAMILY: Single

pmarcelo@projo.com