New PawSox owners eye Providence riverfront stadium
PROVIDENCE, R.I. — The new 10-member team that's taken ownership of the Red Sox Triple A franchise in Pawtucket includes a mix of Rhode Island and Massachusetts business veterans from the banking, drugstore, financial and legal industries.

The group, led by Boston Red Sox president Larry Lucchino and Providence lawyer James J. Skeffington, purchased the Pawtucket Red Sox franchise from Madeleine Mondor, the widow of longtime owner Ben Mondor, and her partners Michael Tamburro and Lou Schwechheimer. Skeffington declined to disclose the purchase price.

Pawtucket Mayor Donald Grebien called the news "both heartbreaking and gut-wrenching."

Though the owners who will seek to carry on Ben Mondor's legacy are known, what's uncertain is where the team's future home will be. Pawtucket's McCoy Stadium will be home to the Triple A franchise for only a couple of more years, Skeffington said during an exclusive interview with The Journal.

"Pawtucket doesn't have the infrastructure," Skeffington said. "We can't recreate what Providence has."

The "target" for a new stadium, said Skeffington, is a piece of freed-up I-195 land he can see from his law firm's office atop One Financial Plaza downtown.

When Skeffington looks down at that land by the Providence River, he envisions a 10,000-seat stadium to house a minor-league baseball team affiliated with the Boston Red Sox and belonging, in his mind, to the state whose capital he hopes it will call home. The stadium would be home to the Triple-A affiliate as well as, he said, amateur games and summer concerts.

“Our sense is that if the state wants us here, it should be the Rhode Island Red Sox,” Skeffington said. “We’re all Rhode Islanders. Whether you live in Pawtucket or you live in Westerly or you live in East Providence or you live in Central Falls, we’re all Rhode Islanders. This is Rhode Island’s team.”

A longtime Rhode Island attorney who has worked on projects including the Providence Place mall and the Rhode Island Convention Center, Skeffington cautioned that all details beyond the purchase of the team are only in their nascent stage.

The Skeffington-Lucchino group already is six weeks and $200,000 into studies that will determine the feasibility of the I-195 land as a stadium site.

The investment group has spoken with architects and discussed models for a stadium, including new Triple-A stadiums in Charlotte, N.C.; Dayton, Ohio; Durham, N.C.; and El Paso, Texas. Those models suggest a price tag north of $60 million for a new stadium, Skeffington said.

Visibility from near the realigned Route 95-195 interchange is a big draw, he said.

That waterside parcel is designated as park space in the development plan drawn up by the Route 195 Redevelopment District Commission, which controls the land. The ballpark also would take up the lot at 200 Dyer St., where Brown University recently moved its Professional Studies and Continuing Education programs.

Apart from both public and private lands, the ownership group declined to specify what other public investments it would seek.

State and city political leaders, while sounding supportive Monday, gave no indication of how much government officials might ask from Rhode Island taxpayers to help bring the stadium to fruition.

Governor Raimondo called the PawSox an "institution in Rhode Island." She did not, however, say how much it was worth to the state to keep the franchise here.

"I look forward to discussions with the new owners about the details of their proposals," she said. "We need a plan that makes sense for the people of Rhode Island.”

Commerce Secretary Stefan Pryor said the Raimondo administration has had "preliminary conversations" with the new owners group but they have not asked for any incentives as of yet.

House Speaker Nicholas Mattiello said the project could be a development catalyst.

“This riverfront stadium will serve as a catalyst for an area that holds great potential for development and it will boost the morale of our citizens," he said.

The city's new mayor, Jorge O. Elorza, was similarly vague.

“The prospect of moving the team to Providence represents a significant and exciting development opportunity for our capital city," Elorza said. "I look forward to working with the new ownership team and all stakeholders to explore this possibility.”

City Council President Luis A. Aponte said the team is an important civic asset for all of Rhode Island and that Providence should explore what it could do to keep the team in the state.

Brown University, which would be a neighbor and possible co-tenant of the stadium, issued this statement: “We welcome the prospect of a multi-use athletic, cultural, and community facility, including the prospect of college athletics played in a new stadium, as a positive contributor to this environment, and believe it will complement our academic investments in the area.”

The prospect of locating a stadium among Brown University's many buildings on the west side of the river and other downtown residents, and close to the relocated Route 95-195 interchange, is something that excited the ownership group. Brown's buildings and the medical complex that includes Rhode Island Hospital, Hasbro Children's Hospital and Women & Infants Hospital make it much like the Fenway-Longwood area in Boston.

Skeffington and Lucchino first met while working with litigator and longtime Baltimore Orioles owner Edward Bennett Williams, the driving force behind the paradigm-breaking construction of Camden Yards. Lucchino later spearheaded a similar project with the San Diego Padres, resulting in the construction of Petco Park. In the years since the Henry-led ownership group took over the Red Sox, Lucchino has been part of the effort to renovate and preserve Fenway Park.

The preliminary vision Skeffington laid out Monday echoes both Camden Yards and Petco Park — urban ballparks with a city skyline beyond the outfield.

Skeffington described a stadium as one that “lights up downtown at night and on weekends,” he said. “I want people to drive by at night and see the lights on, be it a ball game or a college game or a concert, and think, ‘Wow, what’s going on in Providence?’”

He described a ballpark designed in such a way that the Providence skyline would be visible over the left-field wall and that home runs over the right-field wall would land in the Providence River.

“I happen to think that a ballpark in downtown Providence is a game-changer,” he said. “I think it’s a game-changer for the city. I think it’s a game-changer for the state. The vision that we have is one that I think is transformative for Providence and the state of Rhode Island.”

Perhaps the most popular aspect of PawSox games in Pawtucket has been the family-friendly pricing. Skeffington vowed that would not change.

“We envision prices for our ballpark to be as they are in Pawtucket today,” he said. “That’s our goal. Ben Mondor set the standard, and we’re going to strive every day to honor his memory and emulate his success. We’re going to do what we can to keep the costs down so families can go.”

Skeffington said he was optimistic that such a stadium could be ready in time for the 2017 season.

That would mean vacating McCoy Stadium, a 73-year-old facility that was most recently renovated in 1999. The lease between the team, city and state last year was extended through Jan. 31, 2021.

The PawSox ranked ninth in the 14-team International League in attendance last season, drawing almost 7,400 fans per game. They last led the International League in attendance in 2006, drawing 9,200 fans per game.

Tamburro and Schweichheimer, PawSox executives from the beginning of the Mondor stewardship, will stay on as chief executive officer and vice president/general manager, respectively.

The team debuted as a Red Sox Class-AA affiliate in 1970. The PawSox became Boston’s Class-AAA affiliate in 1973. It adopted the PawSox name in 1977, the year Mondor bought the team out of bankruptcy.

With the sale, the PawSox reaffirmed their partnership with the Boston Red Sox, with whom they have worked as a minor-league affiliate since 1970. Dozens of future Red Sox stars — from Jim Rice to Nomar Garciaparra to Dustin Pedroia — have played games in a PawSox uniform. Bringing its Triple-A affiliate further under its own umbrella only further allows the team to dictate the way its prospects are developed, trained and deployed in games.

Skeffington declined to speculate about what the team’s Plan B might be should the I-195 land fail to pan out.

“There is a good possibility that may not be the site because we may not be able to build it there,” he said, “in which case, our desire to stay in Rhode Island and build an urban stadium in Providence, we’ll have to look again at alternatives. But our objective is to stay in Rhode Island if we can.”