Editorial: Inside Chafee World
Lincoln Chafee’s presidential candidacy has yet to fire America’s imagination. But even one of the few reporters paying any attention could not resist asking the obvious question recently: How could someone with an approval rating of 25 percent as governor of Rhode Island – a number that may be charitable – hope to win support for president?

Mr. Chafee’s answer was, essentially, that Rhode Islanders did not like the bitter medicine he was forced to administer, such as hiking beach fees, in his quest to revive the state.

“But, at the end, and that’s why I’m running, Rhode Island is better off,” he told CNN. “We had the biggest drop [in] ... the rate of unemployment, of all but four states. That’s a great record of accomplishment.”

PolitiFact put that claim to the test and ruled that three states would be a more accurate figure than four. And, as URI economist Leonard Lardaro pointed out, Rhode Island’s drop from 11.2 percent to 6.3 percent was an improvement of 44 percent – good, but 12 other states did better.

Still, putting a positive spin on bad unemployment numbers hardly tells the whole story about Mr. Chafee’s economic leadership – which, in truth, was little short of disastrous. Rhode Island retained one of the nation’s worst unemployment rates during his tenure, with one of its worst business climates. Public education continued to struggle, absent strong leadership on Mr. Chafee’s part.

Meanwhile, many college-educated children of Rhode Islanders could not find jobs in the state and had to go elsewhere, a tragic loss of human capital. People in their key earning years fled the state. Indeed, the decline in unemployment, in part, reflected that large numbers of people had given up looking for work and/or had gone elsewhere. Only in the bizarre world of Mr. Chafee would that be a testament to leadership.

As governor, he had a habit of pretending all was well, just as he now is telling the nation he had “a great record of accomplishment.” Fortunately, his successor, Gina Raimondo, has been honest about the severe challenges Rhode Island faces and its desperate need to turn things around.

Similarly, Mr. Chafee has boasted of his high ethical standards, in challenging the conduct of Hillary Clinton.

But he neglects to mention that he blocked public access to state police records in a case involving underage drinking at his house. And he has not discussed his role in violating the spirit of the state’s revolving-door law, in ramming a top aide and ally, Richard Licht, into a state judgeship, instead of doing the public-spirited thing and letting Mr. Licht wait until he had been out of office for a year.

Those actually paying attention to his presidential run should be wary of his fanciful version of his four years in the governor’s office.