Civil liberties debate heats up as R.I. ranks tops in vaccinating youths for HPV
PROVIDENCE — Just as concerned parents were mounting a grassroots campaign against a new Rhode Island mandate for all 7th graders to get the HPV vaccine — and as health officials were gearing up for the kickoff on Wednesday of a statewide series of informational meetings on the shots — the federal government announced that the state has the highest rate in the nation for vaccinating youths against the sexually transmitted virus linked to cancer.

"There is still quite a range in HPV vaccine coverage across the country," Dr. Anne Schuchat, director of the U.S. Centers for Disease Control's immunization center, said during a national news conference. "Rhode Island achieved the highest rate for first-dose HPV coverage among girls with 76 percent, while Kansas had the lowest rate at 38.3 percent."

Despite the opposition that surfaced last week, "we see through our data it's highly accepted, and that there's maybe a small portion of folks" who object to it, said Tricia Washburn, chief of the office of immunization for the state Department of Health. "We'd like to see as many adolescents protected as possible."

Her views echo those of the CDC, as well as of physicians who for years have been touting the vaccine to families, and administering it to boys and girls. They see it as safe, Washburn said, and have been urging the state to require it.

Some parents, however, object not only to the vaccine — which they see as unnecessary, ineffective and potentially harmful — but to requiring schoolchildren to receive it. Only Virginia and the District of Columbia have imposed such a mandate.

That question of civil liberties has struck a chord with two local organizations, the American Civil Liberties Union of Rhode Island and the Rhode Island Center for Freedom and Prosperity. The ACLU raised concerns at a Health Department hearing in 2014 before the the mandate was embraced by then-Gov. Lincoln Chafee and former health director Michael Fine.

"The ACLU of Rhode Island recognizes both the importance of the HPV vaccine for both boys and girls and the Department of Health’s interest in promoting this vaccination," the organization said in a statement. "However ... exclusion from school is an extremely severe penalty that should be used only when truly necessary, and not as a stick to promote more generalized public health goals."

Michael Stenhouse, the Center for Freedom and Prosperity's CEO, criticized how the mandate was put in place, through administrative regulation rather lawmaking and public voting by elected officials who can be held accountable.

"We believe it's an imposition on families when it's a mandate. It falls under parental rights," said Stenhouse. "It's a private health issue between parents and their kids."

With Gina Raimondo now in office, Stenhouse said supporters are looking for a policy reversal.

"We're asking the governor to take an honest and open look at this," Stenhouse said.

But that sounded unlikely on Friday. Raimondo's new health director, Dr. Nicole Alexander-Scott, was slated to be out front and center at the first informational meeting in Barrington on Wednesday. And an aide to Raimondo issued this statement when asked to comment:

“These regulations were finalized over a year ago after a public hearing," said spokeswoman Marie Aberger. "The Governor recognizes there are concerns about mandatory vaccinations, but the CDC recommends the HPV vaccine as a safe and effective way to help prevent cancer in males and females and save lives.

"As a mom, she supports steps to help our children and families be as healthy as possible.”

Unlike other children's inoculations, the vaccine against the human papillomavirus (HPV) is aimed at preventing a sexually transmitted disease. For that reason, some parents think the vaccine decision should rest with families and not be linked to school admittance, unlike mandatory shots for diseases such as measles that can be spread through classrooms in the air and by casual contact.

But Washburn noted that students are required to get vaccinated for hepatitis, which also is not easily spread child to child at school.

The CDC recommends that all boys and girls get the three doses of the HPV vaccine before they become sexually active, preferably at ages 11 or 12. The agency says the vaccine is most effective when given before any exposure to HPV.

About half of HPV infections are high risk, meaning they can cause cervical, anal and oral cancers, according to the CDC. While most infections won't cause any symptoms and will go away on their own, some can persist and lead to cell changes that, if untreated, can lead to cancer.

The remainder of the infections are deemed low risk because, instead of cancer, they cause genital and other skin warts.

HPV infections are the most common sexually transmitted diseases in the United States, with about 14 million new genital infections each year, according to the CDC. It's estimated that 80 to 90 percent of sexually active men and women will be infected at one point in their lives.

Critics consider some of these cancers preventable and not common enough to warrant widespread vaccination, and they disbelieve studies that conclude it's safe. HPV vaccines were first approved by the FDA in 2006.

But Washburn said, "I know there is a lot of talk about how the body may clear it up, but there is no way of knowing who will clear it and who will not ... At this point, we have no evidence to suggest there are any serious side effects [to the vaccine]."

About five years after the FDA approval, the Rhode Island Vaccine Advisory Committee began to urge that it be required.

"This was something initiated by the physician community," said Joseph Wendelken, a state public health promotion specialist.

Washburn said that families have the option of being exempted from the mandate by citing religious reasons or medical issues. Parents on the Facebook page "Rhode Islanders Against Mandated HPV" (which includes links to a petition drive) have recommended that parents concerned about the vaccine avoid the mandate by citing these exemptions.

Washburn said she wasn't too concerned about too many people claiming the exemption. Rhode Island's rate of exemptions for other vaccines has been among the lowest in the nation, she said.

"We hover right around 1 percent," she said. For HPV, "We don't think it's going to be that high."

HPV vaccine forums

The Rhode Island Department of Health will offer the following informational meetings on the HPV vaccine:

Wednesday: Barrington Library, 6:30 p.m. to 8:30 p.m.

Thursday: Rhode Island Department of Health, Providence, 6:30 p.m. to 8:30 p.m.

Aug. 11: Peace Dale Library, 6:30 p.m. to 8:30 p.m.

Aug. 12: East Greenwich Police Department, 6:30 p.m. to 8:30 p.m.

Aug. 17: Cumberland Public Library, 6:30 p.m. to 8:30 p.m.

rsalit@providencejournal.com

(401) 277-7467

On Twitter: @RichSalit