New PawSox owners expect to finance Providence stadium themselves
The new owners of the Pawtucket Red Sox expect to build a Providence stadium with their own funds, but they're exploring about four different public-subsidy options they may request from the state and the city.

PROVIDENCE, R.I. — The new owners of the Pawtucket Red Sox expect to build a Providence stadium with their own funds, but they’re exploring about four different public-subsidy options they may request from the state and the city.

Those options include asking the state to give them as part of a stadium site the former Route 195 land now slated to become a public park, Providence lawyer James J. Skeffington said in an interview Tuesday with The Providence Journal. He and Boston Red Sox president Larry Lucchino lead the 10-member team of investors that now own the Red Sox Triple A franchise.

Skeffington said Monday that costs for a new stadium could be more than $60 million, based on the group’s conversations with architects and costs to build other new Triple-A stadiums.

But the ownership team has “no idea” yet how much financial assistance it would seek from government entities because they haven’t finished feasibility studies, Skeffington said. They don’t even know yet if the site they want can support a stadium, he said.

Skeffington also said Tuesday the team’s architects believe about seven acres they’ve identified along Dyer Street west of the Providence River, will be enough for the stadium. That includes the former Route 195 parcel and the Brown University-owned lot to its north, where the university recently moved its Professional Studies and Continuing Education programs.

Skeffington said he believes that acreage is enough, in part because the new owners are considering alternative off-site parking options. But it would be a tight squeeze.

“If you were planning this with a clean slate, you might be looking for 10 acres, but we’re trying to do it with about six to seven acres,” he said. “We think it’s possible. The architects tell us it’s possible.”

But research and due diligence isn’t completed yet, Skeffington stressed.

The ownership team still needs to consider many issues, he said. Those include whether the investors could build a stadium on the proposed 195 development area park site and not interfere with design plans for that land that have it used for managing stormwater runoff from other parcels as they’re developed, he said.

With regard to parking options, Skeffington said he’s talking with Richard Galvin, lead developer of the South Street Landing project, which broke ground in December south of the former 195 land. They’re discussing a joint venture to expand the proposed 650-car garage for that project to accommodate both their needs, Skeffington said.

Skeffington spoke of other potential assistance the group could seek from the state and/or city. They include a tax break on the ballpark and some sort of leasing and sub-leasing arrangement similar to what exists in Pawtucket with McCoy Stadium.

“We’d have to see how it plays out and whether the state and we can find common ground on a plan that makes sense for both of us,” Skeffington said. “It wouldn’t be too different probably from what we see in Pawtucket except we’ll probably own the property -- take the expense of building it, designing it and then after that, we could lease it to the state and sublease it back. The support will have to come from some part of the state and city.”

The city of Pawtucket officially leases McCoy to the state of Rhode Island, which in turn subleases the stadium to the PawSox organization.

Skeffiington said he met with Governor Raimondo back in December, before she took office, to tell her the group of which he is a principal was seriously considering buying the PawSox and relocating the team to Providence.

He hasn’t spoken to Raimondo again, he said, but since she directed him to speak with Pryor, Skeffington said he has given the new commerce secretary updates “on more than one occasion.” Their most recent conversation was over last weekend, Skeffington said, after the sale of the team was completed but before the new owners announced the deal.

Skeffington insisted Tuesday that the new owners aren’t seeking to buy land owned by National Grid that’s south of the proposed stadium site.“We have never had any interest in that land. Now, if it was being offered to us, we’d probably be interested in it. [But] that is not the land we’ve considered as a potential site.”

kbramson@providencejournal.com

(401) 277-7470

On Twitter @JournalKate