Raimondo, Assembly leaders support keeping PawSox in R.I.
The team's new owners hope to build a riverfront stadium in Providence.

PROVIDENCE, R.I. — With unanswered questions about what — if anything — the new owners of the Pawtucket Red Sox may want from the state, General Assembly leaders and Governor Raimondo reacted Monday with varying degrees of relief, enthusiasm and caution to the proposed relocation of the franchise to Providence.

The new owners — who include the retired executives of CVS and the former Fleet National Bank — confirmed that they're hoping to build a riverfront stadium for the PawSox on land freed up by the relocation of Route 195.

“I am excited that a new stadium will be built in Providence for the Pawtucket Red Sox to relocate in the spring of 2017,” said House Speaker Nicholas Mattiello. “This riverfront stadium will serve as a catalyst for an area that holds great potential for development and it will boost the morale of our citizens.”

Mattiello promised to “work collaboratively with the new owners ... to help build an economic engine for our state and the capital city.”

From Raimondo came a note of caution.

“The PawSox are an institution in Rhode Island, and my main goal is keeping them in the state,” she said. “I look forward to discussions with the new owners about the details of their proposals.”

But “we need a plan that makes sense for the people of Rhode Island,” said Raimondo, who has made the former Route 195 land a focus of her efforts to spur economic activity that would generate “good-paying, middle-class jobs.”

It is not known whether the new team owners will seek help from the city and state, including land, parking or a tax deal.

But Rhode Island’s Republican National Committeeman Steve Frias raised red flags.

“The I-195 land was supposed to become the heart of the knowledge district, and the beginning of a new chapter in Rhode Island’s economic development. EDC took out about $38 million in bonds to pay for this land,” he said Monday. “It would be a mistake for Rhode Island’s economic future if the politicians in this state ... [who] were once silly enough to guarantee a $75-million loan to a former Red Sox pitcher who wanted to make video games ... to give away I-195 land for free in order to build a minor league baseball stadium.”

“Research performed by economists has shown no consistent, positive impact on jobs, income or tax revenues arising from stadiums or sports franchises,” he argued.

The new franchise owners have hired veteran lobbyist Robert Goldberg, a one-time Senate minority leader, to look out for their interests at the State House. He was hired at $375 an hour by “PBC Associates.”

Both Mattiello and Senate President M. Teresa Paiva Weed said they were mindful that moving the PawSox to Providence would be a blow to Pawtucket.

“While I understand Pawtucket’s disappointment, it is important that we all work together as Rhode Islanders to welcome the new owners and to keep the Red Sox franchise in the state,” Paiva Weed said.

Senate Majority Leader Dominick J. Ruggerio, the administrator of an arm of the Laborers International Union of North America, said he is “supportive of doing all that is prudent to keep the Pawtucket Red Sox in Rhode Island.”

Ruggerio did not define “prudent,” but said the proposed relocation of the team to the former I-195 land “would complement existing development efforts,” saying he supports a "mixture of uses” for the district.

kgregg@providencejournal.com

(401) 270-7078

On Twitter: @kathyprojo

An earlier version of this story was published at 12:04 p.m. and updated at 4:48 p.m.

READ MORE on sale of PawSox