Ex-House Finance chair Costantino denies playing role in bringing 38 Studios to R.I.
The depositions made public last week identify Costantino as the lawmaker who recommended bumping up a proposed $50 million business loan program to $125 million.

PROVIDENCE, R.I. — Days after the public release of documents revealing his early-role in crafting the 2010 loan-guarantee legislation that led to Rhode Island's $75 million, 38 Studios fiasco, former House Finance Chairman Steven Costantino has issued a statement.

In his statement, Costantino, who is now the commissioner of the Department of Vermont Health Access, said:

"My only involvement in the matter in RI was because of my former position in the RI legislature. I did not play any role in bringing the company to RI as did others in government. I was tasked with handling the legislation affecting the company by my superiors.

"After legislative activity, I had nothing to do with approving the loan to the company and have had nothing to do with the company ever since."

Costantino was not immediately available to answer followup questions, on his statement which was conveyed to The Journal by Sean Sheehan, public information officer for the Department of Vermont Health Access.

The depositions made public last week identify Costantino as the lawmaker who recommended bumping up a proposed $50 million business loan program to $125 million, without telling his House colleagues that the extra $75 million was earmarked for retired ex-Red Sox pitcher Curt Schilling's high-risk video-game company.

All Costantino recalled, during a deposition taken in July 2014, was that someone from the state's Economic development Corporation — he couldn’t remember who — telling him the business community could use $125 million in loans.

"So, I do remember — and, again, I'm not sure with whom," Costantino testified, "but basically asking the question, well, 'What's the demand out there in the business community that wants the program, that could use the program, the Loan Guarantee Program? So what number would EDC need to fulfill its obligation to the entire need in the community?' And that's what I remember as the figure being, $125 million."

But Keith Stokes, then the EDC's executive director, identified Costantino as the man behind the scenes first advocating that 38 Studios receive $75 million in state-guaranteed loan.

J. Michael Saul, then the EDC's finance director, recalled sitting next to Costantino at a meeting at 38 Studios headquarters, in Maynard, Mass., in March or April of 2010.

"And at the conclusion of the meeting, he turned to me and asked me the question: If we were to increase the $50 million [loan program] to $125 million would this ... be helpful to get this done?"

But Costantino said repeatedly, during his deposition, that he couldn't remember any details about the deal's maneuverings, or whom he had spoken with and when, even when confronted with emails appearing to describe his early role in the deal.

That included a March 31, 2010, email from EDC lawyer Rob Stolzman to Stokes that said: "Hello, all. I just got a call from [Providence lawyer] Michael Corso. He told me that his post meeting meetings went well last night and that Gordon [Fox] and Steve C want to put the 'moral ob [moral obligation bond] program' in the FY10 supplemental budget, which currently might be heard as early as next week."

Costantino, asked by the deposing lawyer, "Do you recall having a meeting on ... the evening of March 30, 2010, with Gordon and Michael Corso?" replied, "I do not recall."

By April 1, 2010 — maybe two weeks from the time Costantino allegedly raised the idea — legislation was drafted for the $125 million Jobs Creation Guarantee program.

In a memo dated that same day to then-Governor Donald Carcieri, who sat as chairman of the EDC, Stokes outlined the deal, saying "the company needs approximately $75,000,000 to complete the intellectual property development" of its next game.

Rhode Island taxpayers have been paying the private investors investors who purchased the high-yield bonds, that provide the loan, ever since 38 Studios went bankrupt in 2012. The depositions were taken in connection with the state's effort to recover the money from a number of the key players. Costantino is not one of the named defendants.

Each time Costantino was confronted with an email detailing his role in the undisclosed behind-the-scenes maneuverings - dating back to March 2010 - to get legislation passed to specifically help 38 Studios, he said: “I don’t recall.’’

That included a March 31, 2010 email from EDC lawyer Rob Stolzman to then-EDC director Keith Stokes that referenced then-House Speaker Gordon Fox and lawyer Michael Corso, who subsequently sought payment from 38 Studios for up to $3.75 million, in large part, for his role in lining up financing for the company's move to Rhode Island.

"Hello, all. I just got a call from Michael Corso,'' the Stolzman email said. "He told me that his post meeting meetings went well last night and that Gordon and Steve C want to put the 'moral ob program' in the FY10 supplemental budget, which currently might be heard as early as next week.’’

“Do you recall having a meeting on … the evening of March 30, 2010 with Gordon and Michael Corso?’’ the lawyer conducting the July 2014 deposition, asked. Costantino said: “I do not recall.’’

But the emails remove any doubt that, by April 1, 2010, the EDC was deeply engaged in drafting terms for the “moral obligation’’ bonds for 38 Studios, and Costantino was among the handful of lawmakers looped in.

Asked when he first learned of 38 Studios interest, he said he “actually got a call from the speaker’’ in late March, or early April 2010 about visiting the company in Maynard. He said he had no recollection who else was there except Fox and Curt Schilling.

“I don't remember the speaker saying anything.’’ And Schilling? “All I recall is basically saying that, you know -- just this was a great opportunity for the State of Rhode Island in general. Things like that.’’

Asked if he agreed, he said: “Any time a company wants to move to Rhode Island, it's an interesting opportunity… At the time, Rhode Island was under tremendous economic distress. We were losing jobs, and there isn't -- often, do you get any company ... wanting to move into Rhode Island. So, that's why it was interesting.’’

“Now, Keith Stokes has indicated that you had suggested increasing the program from $50 million to 125 million. Do you dispute that?” the lawyer asked.

Costantino said he recalled asking someone - he did not recall who: "What is the demand in the community?"

“So, I do remember -- and, again, I'm not sure with whom, but basically asking the question, well, "What's the demand out there in the business community that wants the program, that could use the program, the Loan Guarantee Program?" So what number would EDC need to fulfill its obligation to the entire need in the community? And that's what I remember .. the figure being $125 million.

“Were you aware, at the time, that 38 Studios was looking for 75 million?’’ Costantino: “I knew they were interested …. I did not know what the exact figure was.’’

No mention was made of 38 Studios as the legislation moved through the General Assembly.

“Did you have any conversations with Speaker Fox about keeping the interest of 38 Studios secret during this process?’’ the lawyer asked. Costantino: “I do not recall.’’

“Did you have any conversations with anyone else about keeping the interest of 38 Studios secret during the process of the adoption of the Rhode Island Jobs Creation Guaranty Program?’’ Costantino: “I do not recall.’’

The lawyer confronted him with a March 31, 2010 email from EDC lawyer Stolzman to EDC executives Keith Stokes, Michael Saul and Fred Hashway relative to inquiries about where the legislative drafting stood from "Michael Corso, for 38 Studios.’’

It says: House Fiscal Advisor Sharon Reynolds “also called on behalf of Chairman Costantino, and we exchanged calls, so I imagine we will be under pressure to start circulating drafts tomorrow."

Next up was an April 1, 2010 email from Rob Stolzman to Sharon Reynolds, containing a draft: “ I wanted you and Chairman Costantino to have the benefit of the background portions of the discussions."

“You don't remember that?’’ Costantino; “No.”

He unearthed another email - dated April 1 - from Stolzman then-Governor Donald Carcieri's chief of staff Andrew Hodgkin that said, in part:

"Hi, Andy. Keith asked that I forward to you the drafts of the attached documents. They include a draft memo from Keith to the Governor that is a very brief background and summary of the proposed transaction and development of 38 Studios in RI, a draft letter of intent between 38 Studios and the RIEDC further outlining some basic terms, and a draft ... authorizing the RIEDC to guarantee 38 Studios' debt (at the suggestion of 18 House Finance Chairman Costantino, the [draft] reflects a larger authorization for this as a Jobs Creation Guaranty Program.)"

Costantino: “I don't dispute this.’’