Costantino didn't disclose 38 Studios' connection when pushing House bill
Newly released documents show that former House Finance Committee chairman Steven Costantino worked behind the scenes to help arrange a financing deal with 38 Studios.

Those disclosures cast a new light on Costantino's efforts to persuade his House colleagues to pass a bill that would make that deal possible.

In 2010, Costantino pushed a Jobs-Creation Loan Guaranty bill that would allow the state to issue up to $125 million in guarantees on loans for knowledge-based or technology companies that promised new jobs.

A Providence Journal review of a 50-minute House floor debate on the proposal in April 2010 shows that Costantino did not disclose that $75 million of the $125 million in loan guarantees was earmarked for 38 Studios.

Instead, he insisted that the loan guarantee program arose from a hearing two weeks earlier in which the business community encouraged the state to ramp up its portfolio of financial offerings and incentives.

Several lawmakers raised concerns about the bill, including Republican Rep. Joseph A. Trillo, who emphatically warned that the program would attract risky ventures. "It's easier to borrow money knowing you have the power of the State of Rhode Island guaranteeing the loan. So we're going to end up with higher risk companies, and we're putting taxpayers dollars -- to the tune of $125 million -- at risk."

Even so, Trillo voted for the bill, as did most of his House colleagues. It passed the House that day, 66 to 6.

House votes on the loan-guarantee program first took place on April 13, 2010, when it was part of a supplemental appropriations bill for that year that later ran aground in the Senate, and then on May 25, after it was resurrected as a stand-alone bill, and approved by the House 66-to-1.

Here are some highlights of the House debate on April 13, 2010.

Rep. Charlene Lima presses Costantino on origins of bill:

Rep. Joseph A. Trillo asks Costantino why this bill is necessary:





Rep. Laurence W. Ehrhardt, deputy minority leader, explains why he no longer supports the bill:

Rep. Karen L. Macbeth asks Costantino whether there is an account the state can fall back on should the borrower fail:

Costantino explains that "there are some risks you have to take."



Rep. Watson warns the bill could lead to scandal:



Watch the entire 50-minute House floor debate



MORE:

Documents reveal the secret beginnings of the 38 Studios deal

Who knew what when about the $75 million

Timeline of events preceding, after 38 Studios deal

Verrecchia said he relied entirely on EDC staff to report on 38 Studios finances

38 Studios - search the documents