On tap for R.I.'s General Assembly in 2016: Tolls, gambling, gun control
PROVIDENCE — When they return to Smith Hill on Tuesday, Rhode Island's part-time lawmakers will start where they left off in June, in mid-battle over Governor Raimondo's bid to raise upward of $60 million a year in new truck tolls to fix the state's dilapidated highway bridges.

The two sides are already geared up for a run of big, loud confrontations that will fill the State House rotunda with campaign placards ("Jobs!"), slogans ("StopTollsRI!") and rallying cries ("Fix our bridges!"). The first anti-toll rally is scheduled for 3 p.m. on opening day.

Once the session gets rolling, you can also expect night after night of legislative hearings on:

Gun control.

Tweaks in the state's public-school funding formula.

Sentencing changes aimed at reducing Rhode Island's third-highest-in-the-nation probation rate.

Judicial nominees.

And, of course, there will be the perennial drive to expand state-sponsored gambling in Rhode Island, this time by allowing a November 2016 public referendum on the bid by the owners of Twin River Casino, in Lincoln, to open a second full-fledged casino in Tiverton, just 400 feet from the Massachusetts border.

With little organized gambling opposition left, and the looming threat from Massachusetts' evolving casino-and-slots industry to Rhode Island's third-largest source of revenue, the lawmakers' votes on the Tiverton referendum could mark one of their first significant votes of the year.

The House and the Senate will both meet at 4 p.m. on Tuesday, for the first time since they closed up shop abruptly in late June with frayed nerves, bruised egos and a pile of unfinished business on their desks, including the infamous "chicken-coop" bill that brought the 2015 session to a screeching, squawking halt.

The 75-member House has 11 Republicans, one independent and 63 Democrats; the 38-member Senate has four Republicans, one independent, 32 Democrats and an open seat (formerly held by a Republican) up for grabs. The election to fill the Senate District 11 seat that former Republican Sen. Christopher Ottiano resigned will take place the same day the 2016 session opens.

But there is something just a bit different in the air this election year.

Instead of talking, as they did last year, about tax cuts for the working poor, the elderly and the state's beleaguered business owners, the Democratic leaders of the state's overwhelmingly Democratic legislature are talking about spending more — lots more, in fact — on education and publicly funded construction.

While looking back at the "significant tax cuts" that lawmakers approved during the 2015 legislative session, Senate President M. Teresa Paiva Weed said recently, "I don't see that as a priority this year."

"I don't think it is a time to tax-cut our way into a successful economy," she said. "I think the focus this year should be on investment in education, [and in] our roads and bridges."

"That's Democratic talk," counters House Minority Leader Brian Newberry, R-North Smithfield. "What does it mean to 'invest?' That's a word that Democrats started using in the '90s, under Bill Clinton, when they didn't want to say 'spend.' They didn't want to be accused of tax-and-spend."

Paiva Weed is not alone, of course. With the possible exception of an additional estate-tax cut, House Speaker Nicholas Mattiello, D-Cranston, is also talking more about "investment" than tax relief this year.

On the subject of tolls, for example, to finance hundreds of millions of dollars in highway bridge work, an initially reluctant Mattiello now says, "I expect that a final version of an infrastructure bill will most likely have a tolling provision." His caveat: "The administration has to do a lot of disclosing very, very quickly because until that is done, the House of Representatives will not take anything up."

But opponents are geared for battle, with a "StopTollsRI" petition campaign they hope will muster the same kind of public support that killed the short-lived Sakonnet River bridge toll. (Worth noting: the millions of dollars in motor-vehicle fee hikes and automatic gas tax increases that East Bay lawmakers devised as an alternative to the Sakonnet bridge toll have not, it would appear, produced the "long-term solution" lawmakers touted in 2014.)

"The question is: Where does the money come from to 'invest'?' I would take it from other parts of the budget," Newberry says.

On the surface, Democrats Mattiello and Paiva Weed appear aligned with Democrat Raimondo, who has already got both of them talking about how much — not if — the state should toll.

But tensions have surfaced on this and many, presumably smaller issues.

Mattiello says he and the governor have a "good relationship." But this was his response when asked recently about the new "Health Policy Office" that one of Raimondo's advisory commissions recommended creating: "There are too many gubernatorial commissions."

In this particular case, "I was frustrated ... a gubernatorial commission was put together and the only recommendation was to create a bigger bureaucracy when as far as I'm concerned it's too big right now ....

"They're trying to create mini-legislatures. We are the constitutional body that is to address policy considerations. We're good at it. We have the systems in place. Every time you turn around there's another gubernatorial commission. There's too many."

Raimondo's response: "That's the nature of the beast. That's the way our American government is set up. There's always going to be a natural tension to a certain degree between the executive branch and the legislative branch."

"No one cares," she adds, except reporters, "if two politicians [have a] spat."

For lawmakers up for reelection in 2016, Newberry believes the risks of blindly following the governor's lead are high.

As he sees it: "You have an ambitious governor who is not up for reelection and who is trying to push through some big proposals. You have a Democratic speaker who is trying to do what speakers of the House do, which is to look at the political consequences to the membership of doing those, so that tension … [and] this is an election year ... is not even about Democrat-Republican.

"It's Assembly versus the governor's office in terms of risks, because they are both controlled by the same political party."

Financial reality may also play a role: The state currently has an $8.7-billion state and federally financed budget and a string of projected deficits. The numbers vary, depending on who is doing the estimating, but the state budget office anticipates a potential $79-million deficit in the year that begins July 1.

And that does not include the additional $240 million in state dollars that state agency administrators are proposing to spend. Stay tuned. Under state law, the governor's budget proposals are due out Jan. 21.

On a different financial front, the lawmakers will resume their probe into the state's failed $75-million investment, in 2010, in ex-Red Sox ace Curt Schilling's doomed video-game company, 38 Studios. A key player, former House Finance Chairman Steven Costantino, has promised a return visit to the State House to testify Jan. 14.

Other high-profile issues:

Gun control

The latest run of mass shootings has led gun-control advocates to hope and believe they might finally win an assault-weapons ban in Rhode Island and a prohibition on gun possession by people convicted of domestic violence and those subject to protective orders.

"I think really we have a problem in America with gun violence," Raimondo said recently, and not for the first time. "I look forward to working with the legislature to see where can we find some agreement on some common-sense approaches."

But Mattiello says, "Let's start with the premise that Rhode Island already has one of the 10 strictest [gun laws] amongst all the states …. An assault weapons ban? Tell me how that helps anybody."

His view: "Most of the things that are ultimately proposed in a gun debate come from an ideological viewpoint. They come from the perspective of we just don't like guns. They are proposals that are not going to make people actually safer. They simply regulate law-abiding folks and have no impact on the illegal guns that are out there."

Gambling

In mid-November, the Tiverton Town Council voted 6 to 1 to ask the legislature to put the casino proposal by Twin River's owners on the local and statewide ballot in 2016.

The backstory: Twin River's owners purchased the struggling Newport Grand slots parlor last year, with the intention of eventually closing it and moving its employees and gambling license to the new hotel-casino they propose in Tiverton, on a 45-acre parcel of land within sprinting distance of the Massachusetts line. The plan: 1,000 slot machines, 32 table games and an attached 84-room hotel.

A companion piece of legislation would guarantee the towns of Lincoln and Tiverton at least $3 million each per year from the gambling revenue, even if that cuts into the state's share.

"We take very seriously the economic commitment to the town, and quite frankly, if the legislation to make this possible fails to pass the General Assembly this legislative session and we cannot substantially meet the economics of our proposal, we will withdraw the question from the local and statewide ballot," Twin River Chairman John E. Taylor Jr. told the townsfolk in November.

Although Newport Grand's closing would cost her home city its projected $424,000 annual share of the gambling revenue, Paiva Weed — mindful that voters in her city have repeatedly said no to casino gambling — does not object.

Legalizing marijuana

Lawmakers say they don't want to dismiss out of hand the potential for new revenue, but Mattiello says, "You have to look at the social cost .... I still remain somewhat skeptical, but it does seem to be gaining momentum and acceptance in the general population. So I have an open mind."

Paiva Weed says, "I don't see it as a priority." And Raimondo says, "I don't think it's something we should rush into. I will not lie. The revenue is appealing and we need it — the revenue — but it's a mixed bag of results in other states, so I think we ought to look at it a little more before we do it."

Charter-school funding

In the battle over public school dollars, lawmakers await the recommendations of a commission studying potential remedies to the tug-of-war between the state's "traditional" public schools and non-traditional charter schools.

Entry into one of the state's charter schools is determined by lottery. The perceived problem: Charter schools drain money from schools with more special needs and English-as-a-second-language students. The fear: reasonable questions about the current funding formula may kill the state's highly regarded charter-school movement, where freedom to experiment has produced some stellar results.

To fix the inequity, Paiva Weed anticipates the need to funnel an additional $10 million into the traditional public schools.

"I don't believe we're dedicating enough money to public education," Mattiello agrees, then goes further: "I cannot justify in my mind having two competitive systems fighting for the same resources when we don't have the money to appropriately fund the buildings and the infrastructure of one of the systems."

"I haven't advocated to get rid of the charters …. That's disruptive ... I just would not grow the problem any bigger."

Driver's licenses for

undocumented immigrants

To Raimondo, "this is a public safety issue. It's better for everyone if everyone has a license and insurance ... so I'd like to find a practical solution and work with the legislature."

But she has been stymied, as her predecessor was, by the Real ID Act, initially passed by Congress in 2005, in response to the 9/11 Commission's recommendation that the federal government "set standards for the issuance of sources of identification, such as driver's licenses."

"Real ID is an issue," Raimondo says. "It's confusing and murky."

Criminal justice

Out of a study launched by the Raimondo administration came this finding: Rhode Island has the third-highest probation rate in the country, with 5 in 100 adult men in the state on probation. It is also racially imbalanced — 2 in 100 white males are in prison or probation, while 13 in 100 black males are.

After six months of public meetings and research, the staff to the group assembled by Raimondo laid out several potential remedies, including shortening the time people can be sentenced to probation, making it harder to send them back to prison, and hiring more probation officers.