From the archives: In 2000 Senate race, Chafee challenged over 'pet frogs'
Editor's note: In Tuesday's Democratic debate, former Rhode Island Gov. Lincoln Chafee boasted of a scandal-free political career. However, in his quest for reelection to the U.S. Senate in 2000, he was accused by his challenger of misusing public money.

PROVIDENCE — In their prickliest debate yet, U.S. Sen. Lincoln D. Chafee and his challenger, U.S. Rep. Robert A. Weygand, denounced each other's records yesterday: Weygand's as a state lawmaker and Chafee's as mayor of the state's second-largest city.

Weygand asked Chafee repeatedly during their WHJJ-radio confrontation why he had used taxpayer money to buy "pet frogs, toboggans for children of his friends and theater tickets . . . at the same time you raised taxes five times on the property owners in the city of Warwick?"

"This is private use of public funds," Weygand said of Chafee's use of the $6,000 discretionary fund.

"That is not right," Weygand said, drawing comparisons to the widely publicized credit-card abuses of state economic development officials. His campaign staff also faxed copies of news stories about the secret court account that brought down a chief justice of the Rhode Island Supreme Court, Thomas Fay.

Chafee's two-word response: banking crisis.

He sought to pin some of the blame for the state's 1991 banking crisis on Weygand, who was vice chairman and then chairman of the House Corporations Committee in the years that led to the closing of 45 banks and credit unions insured by the failed Rhode Island Share and Deposit Indemnity Corp. "This is the biggest one to hit Rhode Island in probably the last 30 years. You were there," said Chafee. "And you just did nothing and we are still paying for it in Rhode Island today with a half-a-cent on our sales tax."

The finger-pointing played out during an hour-long debate on Arlene Violet's radio show.

Violet was the attorney general who tried without luck, in the mid-1980s, to convince certain key lawmakers that RISDIC was a house of cards, doomed to fail. But the one-term attorney-general-turned-talk-show-host did more listening than talking while the two U.S. Senate rivals did battle.

And when it was over, both candidates for the seat to which Chafee was appointed last November after the death of his father, Sen. John H. Chafee, accused each other of ducking key questions.

Weygand based his attacks on news reports, late last week, about Chafee's use of the $6,000-a-year "special account" he had during his seven years as mayor of Warwick.

A Journal review of those records found that Chafee had used the fund to send thousands of dollars worth of flowers and memorial donations, and to buy such things as toboggans at Christmas for the children of city workers and tickets to Trinity Repertory company. Thousands more went to "charitable causes" near and far. It also paid for the maintenance and restocking of an aquarium in his Warwick City Hall office; hence, the frequent mention of frogs.

Chafee accused Weygand of slipping the records to the media "in manila envelopes in the middle of the night."

He also said on-air what he said in interviews last week: that the fund at issue was a line item in the city budget that was approved by the Democrat-controlled City Council and aired yearly at public hearings.

No previous mayor kept records of the account, said Republican Chafee, stressing that none of the money went to his personal use.

"The public came forward. They asked questions about it. The Democratic council asked questions about it. They said we want a mayor active in the community and every penny of that money was used for some charitable cause, whether it was toboggans for the employee benefit. . . or for the children to go see A Christmas Carol." (He did not recall who went to the theater with the tickets purchased in August 1997, but stressed they were not his own children.)

As for the frogs, he said: "Having an aquarium with fish and frogs in it was very, very popular with the children" who came to City Hall with parents there to work something out, such as a tax bill.

But Weygand was unappeased. "Why should you not be held to the same standards that all other public officials in the state of Rhode Island are held to?" he demanded. "People at the EDC [Economic Development Corporation] did the same type of things, bought personal gifts with taxpayer money. They were penalized. One, I believe, even lost their job."

But now came Chafee's turn to focus on Weygand's role in the leadership team of former House Speaker Joseph DeAngelis in the years leading up to the RISDIC collapse.

"Time and again you voted not to save the credit unions in Rhode Island," Chafee said, citing as one example a purported Weygand vote against a 1986 bill, sponsored by then-state Rep. Frank Gaschen, to require federal deposit insurance. "You voted against the Gaschen bill, Representative Weygand," Chafee said. "Why did you vote against the Gaschen bill, which would have given FDIC insurance to the credit unions and helped, perhaps, prevent that crisis which we are still paying for?"

But Weygand said he never voted on the bill, which died in another House committee. "I think you really have your facts wrong there," he said.

Chafee spokesman Jeff Neal acknowledged later that Chafee "misspoke." (The governor's office also refuted Chafee's statement that Rhode Islanders are still paying for the depositor bailout through the sales tax: the last bond was paid in August.)

After the debate, however, Neal produced evidence from House Journals of votes Weygand did take, including his April 12, 1988, vote for a bill that "actually relaxed the cash reserve requirements to zero" for the RISDIC-insured institutions.

"You were a leader . . . or at least a lieutenant during that time while RISDIC was building up," Chafee said. "You did nothing."

After the debate, Weygand said: "I wish that I, as a landscape architect, had more banking knowledge back in 1988, 1989." But, he denied any personal responsibility for the banking crisis.

"What he is trying to do, I think, is skirt what I think is really the issue here and that is his record as mayor. He doesn't want to talk about it," Weygand said. "He wants to create another firestorm for something else."