Political Scene: R.I.'s ex-DCYF director lived well on grant funds, audit shows
Restaurants, meals, entertainment. Those words turn up frequently in a state audit that details the role that Janice DeFrances, former director of the Department of Children, Youth and Families, played as a consultant on a "wellness" contract she was supposed to be overseeing.

PROVIDENCE, R.I.— Wellness or eating well?

The troubled state Department of Children, Youth and Families continued to demonstrate last week just how dysfunctional it has been with the release of an audit that details the questionable role former director Janice DeFrances played as a consultant on a "wellness" contract she was supposed to be overseeing. Words that come up a lot in the audit: restaurants, meals, entertainment.

How exactly DeFrances came to be a consultant and what she was technically supposed to be doing when she was charging her vendor, the Center for Southeast Asians, for retreats, meals, an alcohol purchase and a club membership isn't clear. The DCYF said it isn't even clear what services the center was supposed to be providing, but it's demanding the CSEA pay back nearly $450,000 — primarily from funding it never used in the contract.

The audit prepared by the State Bureau of Audits provided some other head-scratching details:

One part of the audit centers on funding that the DCYF received from the Rhode Island Foundation and the Casey Family Programs for "wellness" activities. DCYF transferred the grants — $24,015 — to the CSEA, which then set up a checking account in DCYF's name for the funds. More than $9,850 from this account went to pay DeFrances for various expenses. Here are some other places that money went, according to the audit:

— $200 was paid to a "charitable arts organization" as requested by DeFrances after she retired as director of DCYF.

— $1,128 was paid to a Newport hotel for a "SEA Retreat."

— $624 was paid to the CSEA, of which $200 was for a fundraising event and $424 was for a restaurant reimbursement.

As for the more than $9,850 DeFrances was paid from the account, the largest payment was for $2,640. The audit includes this explanation: "Handwritten note of amount, no additional detail."

The Rhode Island Foundation also provided a $5,000 grant to DCYF for "wellness and leadership for aspiring educators to become principals," according to a small grants report submitted by DeFrances.

"A representative from the foundation stated that there was no grant application or budget document for this grant award to CSEA. The grant award letter did not mention DCYF or the former DCYF director acting as a consultant for CSEA," the audit states.

Here's the audit's account of where that money went:

— $2,500 was paid to DeFrances. Her emailed request to CSEA for the money stated, "Also, instead of getting a check for each meeting I facilitate, I will just request $2,500 for consultation."

— $1,018 paid to DeFrances after she left DCYF with no detailed documentation supporting the payment.

— $681 paid to DeFrances as reimbursement for expenses, including restaurants, supplies and an alcohol purchase.

— $566 paid to DeFrances as a reimbursement for a meeting at a restaurant.

The CSEA was supposed to be providing translation and other "case management" services to DCYF with the $949,230 it received in fiscal 2014 and 2015, but it left $433,962 unspent. The audit tested if the money that was spent was done so appropriately by testing 40 transactions. The audit found that 11, totaling $1,442, were inappropriate.

"The vendor provided restaurant receipts to support the expenditure for which we find to be unallowable according to the submitted budget. Also, an additional three expenditures, totaling $625.09, were questionable due to a lack of supporting documentation," the audit states.

Alternate route?

Last week Rep. Patricia Morgan's Republican Policy Group unveiled an alternative bridge-repair proposal that it argued could devote $875.8 million to the cause without the bridge tolls and $600-million revenue bond in Governor Raimondo's proposed plan.

House Speaker Nicholas Mattiello came out swinging against Morgan's plan, saying that she's sour because she couldn't garner enough support even among her own party for a budget amendment last session. Among his criticisms of the Republican plan, which would divert funding in part from the capital budget, film tax credits, Twin River and revenue from DMV fees, Mattiello argued that the Republican group failed to take into account the existing $150-million structural deficit.

Morgan, R-West Warwick, had this to say: "As a member of the Finance Committee, I am acutely aware that our state has a projected deficit for future years. We surely won't cure it by burdening our citizens with over $1.3 billion in debt and hampering our already stagnant economy with the increased cost of consumer [goods] and raw materials from tolls."

Mattiello was also critical of the proposal's plan to divert upward of $24.3 million annually to bridge repairs from DMV fees, saying that those fees are already programmed for existing transportation spending.

Morgan's response: "The [state Department of Transportation] currently receives $500 million per year. The governor recently announced the restructuring of DOT that she estimates will save $1 billion over the next 10 years. Surely, RIDOT can work within that large sum to fix and maintain our roads."

The Republican plan also ruffled the feathers at the Museum of Work & Culture in Woonsocket. Morgan's group proposed cutting $200,000 annually from the museum. The museum is not run by the state, but it does receive state funding support.

But Anne Conway, the museum's director, argued that the state couldn't possibly cut $200,000 from the operation, which the Republican group referred to as the "Museum of Labor," because in total, the museum receives only $11,619 from state funding sources.

"In this fiscal year ending June 30, 2016, the museum is slated to receive $9,619 from a state legislative grant, as well as $2,000 from Senate community service grants to support bringing Woonsocket students to the museum," Conway said. "This amount is significantly different from the $200,000 reported in the statement from the Republican Policy Group."

Morgan, however, said the museum is "not being completely forthright," saying it is only talking about direct grants.

"They receive $200,000 as a line item in the R.I. Historical Society's budget," she said. "The Historical Society operates the museum, pays its bills and receives the funding from the state. We feel given the safety concerns of our bridges that this money is better used for repairs. We expect the museum to find a different operating model, for instance combining with Slater Mill, using volunteers and/or shorter hours of operation."

Morgan Grefe, the executive director of Rhode Island Historical Society, insisted that's incorrect, and the Republican group is likely misinterpreting the budget. A line in the budget for "government grants" primarily includes various grants from the federal government, not the state. The museum's budget is supported by a mix of private grants, the annual fund, private philanthropy and admission fees.

"There is no $200,000 to take away, at least not from the state," Grefe said.

Another raise

The last of the three 2-percent raises that lame-duck Gov. Lincoln Chafee promised state workers before he left office in January took effect in the work week that began Oct. 4.

Not everyone is getting the raise. The exceptions include state agency directors, correctional officers, and state police. Troopers through the rank of sergeant recently won a series of retroactive pay raises totaling 10 percent from an arbitration ruling. That included 3.5 percent on May 1.

But the vast majority of state workers — union and non-union — will see the last of the three Chafee raises, over 18 months, in the paychecks they receive on Oct. 23. The raises will not be evident on the state's online "transparency portal" until the next scheduled quarterly update, in January 2016. Even then, a viewer will see fiscal-year payments to date to each worker, not their annual salaries.

New role for Dowling

Next week will mark a big meeting for the Judicial Nominating Commission newly chaired by Sally Dowling, who was tapped by Governor Raimondo in July to replace Louise Durfee.

Tuesday's meeting will be the first chaired by Dowling, who held many titles in former Republican Gov. Edward DiPrete’s administration, including policy director. She is also a former chair of the Supreme Court Ethics Advisory panel and former head of the now disbanded Board of Governors for Higher Education.

The nine-member panel that screens candidates for judgeships will be selecting interviewees for four vacancies, including a new position on the District Court bench and the openings created by the retirement this summer of Superior Court Judge Edward C. Clifton; Workers' Compensation Court Judge Edward P. Sowa Jr., and the chief judge in the Workers' Compensation Court, George E. Healy Jr.

The commission forwards a list of three to five candidates to the governor for judicial openings, which are highly sought, lifetime tenure positions.

Debate party

The Democrats vying to be the next U.S. president, including former Governor Chafee, will face off Tuesday in the first Democratic debate.

Local Democrats will be watching the televised event at 9 p.m. from a watch party at Mirabar, 15 Elbow St. in Providence.

The watch party is co-hosted by the Rhode Island Democratic Party and the Rhode Island Democratic LGBTQ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and questioning) Caucus.

jbogdan@providencejournal.com

(401) 277-7493

On Twitter: @JenniferBogdan