Sen. Whitehouse praises toxic-chemicals protection bill
Measure designed to safeguard public would replace 'ineffectual' 1976 act

PROVIDENCE, R.I. — The Toxic Substances Control Act was designed to protect the public from dangerous chemicals in consumer products.

But in the nearly four decades since its passage in 1976, only nine chemicals out of the 83,000 or so in use have been restricted under the law, according to U.S. Sen. Sheldon Whitehouse.

Speaking at a news conference in Providence on Wednesday, the Rhode Island Democrat described the law as “ineffectual” and hailed legislation in the works in the Senate that would give the Environmental Protection Agency greater authority and funding to test chemicals and regulate those that could pose a risk.

The bill, officially called the Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act, won the approval of the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works — of which Whitehouse is a member — has broad bipartisan support, and is expected to be voted on in the coming weeks.

“This is something that has momentum behind it … and can be expected to pass this year,” said Whitehouse, one of 60 cosponsors of the bill.

He spoke at the Providence headquarters of Hasbro, the toy giant that is part of a coalition of manufacturers backing the Senate’s efforts. Coalition members argue the revised law would bring uniformity to the chemical industry by putting in place a national set of standards in place of a patchwork of state standards.

“You can imagine how challenging it is to try to go to market ostensibly with 50 different sets of regulations,” said Brian Goldner, Hasbro president and chief executive. “We wanted to find a way to create a national standard.”

The effort to reform the toxic substances act was started more than a decade ago by the late New Jersey Democrat Frank Lautenberg, and before his death in 2013, he had crafted legislation with Louisiana Republican David Vitter. The bill has since been extensively rewritten, and Tom Udall, a New Mexico Democrat, has taken Lautenberg’s place as a lead sponsor.

The Senate bill has divided environmental groups. While the Natural Resources Defense Council and other organizations have said the bill goes too easy on chemical manufacturers, the Environmental Defense Fund has backed it.

Richard Denison, lead senior scientist with the EDF, said that many believe the 1976 act was “broken from the start,” leaving the federal government powerless to regulate even known toxic substances, including asbestos and lead.

“Americans are exposed to thousands of chemicals every day,” he said. “Only a small fraction of those chemicals have ever been tested for safety. That puts our health at risk because we know from scientific studies that some chemicals, certainly not all chemicals … but some chemicals can affect our health. They contribute to infertility, to cancers, Parkinson’s, even diabetes.”

The new bill would mandate safety reviews, give the EPA the power to test new chemicals and make public more information about chemicals that are in use.

The House of Representatives has passed a different bill that would replace the Toxic Substances Control Act, but both Whitehouse and Denison described the House legislation as weaker than the Senate version.

Denison said that once the Senate bill passes, he expects negotiations to begin on a compromise between the two chambers. Even with uncertainty surrounding how those talks would play out, he called the current effort historic.

“This would be the first major environmental law passed in the U.S. Congress in 25 years,” he said.

akuffner@providencejournal.com

(401) 277-7457

On Twitter: @KuffnerAlex