Raimondo details Rhode Island's pitch to GE
Began with 7 a.m. phone call, included private dinner at Bacaro — before company opted for Boston

PROVIDENCE, R.I. — Governor Raimondo offered details Tuesday about how Rhode Island worked its way onto General Electric's radar as the company sought a new headquarters, how she traveled to Fairfield, Conn., last July for a meeting and then how the Ocean State stayed in the running with an economic incentives package "over $100 million," which was "competitive" with the $145 million in subsidies the company ultimately got to move to Boston.

The state offered Rebuild Rhode Island and Qualified Jobs Incentive tax credits and a tax-increment financing district, Raimondo said. But she offered no details about the source of that much money. It's difficult to say exactly how much is available from current state incentives.

GE whittled its list from 30 locations to Boston, New York City and Providence, Raimondo said.

Now, she remains "very much in talks with them" about possibly bringing back-office or information-technology jobs here, or, "It could be an innovation center."

During a meeting with a group of reporters, Raimondo released what she said was her first presentation to GE. The governor stressed ongoing state efforts to create a more predictable tax and business climate, skilled workers from Brown University's data science and computer science programs and the Rhode Island School of Design, pension reform, plus the state's optimal location between Boston and New York, good quality of life and lower cost-of-living.

Raimondo's pitch began with a 7 a.m. Saturday phone call to a member of General Electric's board of directors, Douglas Alexander Warner III, with whom Raimondo serves on the Yale Corporation, her law school's governing board: "I said, 'Hey, I want to put my hat in the ring. We've got a lot going on.' "

That led to a call with Chief Financial Officer Jeffrey S. Bornstein, then Chairman and CEO Jeffrey R. Immelt: "And I said, 'Just let us compete.' "

At first, GE executives questioned, "Rhode Island?!" Raimondo said. Yet they knew of the state's pension-reform efforts, which she led as state treasurer.

The state's pitch included a private dinner with GE executives at the Italian restaurant Bacaro on South Water Street. They met when the restaurant was closed to keep the talks quiet. Guests included Hasbro CEO Brian Goldner, two to three other CEOs, presidents of the University of Rhode Island, Brown and RISD, U.S. Sen. Jack Reed and Providence Mayor Jorge O. Elorza, who "stopped by."

When she took the call that the company wanted a bigger city, Raimondo said she was "disappointed."

But overall, "I was thrilled. When we started this ... I don't think anyone thought we'd be in the final three."

kbramson@providencejournal.com

(401) 277-7470

On Twitter: @JournalKate