R.I. is spreading the word about 2014 health insurance overhaul
SCITUATE –– “Would you like to enter a raffle?”

Marti Rosenberg was approaching passersby at the farmers’ market here Saturday morning. “It’s free.”

The raffle was just an icebreaker, because Rosenberg’s next question usually went something like, “Would you like to hear about HealthSource RI? This is the new way that Rhode Islanders are going to be getting health insurance.”

The raffle’s winner will get a $25 gift certificate to the farmers’ market. But everybody who stopped to chat got at least a brochure, and many got an education.

HealthSource RI, previously known as the health benefits exchange, is the Obamacare marketplace in Rhode Island, the system by which tens of thousands of individuals and small businesses will obtain health insurance starting in 2014. The marketplace will start enrollment on Oct. 1 for plans that take effect next year.

A survey in the spring showed that four out of five Rhode Islanders had no idea this was about to happen.

Tapping federal grants, Rhode Island is investing heavily in outreach, and the first phase of that effort got into full swing this summer. HealthSource RI plans to visit every city and town in the state. It is organizing meetings with small businesses and community groups and arranging for ad-hoc encounters at public events such as fairs and farmers’ markets.

At the Scituate farmers’ market, Rosenberg was joined by Paul Eacuello; both work for the Providence Plan, a group concerned with the economic and social well-being of Providence, which has a $110,000 contract with HealthSource RI.

Renee and Buddy Wilder, of Coventry, were among those who stopped by. Buddy Wilder, 63, works for a small company that provides insurance coverage (as do half the Rhode Island companies with 50 or fewer employees). But he’d like to retire early, and he asked if HealthSource RI could help.

Eacuello replied that, as an individual buying on his own, Wilder would have a choice of 12 insurance plans and might be eligible for a federal tax credit to help pay the premiums. “Many people don’t realize it’s the same plans you would buy normally,” he explained.

“One of these plans would cover prescriptions?” asked Renee Wilder.

“Yes,” said Eacuello. “You would have the option to pick and choose what you want.”

In addition to setting up a table at the Scituate farmers’ market on Saturday, HealthSource RI had representatives at the farmers’ market in Harrisville the same day, and on Sunday at a farmers’ market in Glocester and at the Dominican Festival in Providence. (Future meetings and appearances are posted on www.HealthSourceRI.com.)

Rhode Island is among the states making a large investment of federal dollars to get the word out. According to an Associated Press analysis, Rhode Island is poised to shell out $5.1 million, or $4.89 per capita, on an array of publicity, marketing and advertising efforts over the next several months. Only seven states are spending more per capita. The total amount to be spent nationally will be at least $684 million, with state expenditures ranging from a low of 46 cents per capita in Wisconsin to $9.23 per capita in West Virginia, the AP reported.

The summertime appearances are just the first piece of the Rhode Island’s outreach effort, which will eventually include media advertising and enrollment specialists working in community health centers. Because it is too soon for people to sign up for insurance, Healthsource RI spokesman Ian Lang said, the main goal now is to show up in every city and town.

“We know that there are people who could benefit from HealthSource RI in every corner of the state. Our goal is slowly building awareness,” he said. Too much information too early, Lang added, could lead to frustration. “If I get someone driven to my website in the middle of August, and they think they’re going to sign up for insurance, they’re going to be disappointed. We want to make sure we’re not overselling what we have to offer now.”

Not only can’t you sign up, you can’t even find what the plans will cost; HealthSource RI has not yet released the prices.

In telling people about HealthSource RI, Rosenberg segued quickly from the new options to the broader implications for health care. “And the cool thing is,” she would say, describing how the HealthSource RI director has the power to negotiate improvements in the offerings each year, “it’s not just a place to buy insurance; it’s a whole new way to set up a health-care system.”

Rosenberg’s enthusiasm is evident, and she calls this work “fulfilling.” She has been a well-known advocate for better access to health care for more than a quarter century. “I feel like I’ve come full circle,” she said in an interview, “and it’s a high point of my career.”

Among those who chatted with Rosenberg on Saturday was Jeanne Chapman, 64, of Coventry. She said she has insurance but knows people who are going without or struggling to pay the premiums. She wanted to bring them news of the new options.

“I’m very proud of my state for preparing for it rather than fighting it,” Chapman said of the federal health-care overhaul, which is being resisted by many state governments. “I just can’t wait for this to become a reality so people will find out it’s nothing to be afraid of, that it’s good.”