Providence Journal/WPRI poll: Taveras has slight edge in Democratic primary race for R.I. governor
PROVIDENCE, R.I. -- Providence Mayor Angel Taveras has a slim edge over General Treasurer Gina Raimondo in the Democratic contest for governor, but one out of four of likely primary voters have not yet made up their minds, according to an exclusive Providence Journal/WPRI poll.

If the September Democratic primary were held today, Taveras would lead the field with 31 percent of the vote compared to 27 percent for Raimondo, 15 percent for political newcomer Clay Pell and 1 percent for Todd Giroux. Another 25 percent of those polled described themselves as undecided.

Based on these findings, veteran pollster Joseph Fleming said: “The Democratic primary for governor is wide open at the present time.”

The telephone survey of 503 likely Democratic primary voters was conducted by Fleming & Associates between Feb. 3-6.

The potential margin for error is 4.38 percent, which means the numbers could be off by that much in either direction and Raimondo — with two-and-a-half times more campaign money than Taveras has — could be in a statistical dead heat with the mayor.

Among the other highlights:

The vast majority of likely Democratic primary voters consider prior elective experience important for a candidate for governor.

When asked how important they considered a track record in office, 70 percent said “very” or “somewhat important.” Another 12 percent said “somewhat unimportant.” Only 17 percent said “not important at all.”

This clearly poses a political problem for newcomer Clay Pell, the 32-year-old grandson of the late U.S. Sen. Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island, who is making his first run for public office. He entered the race with a revered last name and a famous wife — former Olympic figure-skater Michelle Kwan — but no elective experience.

More voters have a “favorable” opinion of Taveras than they do of the other candidates, with 68 percent saying they have a “very” to “somewhat favorable” impression of him overall, compared to 55 percent for Raimondo and 37 percent for the largely unknown Pell

The results also demonstrate the extent to which Taveras and Raimondo have built corps of supporters, detractors — and reputations — on their signature issues.

For example, nearly two-thirds of those polled believe the capital city’s recent financial problems have been solved to some extent, but only 10 percent believe the problems are “totally” or even “mostly solved.”

Another 27 percent say: “not solved at all.”

Forty-six percent of those polled support Raimondo’s signature accomplishment: the passage of sweeping changes in Rhode Island’s pension system for public employees. They included a higher retirement age, reduction in benefits and suspension of the annual “cost-of-living adjustments,” known as COLAs.

Twenty-eight percent oppose the General Assembly-passed changes, with 27 percent not sure.

The poll was conducted before news broke Monday of a proposed — but as yet undisclosed — settlement of the state’s court fight with its public employee unions over the legality of the Raimondo-led pension overhaul. Lawmakers approved the changes in 2011 to save hundreds of millions of taxpayer dollars annually, and $4 billion over the next two decades.

It is unknown how news of the proposed settlement, hammered out during a year of secret, court-ordered talks, might have affected the poll results.

Nonetheless, there are big differences in how the candidates are viewed by different blocs of potential Democratic primary voters, including public-employee union members and independents who are free to vote in either party’s primary.

Among self-declared Democrats, Taveras leads Raimondo 35 percent to 26 percent, with Pell trailing at 16 percent and the rest undecided.

Among those who describe themselves as “independents,” Raimondo has a narrow edge. She leads Taveras 31 percent to 28 percent. (Of those polled, an overall 58 percent described themselves as Democrats, 38 percent as independents.)

Only 21 percent of those polled said they are members of an employees union, and 80 percent of those in a union told the pollsters they are members of a public-sector union.

More than half — 53 percent — of those who identified themselves as members of a public-sector union said they opposed the 2011 rewrite of the state’s pension law.

Flipping the coin: nearly half — 48 percent — of the private-sector union members who were polled supported the money-saving changes. Twenty-nine percent were not sure.

Public sector union members were also more inclined to support Taveras, who negotiated pension changes with city employees, than Raimondo.

Taveras got a potential 35 percent of the public union vote, Pell, 19 percent, and Raimondo, 17 percent, with almost a quarter undecided.

Among private-sector union members, with nothing at stake in the pension-fight except their own tax dollars, Raimondo and Taveras are tied with 33 percent of the vote, with Pell at 10 percent.

Taveras’ campaign manager Danny Kedem said: “We appreciate that people across Rhode Island are putting their faith in Angel’s leadership.

“Poll numbers will go up and down, but what will not change is the mayor’s determination to stand up for working families. His experience of leading Providence out of a $110-million structural deficit to a budget surplus will matter to voters.”

Raimondo campaign manager Eric Hyers called the poll results “encouraging,” and said: “We’re pleased to be in a statistical dead heat as the race gets under way.”

Hyers suggested the results reflect the public’s acknowledgement of Raimondo’s role in the 2011 pension overhaul. “Gina brought people together to solve this big problem and was proud to work with the General Assembly which passed pension reform with overwhelming majorities in both houses.”

He said the poll also underlined the value that voters place on experience: “Gina has a clear track record of bringing people together get big things done.”

Pell spokesman Bill Fischer said: “The poll clearly demonstrates this election is wide open.”

“In the months ahead, we’ll have the opportunity to speak to people about Clay’s problem-solving experience in the Coast Guard, at the White House and at the U.S. Department of Education,” Fischer said, but “this is a great starting point for someone who just got into the race from outside of politics.”