7101-General Information
Page Content

CIVILIAN CLOTHING SECTION 1: GENERAL INFORMATION Article 1. CIVILIAN CLOTHING 7101.1 2. CASUAL CIVILIAN ATTIRE 7101.2 3. DRUG ADVOCATION PROHIBITED 7101.3 3. EARRINGS 7101.4 5. BODY PIERCING 7101.5 6. TATTOOS 7101.6 7. MUTILATION 7101.7 8. DENTAL ORNAMENTATION 7101.8

7101. GENERAL INFORMATION

1. CIVILIAN CLOTHING . Officers and enlisted personnel are permitted to have civilian clothing in their possession at naval activities ashore when authorized by the prescribing authority. Personnel aboard ship may have civilian clothing when authorized by the commanding officer. Such clothing may be authorized for wear while leaving or returning to ships or stations, while awaiting transportation after permission to leave the ship has been given, while on authorized leave of absence, liberty, or in any off-duty status ashore. Commands are authorized to suspend the wear of civilian clothing for individuals who fail to wear civilian clothing as outlined in this section. Civilian clothes privilege may also be suspended for those whose appearance may bring discredit upon the Navy, or who fail to maintain adequate uniforms or seabag requirements properly. Regional commanders and the senior officers present may suspend the privilege of wearing civilian clothing to meet local conditions.

2. CASUAL CIVILIAN ATTIRE . Naval personnel shall ensure that their dress and personal appearance are appropriate for the occasion and will not discredit the Navy. Current styles and fashions which are conservative and in good taste are authorized. Tank-top shirts, white undershirts worn as outergarments, cut-off shorts and shower sandals are appropriate civilian attire for occasions such as picnics, athletic events, and other casual daytime activities, otherwise the above items are not acceptable within the confines of a military installation.

3. DRUG ADVOCATION PROHIBITED . Wearing or displaying clothing, jewelry, tattoos, etc., depicting marijuana or any other controlled substance or advocating drug abuse is prohibited at all times on any military installation or under any circumstance which is likely to discredit the Navy.

4. EARRINGS . Earrings are prohibited for male personnel in civilian attire when in a duty status or while in/aboard any ship, craft, aircraft, or in any military vehicle, or within any base or other place under military jurisdiction or while participating in any organized military recreational activities. When considered appropriate by the prescribing authority under < Article 7201.2 >. earrings may be prohibited while in foreign countries.

5. BODY PIERCING . Not authorized while in uniform. No articles, other than earrings (one earring per earlobe) for women, shall be attached to or through the ear, nose, or any other body part. Additionally, body piercing is not authorized in civilian attire when in a duty status or while in/aboard any ship, craft, aircraft, or in any military vehicle or within any base or other place under military jurisdiction, or while participating in any organized military recreational activities. When considered appropriate by the prescribing authority under < Article 7201.2 >, body piercing may be prohibited while in foreign countries.

6. TATTOOS/BODY ART/BRANDS . Four Criteria will be used to determine whether tattoos/body art/brands are permitted for Navy personnel: content, location, size and cosmetic. Failure to comply with established acceptable tattoo criteria as stated, is a violation of uniform policy and subject to disciplinary action to include involuntary separation.

a. Content: Tattoos/body art/brands located anywhere on the body that are prejudicial to good order, discipline, and morale or are of a nature to bring discredit upon the naval service are prohibited. For example, tattoos/body art/brands that are obscene, sexually explicit, and or advocate discrimination based on sex, race, religion, ethnic, sexual orientation or national origin are prohibited. In addition, tattoos/body art/brands that symbolize affiliation with gangs, supremacist or extremist groups, or advocate illegal drug use are prohibited. b. Location: No tattoos/body art/brands on the head, face (to include ear) and scalp. One tattoo is authorized on the neck and should not exceed one inch in measurement in any direction. Tattoos/body art/brands meeting these requirements are acceptable behind the ear. Permissible tattoos/body art/brands on the torso area of the body shall not be visible through white uniform clothing. c. Size: The size restriction for visible tattoos/body art/brands is limited to the area of the neck and behind the ear only. As a result of this change leg and arm tattoos can be of any size. Tattoos/body art/brands on the neck or behind the ear will not exceed one inch in measurement in any dimension (height/width). d. Cosmetic: Cosmetic tattoo is authorized to correct medical conditions requiring such treatment. For the purpose of this regulation, cosmetic tattooing refers to medical or surgical procedures conducted by licensed, qualified medical personnel.

7. MUTILATION . Intentional mutilation of any part of the body is prohibited. Mutilation, is defined as the intentional radical alteration of the body, head, face, or skin for the purpose of and or resulting in an abnormal appearance.

a. Examples of mutilation include, but are not limited to:

(1) A split or forked tongue;

(2) Foreign objects inserted under the skin to create a design or pattern;

(3) Enlarged or stretched out holes in ears (other than a normal piercing);

(4) Intentional scarring on neck, face, or scalp; or

(5) Intentional burns creating a design or pattern.