Public Policy Polling
“PPP is quick, inexpensive and strategic. Incredibly helpful in both the early strategy phases and the late rough and tumble of a campaign.” Steve Smith

Kansas Family Values

“PPP provided us with a cost effective way to gain insight into the political environment. Their reliable information enabled NC House Democrats to weather the storm and become the only legislative chamber in the Southeast where Democrats gained seats.” Representative Grier Martin

North Carolina House Democratic Caucus Campaign Committee

“We came to PPP after a public poll in the San Jose Mayoral race showed our opponent ahead by 8 points. They found our candidate (Sam Liccardo) ahead by 3 points and that allowed us to be able to push back with the press against the perception that our opponent was now a strong favorite in the race. Sam ended up winning by 2 points and is now the next Mayor of San Jose. PPP worked very fast and had a very accurate read on the electorate when we needed them” Eric Jaye

Storefront Political Media

“We were in a "safe" district, but in a "bad" year, and our opponent started receiving independent expenditures. We needed a read on whether the opponent was gaining traction. For a week, our non-solution was to lose sleep. Then, we asked PPP to do a poll. In less than 24 hours, and for a reasonable price, we were able to get the peace of mind that we didn't need to ratchet up our direct mail. In the end, the PPP poll gave us a result that allowed us to save money on additional mail. And to get some sleep.” Mike Kreloff

Campaign Chair for State Representative Laura Fine (IL)

“PPP conducted three tracking polls on our school funding measure in Marion County, Florida. One had it passing with 53% of the vote, one had it passing with 55%, and one had it passing with 56%. Our bond ended up getting 54%, right in line with what they’d been telling us. Their polls were a cost effective way of letting us know that we were on the right track throughout the campaign, and now more than 42,000 students in Marion County will benefit from this additional community investment in our public schools.” Ray Seaman

Yes for Marion (FL) Schools

“PPP helped us navigate a very tricky path as we needed to win nearly all of our competitive races in districts where Senator McConnell and other national Republicans enjoyed substantial leads throughout the campaign. PPP was not only extremely accurate , their affordability allowed us to initially test 25 districts, strike those from our program that were not competitive and focus the bulk of our resources on those races where we knew we could make a difference. In the end, with PPP's research guiding us on targeting and messaging, our candidates won 11 of our 15 top districts.” Dave Contarino

Kentucky Family Values