Press Releases

PUC Details $173 Million Distribution of Gas Drilling Impact Fees; Total Fee Distribution Now Tops $1 Billion







HARRISBURG – The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission (PUC) today posted detailed information about this year’s distribution of Impact Fees on natural gas producers, totaling $173,258,900, on the PUC’s interactive Act 13 website. Over the past six years, the PUC has collected and distributed more than $1.2 billion in Impact Fees to communities across Pennsylvania. County and municipal governments directly affected by drilling will receive a total of $93,128,340 for the 2016 disbursement year. Additionally, $62,085,600 will be placed into the Marcellus Legacy Fund, which provides financial support for environmental, highway, water and sewer projects, rehabilitation of greenways and other projects throughout the state. Also, $18 million will be distributed to state agencies specified by the Act. The PUC has forwarded the information for payment and expects checks to be distributed in early July. This year’s distribution is approximately $14.5 million lower than last year, driven by a continued reduction in the price of natural gas – which again resulted in a $5,000 per well reduction in the fee paid this year – along with the increasing age of many wells, which also reduces the per-well fee. This decline has resulted in funding changes for many individual municipalities, as detailed on the PUC’s Act 13 site. Extensive details regarding the Impact Fee distribution are available online, including specifics on funds collected and distributed for each year since 2011. Visitors can search and download statistics such as distributions to individual municipalities or counties; allocation and usage of those funds, based on reports submitted by various municipalities; eligible wells per county/municipality; and payments by producers. The PUC’s is responsible for implementing the imposition, collection and distribution of an unconventional gas well fee (also called a drilling impact fee) was established by the Unconventional Gas Well Impact Fee Act, signed into law as Act 13 of 2012. The Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission balances the needs of consumers and utilities; ensures safe and reliable utility service at reasonable rates; protects the public interest; educates consumers to make independent and informed utility choices; furthers economic development; and fosters new technologies and competitive markets in an environmentally sound manner. For recent news releases and video of select Commission proceedings or more information about the PUC, visit our website at http://www.puc.pa.gov/. Follow the PUC on Twitter – @PA_PUC for all things utility. “Like” Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission on Facebook for easy access to information on utility issues. # # #





Contact: Nils Hagen-Frederiksen Press Secretary 717-783-6152