Qorvis MSLGROUP
Stan Collender is an executive vice president at Qorvis MSLGROUP who has designed and executed award-winning communications campaigns for major corporations, Wall Street firms, accounting firms, trade associations, nonprofit organizations and federal agencies during his almost four decades in communications. He has also developed multiple crisis-communications efforts for national, regional and local financial-services organizations, including commercial and investment banks and federal agencies.

Collender has extensive experience in financial, corporate, crisis, and public affairs communications. He frequently advises banks, investment banks, accounting firms, hedge funds and other major financial players on fiscal policy, federal budget developments and the likely outcome of current deliberations in Washington. He also works closely with corporations and associations on spending and tax issues.

Before joining MSLGROUP, Collender was the general manager of the Washington office of Financial Dynamics Business Communications, national director of public affairs for Fleishman-Hillard and a senior vice president at Burson-Marsteller. He also served as a managing director at two major international accounting firms, Price Waterhouse and Touche Ross, and was president of the Budget Research Group, a private Washington-based consulting firm.

Collender is one of the senior media and speech trainers for Qorvis MSLGROUP. In that capacity he works frequently with the highest-level corporation, association and government executives to increase their overall skills and to prepare them for specific opportunities and challenges.

Collender is one of the most quoted experts in the U.S. on all aspects of federal fiscal policy and Washington’s response to economic and financial challenges. During the 2012 fiscal cliff and 2013 government shutdown, Collender appeared more than 200 times on television and radio and frequently guest-hosted on Bloomberg Television. He continues to be quoted regularly by major national newspapers including The Wall Street Journal, The New York Times and The Washington Post. He is also a weekly contributor to Forbes and the author of “The Guide to the Federal Budget,” the most-assigned text on that topic during the 19 years an annual edition was published.

Collender’s communications industry accolades include a Sabre Award in 2000 for the campaign he created and implemented to introduce the Golden Dollar coin, a PR Week Award in 2001 for best use of research in a communications campaign and a Platinum PRNews Award in 2013 for best financial/investor relations campaign of the year for his work with Al Jazeera America. He has also been nominated for financial communicator of the year by PRNews.

Collender is also the recipient of the Howard Award for exceptional leadership in public budgeting and was the 2012 winner of the prestigious James L. Blum Award from the American Association for Budget and Program Analysis.

Collender has a master’s degree in public policy from the University of California, Berkeley, and a bachelor’s degree in politics and psychology from New York University. In addition to his other activities, he is an adjunct professor of public policy at Georgetown University.

In 1998, President Clinton appointed Collender to the presidential commission that studied whether the U.S. should have a capital budget.