www.quepasacorp.com
QUEPASA LAUNCHES ZOOSK ONLINE DATING SERVICE Implementation of world’s largest dating community of over 50 million users in 60 countries WEST PALM BEACH, FL – June 11, 2010 —Quepasa Corporation (OTC BB: QPSA), owner of Quepasa.com, an online social network targeting the Latino community, completed its implementation of the Zoosk dating service within the social network. The objective of the partnership is to extend the Zoosk community across the countries of Latin America by promoting and monetizing the Zoosk offering to the users of Quepasa.com. "Flirting is already an important element of the activity within Quepasa, so we look forward to providing further engagement and monetization via Zoosk", said Quepasa CEO, John Abbott. About Zo About Zoosk

Zoosk Inc. ( Zoosk Inc. ( www.zoosk.com ) is one of the world's largest online dating services with more than 50 million members in 60 countries. Built on the social web, Zoosk provides an easy, fun and safe online dating experience across major social networks, mobile devices and the desktop. The 'freemium' model invites Zooskers to join for free, while also offering subscriptions and virtual goods. Founded by Shayan Zadeh and Alex Mehr, the company is based in San Francisco and backed by Canaan Partners, Bessemer Venture Partners and ATA Ventures. About Quepasa Corporation

Quepasa Corporation (OTC BB: QPSA), headquartered in West Palm Beach, FL with offices in Los Angeles, CA; São Paulo, Brazil; Scottsdale, AZ; Miami, FL; and Hermosillo, MX, owns Quepasa.com ( Quepasa Corporation (OTC BB: QPSA), headquartered in West Palm Beach, FL with offices in Los Angeles, CA; São Paulo, Brazil; Scottsdale, AZ; Miami, FL; and Hermosillo, MX, owns Quepasa.com ( www.Quepasa.com ), one of the world's largest, trilingual, Latino social networks. Quepasa.com is an authentic Latino community that provides fun, interactive, and easy to use social tools, and rich multimedia content in English, Spanish and Portuguese to embrace Latinos everywhere, and empower them to connect online, compete in contests and games and share their interests, ideas, and activities. Forward-Looking Statements

As a cautionary note to investors, certain matters discussed in this press release may be forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such matters involve risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially, including the following: changes in economic conditions; general competitive factors; acceptance of the Company’s products in the market; the Company’s success in technology and product development; the Company’s ability to execute its business model and strategic plans; and all the risks and related information described from time to time in the Company’s SEC filings, including the financial statements and related information contained in the Company’s SEC Filing. The Company assumes no obligation to update the information in this release. Contact:

Company Contact

Mike Matte, Chief Financial Officer

Quepasa Corporation

(561) 650-8075



Investor Relations contact

John Baldissera

BPC Financial Marketing

800-368-1217