www.quepasacorp.com
QUEPASA.COM GROWS MEMBERSHIP TO 15MM USERS Quepasa sets another record number of monthly unique visits WEST PALM BEACH, FL – JULY 1, 2010 – Quepasa Corporation (OTC BB: QPSA), owner of Quepasa.com, an online social network targeting the Latino community, today announced that the website saw a record 10.8MM unique visits during the month of June, a 12.5% increase over the prior month. At the same time, registered users grew by 1.2MM new members to over 15MM. "We continued to benefit from new functionality aimed at enhancing user experience on Quepasa and as result saw a greater number of unique visits", said John C. Abbott, CEO of Quepasa Corporation. "Following the completion of our developer site, we now look forward to seeing the results of third party applications on Quepasa." About Quepasa Corporation

Quepasa Corporation, headquartered in West Palm Beach, FL with offices in Los Angeles, CA; São Paulo, Brazil; Scottsdale, AZ; Miami, FL; and Hermosillo, Mexico, owns Quepasa.com ( Quepasa Corporation, headquartered in West Palm Beach, FL with offices in Los Angeles, CA; São Paulo, Brazil; Scottsdale, AZ; Miami, FL; and Hermosillo, Mexico, owns Quepasa.com ( www.Quepasa.com ), one of the world's largest, trilingual, Latino social networks. Quepasa.com is an authentic Latino community that provides fun, interactive, and easy to use social tools, and rich multimedia content in English, Spanish and Portuguese to embrace Latinos everywhere, and empower them to connect online, compete in contests and games and share their interests, ideas, and activities. Forward-Looking Statements

As a cautionary note to investors, certain matters discussed in this press release may be forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Such matters involve risks and uncertainties that may cause actual results to differ materially, including the following: changes in economic conditions; general competitive factors; acceptance of the Company’s products in the market; the Company’s success in technology and product development; the Company’s ability to execute its business model and strategic plans; and all the risks and related information described from time to time in the Company’s SEC filings, including the financial statements and related information contained in the Company’s SEC Filing. The Company assumes no obligation to update the information in this release. Company Contact

Mike Matte

Chief Financial Officer

Quepasa Corporation

(561) 650-8075



Investor Relations contact

John Baldissera

BPC Financial Marketing

800-368-1217