Polling Institute
Recent Releases

Results of a New York State poll on medical and recreational marijuana will be available at 6 a.m. on Monday, Feb. 17.

The Feb. 13 New York State poll found Cuomo thumps Trump, Astorino in New York governor's race; Clinton runs better against Christie in 2016 race.

The Feb. 12 New York State poll found New York voters back Cuomo's no-tax pre-K plan; voters closer soul mates to governor than Mayor de Blasio.



Annual Reports:



Download the Polling Institute brochure. (Adobe PDF)







Timely and accurate polls

Frequently cited by journalists, public officials and researchers, the independent Quinnipiac University Poll regularly surveys residents in Colorado, Connecticut, Florida, Iowa, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia and nationwide about political races, state and national elections, and issues of public concern, such as schools, taxes, transportation, municipal services and the environment.



Known for its exactness and thoroughness, the Quinnipiac poll is featured regularly in The New York Times, The Washington Post, USA Today, The Wall Street Journal and on national network news broadcasts. In 2010, respected public opinion polling analyst Nate Silver ranked the Quinnipiac University poll as most accurate among major polls conducting surveys in two states or more. The Quinnipiac poll was also called "the standout performer" by City and State for the most accurate prediction in the Democratic primary for New York City mayor in 2013.

The Asbury Park Press wrote, "The Quinnipiac University Poll is considered the gold standard in the business, frequently lauded by USA Today and other national media organizations for its information and accuracy."

For a typical public opinion survey, a randomly selected sample of about 1,000 registered voters age 18 and over is interviewed over five or six days. The polls are conducted at the Polling Institute on West Woods Road, close to the Mount Carmel and York Hill Campuses.



The Polling Institute can be contacted at 203-582-5201 or pollinginstitute@quinnipiac.edu.

Back to top