Chp 10: Kindling a New National Grand Council Fire, Native American liberty and the U.S. Constitution, "Exemplar Of Liberty"
Adams' Defence was a critical survey of world governments and he included a description of the Iroquois and other Native American government in his analysis. In his preface, Adams mentioned the Inca, Manco Capac, and the political structure "of the Peruvians." He also noted that tribes in "North America have certain families from which their leaders are always chosen." [30] Adams believed that American Indian governments collected their authority in one center (a simple or unicameral model), and he also observed that in American Indian governments "the people" believed that "all depended on them." [31] Later in the preface, John Adams observed that Benjamin Franklin, the French Philosophes and other "great philosophers and politicians of the age were "attempting to "set up governments of . . . modern Indians." [32]

According to Adams, the French Philosopher Turgot believed that the new American constitutions that Franklin showed him were "an unreasonable imitation of the usages of England." [33]

Turgot, like Franklin, objected to the perpetuation of bicameral legislatures by the American states and reserved praise only for the unicameral legislature found in the new Pennsylvania state constitution of 1776. The Pennsylvania Constitution also contained a "Council of Censors" that functioned similarly to the Council of Elders of the Iroquois. The Council of Censors' duties included inquiring into whether the constitution was "preserved inviolate . . . and whether the legislative and executive branches" have discharged their duty" as guardians of the people." Like the Iroquois League, the Pennsylvania Constitution provided that

The doors of the . . . general assembly, shall be and remain open for the admission of all persons who behave decently. [34]

In his Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States (1787), Adams implied that Turgot's preference for the Pennsylvania constitution was probably the result of conversations with Franklin. Adams believed that "Americans are advised" by Turgot, Franklin and others to go back to the political structures of Ancient Germans and modern Indians. While he was critical of this suggestion, Adams argued that "the three powers [of government] are strong in every tribe." Adams also talked of the importance of certain families in American Indian governments. [35] Adams was familiar with the opinions of Richard Price, the radical British thinker, who had received a letter from Turgot in 1778 on the nature of American constitutions. [36] Price believed that Americans had established forms of "government more equitable and more liberal than any the world has yet known." He also believed that as a result of the American Revolution the "Britons themselves will be the greatest gainers." [37] It is very likely that Franklin favored unicameral legislatures because of his experience in Pennsylvania and his exposure to the ideas of Iroquois. Certainly, this was what Adams tried to imply in his Defence. The Iroquois governmental system helped reinforce Franklin's belief (similar to that of Tom Paine and Thomas Jefferson), that the best government governed least-- and with the simplest bureaucratic machinery. [38]

Adams, an ardent believer in the fundamentals of the British Constitution, opposed Franklin's intimation that the new government should resemble the native confederacies, but he did believe it would be productive to have "a more accurate investigation of the form of governments of the . . . Indians." In addition, Adams argued that it would be "well worth the pains . . . to collect . . . the legislation of the Indians" for study while creating a new constitution. Adams believed that in studying American Indian governments such as the League of the Iroquois, Americans could observe the best examples of governmental separation of powers. In fact, Adams stated that separation of powers in American Indian governments "is marked with a precision that excludes all controversy." [39]

Indeed, Adams pointed out that American Indian governments were so democratic that the "real sovereignty resided in the body of the people." [40] Personal liberty was so important to American Indians, according to Adams, that Mohawks might be characterized as having "complete individual independence." [41]

While discussing the Mohawks, Adams referred to "fifty families governed by all authority in one centre." This statement reflects the extent of Adams' knowledge of the structure of the Iroquois confederacy. In fact, Adams notes rather casually the number of Iroquois sachemships that were delineated by Lewis Henry Morgan, pioneer ethnographer of the League, more than sixty years later. Adams' insight indicates that the founders knew a great deal more about the Iroquois governance system than has been previously acknowledged. The fact that Morgan arrived at similar conclusions without reference to Adams' and other founders' observations provides independent verification of such knowledge. However, the extent of Adams' understanding of the nature of Iroquois government is less important than the awareness that there were profound intellectual connections between native Americans and the founding fathers. Essentially, Adams' insights about Indian governments were really personal and cultural manifestations of a lengthy and sustained dialogue between Euroamericans and Native Americans. [42]

Adams' knowledge of Iroquois and other American Indian confederacies can be seen in his reference to the sachemship system in American Indian governments, which also resembles Morgan's work. Adams wrote that a sachem is elected for life and lesser "sachems are his ordinary council." In this ordinary council, all "national affairs are deliberated and resolved" except declaring war when the "sachems call a national assembly round a great council fire." At this council, the sachems "communicate to the people their resolution, and sacrifice an animal." No doubt, the animal sacrifice is a reference to the "white dog ceremony" of the Iroquois, also described by Morgan more than six decades after Adams. Adams further describes Iroquois custom, when he states that "the people who approve the war . . . throw the hatchet into a tree" and then "join in the subsequent war songs and dances." Adams also exhibits an understanding of the voluntary nature of Iroquois warfare, when he asserts that those who do disapprove of the decision to go to war "take no part in the sacrifice, but retire." [43]

Adams was critical of such European thinkers as Turgot, John Locke and David Hume. Adams felt their theories of government were too abstract and that European thinkers did not know enough about tribal societies and republican governments. [44] In an analysis of the Iroquois and other tribal governments, Adams saw American Indian governments as a window to the pre-monarchical past of Europeans. The founders looked to American Indian ideas about government because they believed that American Indian societies possessed a democratic heritage that European society had largely lost. Adams and other thinkers of the time were critical of all governments, but when they rejected the monarchy and the aristocratic House of Lords of the British Constitution, the often turned to American Indian governmental structures to seek alternatives. To an American like John Adams, firsthand knowledge of American Indian governments helped him in political discussions of emerging republicanism during the eighteenth century. Examples from native America thus framed their debates.





A dams' Defence was no unabashed endorsement of native models for government. Instead, he refutes the arguments of Franklin and Turgot, who advocated a one-house legislature resembling the Iroquois Grand Council, a model that had been used in the Albany Plan and Articles of Confederation. Among Europeans, Adams did not trust the consensus model that seemed to work for the Iroquois. Adams believed that without the checks and balances built into two houses, the system will succumb to special interests and dissolve into anarchy, or despotism. When Adams described the Mohawks' independence, he exercised criticism while Franklin wrote about Indian governments in a much more benign way. Adams believed:

Is it not sublime wisdom, to rush headlong into all the distraction and divisions . . . which are the certain consequence of the want of order and balances, merely for the sake of the popular caprice of having fifty families governed by all all authority in one centre? Even this would not satisfy; the fifty families would soon dissolve their union, and nothing would ever content them short of the complete individual independence of the Mohawks; for it may be depended on, that individual independence is what every unthinking human heart aims at, nearly or remotely. [45]

Adams sought to erect checks on the caprice of the unthinking heart, and cited the Iroquois Grand Council (the fifty families) as a negative example, ignoring the fact, as Franklin wrote to Parker in 1751, that it "has subsisted ages." Franklin was more of a utopian: he still sought a government based upon the best in human nature, calling its citizens to rise to it. He did not fear unrestrained freedom as did Adams. During the Convention, Franklin, according to James Madison's notes, argued that "We shd. not depress the virtue & public spirit of our common people. . . . He did not think the elected had any right in any case to narrow the privileges of the electors." The United States, having tasted revolution and the better part of a decade under the Articles of Confederation, seemed ready, in 1787, to agree with Adams, whose advocacy of two houses prevailed over Franklin's unicameral model. Still, the example of native liberty exerted a telling pull on the national soul, and conceptions of native America played an important role in these debates. The fact that Adams repeatedly called upon native imagery even in opposition to its use is proof of how widely these ideas were discussed.

Furthermore, Adams specifically stated that many thinkers of the era liked the governmental structures of Native Americans. Since Adams' Defence was "much circulated in the [Constitutional] convention," it seems that his portrayal of the crosscurrents of ideas at the time is an accurate reflection of the thinking of the era. [46]

Given the nature of Adams' Defence, there can be no doubt that Native American governmental structures and ideas were part of the process of constitution making. Even though John Adams and Thomas Jefferson disagreed fundamentally about the nature of government, both men used American Indian ideas and customs to support divergent points of view. This insight leads to the realization that both men were in agreement over the source of distinctly American ideas even though they interpreted that source very differently. In the end, it is significant that American Indian ideas and political structures, as perceived by Adams and Jefferson, were used to construct a uniquely American political system.

The issue of property, and whether government should be constituted to protect it, was a major issue of debate at the Constitutional Convention, as it had been during the Revolution. Jefferson had substituted "happiness" for Lockean "property" as a natural right in the Declaration of Independence, and invoked native Americans as examples of it when he wrote to Edward Carrington in January of 1787. Six months later, at the Convention, the native example was invoked negatively by Gouverneur Morris in a similar argument. "Men do not enter into Society to protect their Lives or Liberty -- the Savages possess both in perfection -- they unite in Society for the Protection of Property," according to notes taken July 5, by Rufus King. [47] Morris' remark came as delegates debated whether they should establish a numerical ratio of one representative per 40,000 inhabitants, a debate that was later resolved by the establishment of a House of Representatives based on population, and a Senate with an equal number of seats for each state. Morris feared that if population was the sole criterion, the poor of the western states would ultimately "destroy or oppress the Atlantic States." [48] He favored representation based on the amount of taxation paid.

On August 8, according to King's notes, Morris again cited a native example in a negative manner when he expressed support for a proposal to require fourteen years' citizenship before one could be elected to the United States Senate.

The Indians are the most liberal of any People, because when Strangers come amongst them, they offer their wives and daughters for their carnal amusement. It is recommended that we open our Doors, and invite the oppressed of all Nations to come & find asylum in America. It is true we have invited them to come & worship in our Temple, but we have never proposed that they should become Priests at our Altars. [49]

Morris showed his ignorance of gender equity among most native peoples: husbands did not order their wives to do such things. Instances of such things were recorded, with the women usually acting as intelligence agents for their nations.

Benjamin Franklin made an impassioned plea for unity and pragmatic compromise near the end of the debates:

I confess that there are several parts of this Constitution which I do not at present approve . . . but . . . the older I grow, the more apt I am to doubt my own judgment, and to more respect to the judgment of others. . . . I doubt whether any Convention we can obtain may be able to make a better Constitution . . . so near to perfection as it does; and I think it will astonish our enemies who are waiting with confidence to hear that our councils are confounded like those of the Builders of Babel; and that our States are on the point of separation, only to meet for the purpose of one another's throats. [50]

Throughout the process of nation building Franklin consistently had stressed unity as a fundamental concept in any form of government. No matter how old he got nor how many revisions his Albany Plan of Union underwent, Franklin never forgot the Iroquois roots of the U. S. Constitution and the need for unity. On June 30, 1787 while the Constitutional Convention was resolving the bitter dispute on proportional representation, he wrote to Indian leaders using direct references to the "Great Spirit" and the council fire of the American government. [51]

I am sorry that the Great Council fire of our Nation is not now burning, so that you cannot do your business there. In a few months, the coals will be rak'd out of the ashes and will again be rekindled. Our wise men will then take the complaints of your nation into consideration. [52]

T

[53]

In August of 1787, the bundle of arrows imagery was once again recalled in a Philadelphia magazine. The imagery was very similar to the one published in April of 1787, just before the Constitutional Convention. In fable form, the editor again openly urged the delegates to use the bundle of arrows as a method to obtain unity. (Section 57 of the Iroquois Constitution). The fable did not appeal to ancient or modern European states.

Unanimity recommended to Americans

-- A Fable -- Addressed to the

Federal Constitution A careful sire, of old, who found

Death coming, call'd his sons around.

They heard with reverence what he spake,

Here, try this bunch of sticks to break. The took the bundle: ev'ry swain

Endeavour'd but the task was vain.

`Observe,' the dying father cry'd;

And took the sticks himself and try'd; When separated, lo! how quick

He breaks asunder ev'ry stick

`Learn my dear boys, by this example,

So strong, so pertinent, so ample, That Union saves you all from ruin,

But to divide is your undoing: For if you take them one by one,

See, with what ease the task is done!

Singly, how quickly broke in twain,

How form the aggregate Thirteen!' Is not the tale, Columbians, clear?

What application needs there here?

This motto to your hearts apply,

Ye Senators, Unite or Die. [54, emphasis in original]

At the end of the Constitutional Convention, Franklin could have been recalling the December, 1776 "rising sun" speech of an Iroquois sachem when he stated

I have . . . looked at that [chair] behind the President without being able to tell whether it was a rising or setting: But now at length I have the happiness to know that it is a rising and not a setting sun. [55]

Certainly, Franklin had used Iroquois imagery in late June 1787 when the Convention had finally decided to scrap the Articles of Confederation and create a whole new bicameral legislature.

Wilson described the course of debate at the Constitutional Convention:

the extent of the country for which the New Constitution was required, produced another difficulty in the business of the Federal convention. It is the opinion of some celebrated writers, that to a small territory the democratical, to a middling territory (as Montesquieu has termed it) the monarchial, and to an extensive territory the despotic form of government is best adapted. Regarding then, the wide an almost unbounded jurisdiction of the United States, at first view the hand of despotism seemed necessary to control, connect and protect it; and hence the chief embarrassment arose. For we knew that, although our constituents would cheerfully submit to legislative restraints of a free government, they would spurn at every attempt to shackle them with despotic power. In this dilemma, a Federal Republic naturally presented itself . . . as a species of government which secured all the internal advantages of a republic, at the same time that it maintained the external dignity and force of a monarchy. [56]

Therefore, it is not surprising that Wilson would explain that "the most important obstacle to the proceedings of the Federal Convention" was in drawing the "line between the national and the individual governments of the states." However, Wilson stated that the sentiments of the convention and of the American people on this issue were "expressed in the motto some of them" had adopted "Unite or die." [57]

As a Pennsylvanian, Wilson was aware of the influence of Iroquois imagery and how it was used by the Constitutional Sons of St. Tammany, or Columbian Order. Wilson was a good friend of Franklin having read Dr. Franklin's speeches "to the Convention . . . it being inconvenient for the Doctor to remain long on his feet." [58] With these facts in mind, it is not surprising that Wilson would explain to the ratification convention that "the most important obstacle to the proceedings of the Federal Convention" was the drawing of the "line between the national and the individual governments of the states." However, Wilson stated that the sentiments of the convention and of the American people on this issue were "expressed in the motto some of them" had adopted "Unite or die" (this phrase is one of the mottoes of the Tammany society). [59]

Iroquois imagery was used by James Wilson to explain the process of territorial expansion and the establishment of new states. Wilson made it clear that the Eastern States should not expand their western boundaries and instead new semi-independent states ought to be created. Wilson believed that in order to have the respect of western settlers new government officers should be:

chosen by the people to fill the places of greatest trust and importance in the country; and by this means, a chain of communication and confidence will be formed between the United States and the new settlements. To preserve and strengthen this chain it will, I apprehend, be expedient for Congress to appoint a minister for the new settlements and Indian Affairs. [60]

In using covenant chain imagery, Wilson was echoing the rhetoric of Iroquois and American diplomacy. Since Wilson served on many Indian committees in the Continental Congress and had met with the Iroquois on several occasions, he seems to have been impressed by Iroquois ways concerning the rights of the people and territorial expansion. [61] In December of 1787, The American Museum published a poem that used chain imagery as a model to unite the vast United States. In part, the poem stated:

In federal laws connect the wide domain,

And bind the Union with a deathless chain. [62]

In 1788, an editorial on the Constitution appearing in South Carolina also recalled the "unite or die" motto and urged the people to be "of one heart and mind." [63] In November of 1788, The Columbian Magazine (one of the foremost magazines of the day) published an article on Canassatego's version of the origin of the Five Nations. [64] Clearly, Iroquois concepts and rhetoric were prevalent in the American press at the time of ratification. David Ramsay of South Carolina argued during ratification that the American union was a kinship state. Ramsay, who was president of Congress on May 2, 1786 when Cornplanter spoke on Iroquois unity, stated that

When thirteen persons constitute a family, each should forego everything that is injurious to the other twelve. When several families constitute a parish or county, each may adopt what regulations it pleases with regard to its domestic affairs, but must be abridged of that liberty in other cases, where the good of the whole is concerned. When several parishes, counties or districts form a state, the separate interests of each must yield to the collective interest of the whole. When several states combine in one government, the same principles must be observed. These relinquishments of natural rights, are not real sacrifices; each person, county, or state, gains more than it loses, for it only gives up the right of injuring others, and obtains in return aid and strength to secure itself in the peaceful enjoyment of all remaining rights. [65]

Ramsay and other influential intellectuals of the time led a movement to develop a distinct American character that was different from Europe's. Ramsay, like Charles Pinckney of South Carolina, believed that few European ideas were really applicable to the American environment. It is only logical that these thinkers turned to their "native" roots for inspiration.

During the writing of the Constitution in August of 1787, The American Museum had called the Iroquois "sires" and had utilized the bundle of arrows imagery of the Iroquois (Section 57 of the Great Law) as a metaphor for union. By 1789, the editor of The American Museum, Matthew Carey, was just publishing the obvious relationships between Iroquois ideas and the new government that had been a part of the folk tradition of the American Revolution. The founders, the members of the "Tammany" society, and the American people at the time of ratification knew of the native American roots of American government. [66] In a very real sense, the articles on the Albany Plan and the items on American Indian customs printed in The American Museum and the Columbian Magazine in 1788 and 1789 should be considered Franklin's "Federalist Papers." "The Albany Papers" argued that there was a marked similarities between the Constitution and Franklin's Albany Plan. Matthew Carey featured the "Albany Papers" articles in his magazine after he had consulted with Franklin.

While Franklin was known to be a member of the Tammany Society and Washington attended meetings, the Tammany society held reservations about the implementation of the new constitution. During ratification, Alexander Hamilton addressed the concerns of the Tammany Society in Federalist No. 69. An editorial under the pseudonym of "Tamony" was published in several Virginia and Pennsylvania newspapers that reflected the political philosophy (strong legislature and weak executive except in war) of the Tammany Society. In particular, the Tammany Society feared that the new executive might have peacetime powers akin to the British Crown and that such powers could abridge basic rights and freedom of expression even in peacetime. In Federalist No. 69, Hamilton sought to explain the powers of the executive in terms that would eliminate some of these feelings raised by Tammany members. [67] During ratification, the Tammany Society feared that the executive branch might usurp American freedoms in peacetime as could the British King. This issue was raised in an article appearing in both Virginia and Pennsylvania newspapers. [68]





A nother obvious reference to Native American political imagery was a poem entitled "Character of St. Tammany" that idolized the old Delaware Chief who wanted "To live in freedom or with honor die." The monthly American Museum's list of subscribers included just about every major political figure of the era (Washington, Madison, Jefferson, Franklin, et. al.) so it had an enormous impact. The clustering of the Albany Plan, the Albany conference of 1775 and a poem on St. Tammany during ratification was deliberate. It sent a clear message to the American people about the nature of American government and its origins.

In early 1789, The American Museum called attention to the similarities of Franklin's Albany Plan of Union and the new constitution. The article said that the Albany Plan of 1754 had a "strong . . . resemblance to the present system." The essay further observed that an examination of the similarities of the two documents will "convince the wavering, the new constitution is not the fabrication of the moment." The essay further asserted that Franklin never lost sight of his favorite system until the end of his life, when he "lived to see it accomplished." After this article, the publication launched a three-part series entitled "Albany Papers with notes by Franklin" that explored the evolution of American government from the Albany Plan to the framing of the Constitution. The American Museum also carried several essays on American Indian manners and customs during this time. When ratification was in its last stages, The American Museum reprinted the major speech by the Americans to the Iroquois at the Albany conference in the summer of 1775. The reprinted speech contained the "tree of peace" imagery and many other familiar references.

James Wilson figured in a direct use of Iroquois imagery during ratification. An essay titled "The New Roof" styled him as an architect, adding rafters to the national house, in much the same way as Section 6 of the Iroquois Great Law provides for amendment of the Great Law in precisely the same language. He observed that:

In forming this plan [the Constitution], they [the founders] consulted the most celebrated authors in ancient and modern architecture and brought into the plan the most approved parts . . . selected from the models before them. [69]

A

On July 21, 1790, the Tammany Society escorted M'Gillvray and several other Creek chiefs through the streets of New York. The speeches during this visit had a great deal of Tammany rhetoric in them and the Creeks seemed to like the references to the Iroquois since they referred to the Iroquois as their "grandfathers" throughout this occasion. [70] President George Washington wanted to negotiate a favorable treaty with the Creek Nation so he asked the New York branch of the Saint Tammany Society to escort and entertain the Creek leaders when they visited New York City in July and August of 1790. Washington was aware of the favorable impression that the Saint Tammany Society of Philadelphia had made on Cornplanter and several Senecas during their visit in 1786 so he asked the New York branch of the society to conduct a similar welcoming ceremony for the Creeks.

With ratification complete, Washington was ready to negotiate with American Indian nations such as the Creeks. Certainly, the speeches and toasts of the Saint Tammany Society during this occasion clearly indicate the pervasiveness of Native American, especially Iroquois, idea and symbols in American politics at the time. Washington had attended Tammany meetings for years, and he knew Tammany societies from Georgia to Rhode Island were referring to the new Constitution as the "New Fire which we have kindled in peace." [71]

The visiting Creeks were escorted throughout the city by three officers of "The Society of Saint Tammany, in their proper dresses." Toasts were made to a "strong and perpetual chain of friendship between the United States, and the Creek Nation" and to the "Oblivion of all prejudices and resentments." [72] On August 2, 1790, the Sons of Saint Tammany sought to explain the purpose of the society to the Creeks. Their great object was to "cherish -- to spread abroad, and to maintain the love of freedom."

At a remarkable banquet on August 2, 1790, the Sons of St. Tammany acknowledged the country's debt to the Iroquois for providing notions of unity and federalism to the founders. This banquet was attended by the members of the Tammany Society, Thomas Jefferson (Secretary of State), John Jay (Chief Justice of the Supreme Court), Henry Knox (Secretary of War), and the Creeks. According to the traditions of the Tammany Society, its great object was to "cherish -- to spread abroad, and to maintain the love of freedom." In the traditions of the Tammany Society, its two great leaders (Tammany and Columbus) were supposed to direct the society in all of its proceedings and both men lived together "in a world of the spirits in great harmony." The Tammany sachems pointed out that M'Gillvray was both white and Indian, and that we "are altogether children of one father." [73]

Subsequently, the scribe of the Tammany Council asserted:

Our institution, erected on the basis of natural freedom, records, in its formation, the noblest sentiments . . . public virtue and political friendship; men actuated by a sameness of principle, become our brethren, and we embrace than as friends. [I] present to you our public constitution. In it you will behold the strong features of political freedom, and that a sacred regard for the rights of human nature originated in our institution . . . let these [principles] prove a covenant chain between us, the brightness of whose links will never know rust. . . . Let us take hold of it, and, as we are all children of the same soil, let one tree of peace shelter us with its branches of union. . . . The . . . constitution . . . was then presented by him to the acceptance of Col. M'Gillvray." [74]

After this speech, hands were shaken, patriotic songs sung and the Creeks danced. Several toasts were offered to "Washington -- the beloved sachem of the 13 fires," and to universal peace and happiness, or the "Tammanical Chain extended thro' the Creek Nations and round the whole earth." [75] The Creeks were pleased with the ceremony and enjoyed the rhetoric of their grandfathers, the Iroquois, whose political imagery and theory was now firmly embedded in the minds of the American people during the Washington administration. Indeed, Washington remarked that "the citizens . . . were . . . animated with the hope of transmitting to posterity the spirit of a free constitution in its native purity." [76]

In discussing the synthesis of American Indian and European cultures, the Tammany society asserted that the "constitution . . . [had] . . . a sacred regard for the rights of human nature." Furthermore, the Tammany society toasted the constitution as our "tree of peace . . . [that shelters] . . . us with its branches of union." [77] Thus, in the presence of Thomas Jefferson and many other dignitaries, the debt to Iroquois political theory was acknowledged by the Tammany Society during the final stages of the Constitution's ratification. Americans not only had forged a new identity but also a new political structure that was a synthesis of the European and the Native American worlds. The grand equation, our constitution, was a product of the American and European experience.

In 1792, the Tammany Society built toward a mass tricentennial celebration of Columbus' arrival in America. On March 17, joy bells rang in Philadelphia to mark the arrival of 47 "chiefs and warriors of the Seneca Nation of Indians," who "came from the northward," landing at the Market Street Wharf. They were escorted to Eller's Hotel by a detachment of light infantry to the booming of cannon, where the governor of the state met with them. [78]

On October 12, 1792, the Columbian tricentennial celebration peaked in New York City. As had become their custom, Tammany members remembered the occasion by retelling Franklin's anecdotes about Indians. The society also used this occasion, among others, to advocate its political platform, which included abolishment of imprisonment for debt and a continuous review of the Constitution. The society also advocated making of America an "asylum for the oppressed of all nations and religions." In keeping with its belief that all human beings should "assume the native rights and privileges of American freeman," the Tammany Society pledged that the ensuing one hundred years would be the "last Columbian century" in which anyone would be held as a slave in any nation. The Society questioned the assumptions that lay behind slavery (and racism in general), contending that Indians were their "equal brothers." Along the same lines, Tammany Society members sought to expand the scope of suffrage and "subversion to monarchy." The platform echoed the concepts of Thomas Jefferson, Tom Paine and others who, after the American revolution, spread their political convictions in an attempt to foment "a world republic." [79]





T hroughout the nineteenth century, the Tammany Society kept alive the idea that America was a synthesis of European and American Indian ideas. Gradually, other societies evolved that perpetuated this concept. One of these societies was the Improved Order of Red Men, a fraternal society that, like the Tammany Society, traces its roots back to the Sons of Liberty. A description of the fundamental principles of the organization formally states that American democracy was derived from Native American roots.

The early patriots who founded the old Sons of Liberty in colonial times, never knew what real American liberty was. . . . Their first vision of real freedom was caught from the wild savages, who . . . selected their own Sachems and forms of religious worship; and who made their own laws . . . while white men . . . were continually . . . hampered by unreasonable laws and regulations, imposed by a distant king. . . . They began to chafe under their thralldom, which finally resulted in the "Boston Tea Party," the Declaration of Independence, and the War of the Revolution. The children of the forest . . . furnished the first inspiration of true liberty. . . . [Thus] it was but natural that the name of the old Sons of Liberty should be changed . . . thereby giving honor to whom honor was due, hence -- "The Improved Order of Red Men." [80]

A

After the creation of the Constitution, the American Republic would overlay the theme of American democracy with a Neoclassical Greek and Roman theme. This was an obvious attempt to give the new Republic an image of stability and antiquity despite the observations by Charles Pinckney, Benjamin Franklin and others that such ancient governments were not applicable to the American experience. Oddly enough, recent research by Martin Bernal refuted the racist assumptions about the exclusive European origins of ancient Greek culture. Bernal argued that Greek culture can be attributed to African and Asian antecedents as well as European sources. Bernal argues that scholars have fabricated a Greek culture exclusive of Non-European roots in the last two centuries to maintain that European culture is not related to and "above" African and Asian societies. [81]

It appears that in their haste to "legitimize" the new American government of 1787. The "opinion leaders" of the time drew a Neoclassical "veil" across not only the African and Asian roots of European society but also sought to ignore the debts to Native Americans as well. In 1789, a magazine article on the antiquity of Indian mounds and "former strength of the aborigines" in the Ohio River Valley stated that

if we and our fathers, desire to conceal our shame from posterity, history must draw a veil over the conduct of foreigners towards their tawny brethren. [82]

Chief among these Native American debts are a distinctive American identity, federalism, unity without imperialism across a vast geographic expanse (this was not typical in Europe). Through a study of the St. Tammany Society and a careful reading of interactions with Native Americans, Americans can regain an understanding of its North American roots. [83] Certainly, the evidence that America is a synthesis of Native America and Europe can be found in the Works of John Adams and in the philosophy of the Tammany society. Early historians of the American Revolution such as David Ramsay and Mercy Otis Warren believed that Americans had a distinctive national character that was linked to the environment. Indeed, Mercy Otis Warren asserted that the environment of America enforced a natural equality of man because the state of civilization in the colonies did not allow the development of great wealth and power. She coupled this analysis with the realization that American frontiersmen had "the habits of savages, and appear scarce a grade above" them. Warren feared westward expansion because she felt it would destroy the happy balance in America between the state of nature and the over-refined civilization in the states of the Eastern seaboard. [84]

Two generations ago Carl Van Doren and Julian Boyd summed up the appeal of the Iroquois confederacy to the colonists in this way.

From family, council to town, to tribe to confederacy and down again there were regular steps in the chain of administration. . . . Their confederacy was but a League of ragged villages, as Franklin said of it, but it worked better than any other in the colonies. [85]