Key Budget Duel Question: How Big a Problem is the Debt?
By Robert Robb - March 15, 2013

Many of the angriest rhetorical shots in the budget resolution duel this week are beside the point.

House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan’s proposal to change Medicare into a premium support system wouldn’t kick in for 10 years, or after the budget resolution planning horizon. Republicans aren’t going to repeal Obamacare as long as the eponym remains in office.

In fact, the Ryan budget and that proposed by Democratic Senate Budget Chairwoman Patty Murray spend pretty comparable amounts on Social Security, Medicare and defense over the next 10 years.

The real difference is in what is spent on the rest of the budget. And that difference is driven by a radically different perspective about whether the current level of the federal debt is a serious intermediate problem.

Total federal debt currently exceeds 100 percent of GDP. Some economic historians believe that anything above 90 percent adversely affects private sector economic growth and raises questions about the ability of the government to pay it back.

The Congressional Budget Office projects the annual deficit for this year at 5.3 percent of GDP. It was as high as 10 percent during the recession. Economists generally believe that anything above 3 percent suggests a government that doesn’t have control of its finances.

Democrats believe that if annual deficits can be brought under that 3 percent threshold, the total debt doesn’t matter much. Markets will turn it over at reasonable interest rates.

Murray’s budget would bring the annual federal deficit under 3 percent fairly quickly, by 2015, and keep it there.

It wouldn’t, however, do much to reduce the rapid rise in total federal debt. In fact, under Murray’s budget, the federal debt would increase $7 trillion over the next 10 years, from an estimated $17 trillion this year to a projected $24 trillion in 2023. And that’s after a tax increase of nearly $1 trillion.

Murray’s budget would get total debt below 100 percent of GDP, something no budget ever proposed by President Barack Obama has done. But only down to 94 percent, still above the danger point.

The Democratic position that total debt isn’t a problem if the annual deficit is under 3 percent is a risky bet. Italy didn’t have out-of-control annual deficits, but the size of its overall debt and sluggish economy have crimped its ability to turnover its sovereign debt. Include state and local government debt, and the debt profile of the United States under Murray’s budget would be very similar to Italy’s.

Ryan’s budget is based upon the belief that not only must annual deficits be brought within the safety range, but so must overall debt. Ryan’s budget would still add $3 trillion in debt over the 10-year period, but total debt would be reduced to around 78 percent of GDP, comfortably back into the safety zone.

Ryan does that not by cutting federal spending, despite the overheated rhetoric. He does it by reducing the rate at which federal spending increases. CBO projects that, under current law, federal spending will increase at an annual rate of 5.3 percent over the next decade. Murray’s budget reduces that to 4.9 percent. Ryan dials it back to 3.4 percent.

At the end of the decade, this produces a significant difference in the size of the federal government as a percentage of GDP. Under Murray’s budget, federal spending would be 22 percent of GDP. Under Ryan’s, it would be 19 percent. By way of comparison, it was 18 percent in the last year of Bill Clinton’s presidency.

Given that Ryan proposes to spend roughly the same amount over the decade on the big-ticket items of Social Security, Medicare and defense as Murray, he obviously proposes to spend considerably less on other things.

What other things and how much less? Ryan doesn’t really say, and his budget is appropriately criticized for its lack of specificity about that. Murray’s budget is far more forthcoming about spending details than is Ryan’s.

But other than pointing in a general direction, these budget resolutions aren’t that important anyway. And if you ignore the side noise, the budget resolution duel does frame a critical question: Is debt an intermediate problem?