Interview with Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli

xfdfx LIVE-EVENT-03

Show: LIVE EVENT>

Date: March 1, 2011>

Time: 09:50>

Tran: 030103cb.261>

Type: Show>

Head: Interview with Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli>

Sect: News; International>

Byline: Bill Hemmer>

Guest: Ken Cuccinelli>

Spec: Barack Obama; Legislation; Health and Medicine; Elections>

BILL HEMMER, FOX NEWS ANCHOR: President Obama saying he would agree to some changes in the new health care law, telling this to a group of governors in Washington, saying the state could opt out only three years from now.How would that work?

Ken Cuccinelli is the attorney general in Virginia. He's part of a massive lawsuit, one of 28 states taking the federal government to court.

Welcome back here to AMERICA'S NEWSROOM. So the overall idea under the law as it's written right now, in 2017, the state could opt out. What the president suggested yesterday is that you could do that in year 2014, only three years from now.

Would Virginia do that?

ATTORNEY GENERAL KEN CUCCINELLI, R-VIRGINIA: Well, first of all, it -- it requires a change in the law. So it's got to get through both bodies. And it isn't as simple as simply opting out. They put four enormous conditions on what they call the opting out or providing some flexibility, and one of them that I would point to first is that it has to be deficit-neutral, which for a president who's counting six years of costs against 10 years of tax revenue to call his balanced, you think he's going to let the states do that? I doubt it.

So it's going to be very hard to hit their benchmarks, even for states that want to opt out.

HEMMER: Because what he said was that --

CUCCINELLI: Now we would like -- we would like to get out, but it may not be possible.

HEMMER: I apologize for interrupting. You have to cover as many people as the original law requires.

CUCCINELLI: Right.

HEMMER: And at the same cost, which brings that hurdle quite high. That's a practical question. I don't know if Virginia would do it, I don't know how many other states would pick up that option either. But there is a political question in this, also.

Why do you believe he would make this suggestion now?

CUCCINELLI: It is -- it is very interesting. Frankly, this is falling back for him. I mean this is a concession. I know that in the morning, when they talk to their liberal allies, they said no, no, this will allow some states to go straight to single payer. Of course, they can already do that.

That's not restricted under the law. So they aren't really offering the folks on the left anything. That tells me that the incoherence of this policy is starting to crumble around them and they're starting to withdraw a bit politically.

HEMMER: So you think it's --

CUCCINELLI: And this one way to do that.

HEMMER: Well, and what gives you that impression? Is it poll numbers, is it the pushback in Congress? What is it?

CUCCINELLI: Well, it isn't -- it's a number of different things. If you remember, when the president encouraged his caucuses to first vote for this bill, he said, look, I'll go sell it. I think they all thought he could sell ice to Eskimos. And as people learned more about the bill, they liked it less.

That's part of the explanation for the 2010 election outcome. And there's no reason to think that trend is going to change. There's no evidence that it's changing. And I've been getting around Virginia since we sued the federal government the day the president signed the bill, explaining what we're doing and why.

And the pushback hasn't grown against what we're doing. It has receded. People are agreeing with our position in opposition to the president's. And --

HEMMER: That says to me --

(CROSSTALK)

CUCCINELLI: So I don't see where this is going.

HEMMER: You think the signature piece of legislation, in all likelihood, whether he's a one-term president or two-term president, you say he's backing down already? That's a big statement.

CUCCINELLI: Absolutely. That's how -- that's how I see it. I don't think there's any other reasonable way to interpret it.

HEMMER: Well, Ken Cuccinelli, attorney general out of Virginia, thanks for coming on today. It got our attention.

CUCCINELLI: My pleasure.

HEMMER: We'll see where it goes next. Thank you.

END

Content and Programming Copyright 2011 Fox News Network, LLC. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. Copyright 2011 CQ-Roll Call, Inc. All materials herein are protected by United States copyright law and may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, displayed, published or broadcast without the prior written permission of CQ-Roll Call. You may not alter or remove any trademark, copyright or other notice from copies of the content.

The Associated Press