The Fray: Faso, Delgado trade jabs over “age tax” claim in TV ad
Rep. John Faso went after Democratic challenger Antonio Delgado for claiming in a recent TV commercial that the bill Faso supported last year in Republicans’ failed attempt to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act would have let health insurers hike premiums for older enrollees — a cost increase that the AARP dubbed an “age tax.”

“The Washington Republican plan would pave the way for an age tax on seniors,” Delgado said in the commercial, which deals largely with the House Republicans’ bill — the American Health Care Act — and the deciding vote Faso cast in committee to advance it.

The 2010 Affordable Care Act allowed insurers to charge older customers, who generally have higher medical costs, no more than three times as much as their younger customers, and the Republican bill would have raised that ratio to 5:1 to try to make insurance more affordable for the young. But Faso argued that provision would have had no effect on New York — and, hence, no age tax — because the state already prohibits insurers from charging customers different amounts based on age.

“Antonio Delgado’s use of a false attack shows two things: his desperation to get elected to Congress and his complete lack of knowledge of New York State law and how health-care legislation at the federal level applies to state rules in the Empire State,” Joe Gierut, a spokesman for the Faso campaign, said in a press release.

Faso’s campaign had already rebuked the House majority PAC for its own commercial tarring Faso with an attempted age tax, a copy-and-paste ad that the Democratic super PAC has used against Republicans around the country with just the names of the Congress members replaced in each. Bill Hammond of the Empire Center for Public Policy debunked their claim as irrelevant in New York this month, calling it “particularly misleading in the context of New York State’s insurance market.” In reality, he said, the Republican bill that Faso supported would have given older New Yorkers “an unnecessary discount” through tax credits — “while increasing net costs for the young.”

Delgado’s spokewoman, Melissa Toufanian, said two things in response. One was that Delgado was referring to a federal bill with national consequences, even though the altered age rating wouldn’t have applied to New York. (According to Hammond, only one state besides New York — Vermont — forbids age rating, or varying health-insurance prices based on age.)

She also pointed out that Faso, when he was an assemblyman, voted against the very bill that prohibited age rating in New York. The bill passed in the Assembly with bipartisan support in a 118-25 vote in 1992. According to the roll call she provided, Republican supporters in the Assembly included George Pataki, who was elected governor two years later; Orange County’s John Bonacic, who’s retiring from the Senate in December after 20 years in that chamber; and Orange County’s Nancy Calhoun, who retired in 2012 after 22 years in the Assembly.

“As a career politician, John Faso has a record of voting to allow insurance companies to increase health-care costs,” Delgado said in a statement. “He did it as an Assemblyman in 1992 and he did it again in Congress. It’s pretty foolish of him to want to continue to mislead folks on this issue.”

Chris McKenna

Faso supports 6-month extension of domestic violence law

Rep. John Faso is one of eight House Republicans who proposed extending the Violence Against Women Act for six months after it expires on Sept. 30 to buy lawmakers more time to negotiate any changes to the 1994 law for a long-term reauthorization.

Known as VAWA, the law provides funding for numerous programs that are meant to prevent and address domestic violence and sexual assault. Congress has reauthorized VAWA three times since President Clinton signed the first version, most recently in 2013. Rep. Sheila Jackson Lee, a Texas Democrat, introduced a five-year reauthorization bill in July, but the House hasn’t taken it up.

“VAWA programs are instrumental in increasing awareness of domestic and sexual abuse, improving services and support available to victims, and enhancing law enforcement training and response to these crimes,” Faso said in a press release. “For the safety of our communities, to continue protecting and supporting survivors, we must not allow VAWA to expire. This six-month extension of the legislation is critical, and I remain committed to working with my colleagues from both sides of the aisle to pass a long-term reauthorization.”

The extension bill was introduced on Sept. 13 with Rep. Elise Stefanik of New York’s 21st Congressional District as the lead sponsor. A week earlier, Faso and 45 other House Republicans had sent House Speaker Paul Ryan a letter urging him to bring a bipartisan reauthorization bill to the House floor before Sept. 30.

House members and senators have since added a short VAWA extension to a spending bill that would sustain funding for VAWA programs through Dec. 7. If the spending bill is approved, the bill Faso cosponsored would continue that extension for almost another four months if no reauthorization deal is reached by Dec. 7.

Chris McKenna

Human Rights Campaign endorses Metzger for Senate

Democratic state Senate candidate Jen Metzger announced the endorsement this week of the Human Rights Campaign, the nation’s largest lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer civil rights organization.

“Jen Metzger has the passion, vision, and experience needed to move New York forward as an even stronger, more inclusive state,” Marty Rouse, a national field director for the group, said in a press release from the Metzger campaign. “From access to affordable health care to holding public officials accountable for their actions, Jen will fight each and every day in the New York State Senate for the hard-working families in her district.”

Metzger, a Rosendale councilwoman and director of the nonprofit Citizens for Local Power, won a Democratic primary by 22 percentage points on Sept. 13 and will face Republican Orange County Clerk Annie Rabbitt in the Nov. 6 general election for the 42nd Senate District.

Chris McKenna

Two more unions endorse Skoufis for Senate

Democratic assemblyman and Senate candidate James Skoufis picked up two more labor endorsements this week, from the state Public Employees Federation and the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union.

“Assemblyman Skoufis has dedicated his entire public service career to helping working families, ensuring our children receive a quality education, and fighting for better wages and improved health care for all New Yorkers,” PEF President Wayne Spence said in a statement from the Skoufis campaign. “At a time when anti-union forces are ramping up efforts to tear us down, we know Assemblyman Skoufis will have our backs in the New York State Senate.”

Skoufis, a Woodbury resident and third-term assemblyman competing with Republican Tom Basile for the 39th Senate District seat, has swept union endorsements from such groups as the state AFL-CIO, New York State United Teachers, Civil Service Employees Association and Hudson Valley Building and Construction Trades Council.

Skoufis also announced last week the endorsements of six elected officials from Monroe and Woodbury: Town of Woodbury Supervisor Frank Palermo and council members Bob Hunter and Jackie Hernandez; Village of Woodbury trustees Neil Crouse and Tim Egan; and Monroe Councilwoman Mary Bingham. All except Egan, who is Republican, are Democrats.

Chris McKenna

Woodbury mayor endorses Basile for Senate

Woodbury Mayor Michael Queenan endorsed Republican Senate candidate Tom Basile this week, joining four other Republican mayors and supervisors from southern Orange County who announced support for their party’s candidate for the 39th Senate District seat a week earlier.

“Tom Basile’s experience at the state, local and national level, as well as his work in the private sector, has prepared him to be a staunch advocate for our community,” Queenan said in a statement from the Basile campaign. “He understands the challenges we face and will work with local governments to ensure sustainable growth that’s in keeping with our local vision.”

Basile, a Stony Point councilman and communications consultant, stood with Monroe Supervisor Tony Cardone, Blooming Grove Supervisor Rob Jeroloman, Monroe Mayor Neil Dwyer and South Blooming Grove Mayor James LoFranco a week earlier to announce those Republican leaders’ endorsements. He also announced the support this week of two other Republicans: Orange County Legislator John Vero and Plattekill Supervisor Joe Croce.

Basile and Democratic Assemblyman James Skoufis of Woodbury are running for the Senate seat that retiring Sen. Bill Larkin is vacating.

Chris McKenna