Project Summary
Grants - AWARD SUMMARY

AMERICAN LEGACY FOUNDATION

Many national consensus documents emphasize the enormous potential to maximize the reach, use, and population impact of smoking cessation interventions via tobacco quitlines. The population impact of quitlines remains small (reach x effcacy / cost), because while their potential for outreach is unrivaled, they are principally a time-limited counseling service, neither intended nor staffed to provide intensive, momentary support following the dozens of temptations and lapses that typically characterize a cessation attempt. The project is an addictive two-group randomized controlled trial to test whether the addition of a web-based mobile quitline enhancement(MQE) system improves abstinence rates at 1-,3-, 6-, and 9-months relative to standard care provided by the Washington D.C. Quitline (DCQL) program. This MQE system is designed to fill the gaps between quitline calls with ready access to a menu of evidenced-based treatment components, while also providing DCQL counselors with detailed information about their clients' ongoing progress with cessation - two developments that constitute a major advance over standard quitline programming. Participants will be 700 smokers who contact the DCQL and are randomized to receive either standard DCQL programming (N=300) or DCQL plus MQE (N=400). Participants assigned to standard DCQL programming will receive 6 proactive counseling sessions and free nicotine replacement therapy NRT). Participants assigned to DCQL plus MQE will also receive mobile access to the MQE system via a web-enabled cellular telephone provided by the study. Relative to usual care, we expect that MQE will improve outcomes by improving delivery, utilization and thereby effectiveness of DCQL programming. This project is well suited for the ARRA funds because it represents an extraordinary opportunity to jump-start a collaborative effort that spearheads the use of web-enabled mobile devices to enhance the efficiency, fidelity, and impact of an established tobacco quitline program that benefits underserved communities in Washington D.C. To meet this challenge our transdisciplinary team brings expertise in tobacco control, behavioral informatics, data analysis, and clinical health psychology together with solid collaborative relationships across the DC Tobacco Consortium. As such, the project is positioned to take full advantage of DCQL infrastructure to conduct a randomized trial in an accelerated timeframe. The study is unconventional and innovative in the way it leverages web-based ecological assessment methodology to literally "close the loop" between research and practice. Bolstering the effectiveness of tobacco quitlines is a critical and timely endeavor, promising to expand the potential public health impact of this "broad reach" treatment modality.

Clarification of Codes Many national consensus documents emphasize the enormous potential to maximize the reach, use, and population impact of smoking cessation interventions via tobacco quitlines. The population impact of quitlines remains small (reach x effcacy / cost), because while their potential for outreach is unrivaled, they are principally a time-limited counseling service, neither intended nor staffed to provide intensive, momentary support following the dozens of temptations and lapses that typically characterize a cessation attempt. The project is an addictive two-group randomized controlled trial to test whether the addition of a web-based mobile quitline enhancement(MQE) system improves abstinence rates at 1-,3-, 6-, and 9-months relative to standard care provided by the Washington D.C. Quitline (DCQL) program. This MQE system is designed to fill the gaps between quitline calls with ready access to a menu of evidenced-based treatment components, while also providing DCQL counselors with detailed information about their clients' ongoing progress with cessation - two developments that constitute a major advance over standard quitline programming. Participants will be 700 smokers who contact the DCQL and are randomized to receive either standard DCQL programming (N=300) or DCQL plus MQE (N=400). Participants assigned to standard DCQL programming will receive 6 proactive counseling sessions and free nicotine replacement therapy NRT). Participants assigned to DCQL plus MQE will also receive mobile access to the MQE system via a web-enabled cellular telephone provided by the study. Relative to usual care, we expect that MQE will improve outcomes by improving delivery, utilization and thereby effectiveness of DCQL programming. This project is well suited for the ARRA funds because it represents an extraordinary opportunity to jump-start a collaborative effort that spearheads the use of web-enabled mobile devices to enhance the efficiency, fidelity, and impact of an established tobacco quitline program that benefits underserved communities in Washington D.C. To meet this challenge our transdisciplinary team brings expertise in tobacco control, behavioral informatics, data analysis, and clinical health psychology together with solid collaborative relationships across the DC Tobacco Consortium. As such, the project is positioned to take full advantage of DCQL infrastructure to conduct a randomized trial in an accelerated timeframe. The study is unconventional and innovative in the way it leverages web-based ecological assessment methodology to literally "close the loop" between research and practice. Bolstering the effectiveness of tobacco quitlines is a critical and timely endeavor, promising to expand the potential public health impact of this "broad reach" treatment modality. Choose a quarter and click "Go." Reporting Quarter April 1 - June 30, 2010 January 1 - March 31, 2010 October 1 - December 31, 2009 February 17 - September 30, 2009

AWARD OVERVIEW AWARD OVERVIEW Award Number 1RC1DA028710-01 Funding Agency Department of Health and Human Services Total Award Amount $497,893 Project Location - City Washington Award Date 09/28/2009 Project Location - State DC Project Status Less Than 50% Completed Project Location - Zip 200361903 Jobs Reported 1.30 Congressional District 98 Project Location - Country US

Recipient Information (Grants) Recipient Information (Grants) Recipient Name AMERICAN LEGACY FOUNDATION Recipient DUNS Number 120568014 Recipient Address 1724 MASSACHUSSETS AVE, NW Recipient City WASHINGTON Recipient State District of Columbia Recipient Zip 200363306 Recipient Congressional District 98 Recipient Country USA Required to Report Top 5 Highly Compensated Officials No

Projects and Jobs Information Projects and Jobs Information Project Title Comparative Effectiveness of Web-based Mobile Support for the DC Tobacco Quitline Project Status Less Than 50% Completed Final Project Report Submitted No Project Activities Description Smoking Cessation Quarterly Activities/Project Description As outlined in the initial application, over the first three months the project team focused their effort on development of logistical infrastructure and partnership building. This included ongoing collaboration with our local partners at the DC Department of Health Tobacco Control Program, the American Lung Association of DC Tobacco Free Families Program, the Georgetown University Lombardi Cancer Center Health Disparities Initiative, and other academic colleagues. We have now finalized negotiations with required academic and private service vendors that will support the project, including our cellular services vendor and mobile software development vendor. We have completed development of the mobile smoking cessation support applicaiton described in the initial application. We have developed the materials, identified and secured venues, staffing and data processing resources to support to implement all aspects of the proposed study. The project start date has been delayed several times due to unforeseen circumstances faced by our partners, including the DC DOH, but we have now resolved all sources of delay, and have arranged to commence recruitment for the study on July 14, 2010. Jobs Created 1.30 Description of Jobs Created The project has hired a full-time project coordinator that spends 100% of her time managing ongoing project development while serving as liaison to the DCQL progrm. The Principal Investigator on this project has been spending 30% of his time on it - 1.30 jobs saved for the quarter.



Purchaser Information (Grants) Purchaser Information Contracting Office ID Not Reported Contracting Office Name Not Available Contracting Office Region Not Available TAS Major Program 75-0908

Award Information Award Information Award Date 09/28/2009 Award Number 1RC1DA028710-01 Order Number Award Type Grants Funding Agency ID 75 Funding Agency Name Department of Health and Human Services Funding Office Name Not Available Awarding Agency ID 75 Awarding Agency Name Department of Health and Human Services Amount of Award $497,893 Funds Invoiced/Received $235,131 Expenditure Amount $235,131 Infrastructure Expenditure Amount $0 Infrastructure Purpose and Rationale Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Name Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Email Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Phone Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Address Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact City Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact State Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Zip Not Reported

Product or Service Information (Grants) Product or Service Information Primary Activity Code F08.08 Activity Description Smoking Cessation

Sub-Awards Information Sub-Awards Information Sub-awards to Organizations 0 Sub-award Amounts to Organizations $0 Sub-Awards to Individuals 1 Sub-Award Amounts to Individuals $3,000 Number of Sub-awards less than $25,000/award 0 Amount of Sub-awards less than $25,000/award $0 Number of payments to vendors greater than $25,000 0 Total Amount of payments to vendors greater than $25,000/award $0 Number of payments to vendors less than $25,000/award 0 Total Amount of payments to vendors less than $25,000/award $0













Project Location Detail Location Information Latitude, Longitude 38ยบ 54' 28", -77ยบ 2' 22" Congressional District 98 Address 1 1724 Massachusetts Avenue, NW Address 2 City Washington County District of Columbia State DC Zip 200361903