Project Summary
Grants - AWARD SUMMARY

UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, DAVIS

The islands of the Southwest Indian Ocean are renowned for exceptional biological diversity and high concentrations of endemic species. A complex process of continental fragmentation, island emergence and habitat isolation has produced a unique flora and fauna. Yet the insects of this region remain incompletely documented. Ants and other arthropods of the Comoros and Seychelles Islands and adjacent coastal portions of Mozambique and Tanzania will be collected and compared with existing inventories from Madagascar and the Mascarenes. Collaborative taxonomic tools and molecular genetics will uncover evolutionary relationships. Species descriptions and detailed photographs will be published on AntWeb (www.antweb.org). Interactive identification keys will be developed and placed online. Other arthropods will be analyzed by specialists. Discovering and documenting the arthropods of the Southwest Indian Ocean islands and adjacent portions of east Africa will provide insight into island biogeography, evolution and speciation in this biodiversity hotspot. The survey will provide baseline information about existing species, and identification resources will assist future efforts to monitor biodiversity. Data provided to regional collaborators will help prioritize conservation initiatives. A large pool of ant taxonomists will be fostered through student training and support, graduate student recruitment, mentorship, and ant taxonomy workshops.

Clarification of Codes The islands of the Southwest Indian Ocean are renowned for exceptional biological diversity and high concentrations of endemic species. A complex process of continental fragmentation, island emergence and habitat isolation has produced a unique flora and fauna. Yet the insects of this region remain incompletely documented. Ants and other arthropods of the Comoros and Seychelles Islands and adjacent coastal portions of Mozambique and Tanzania will be collected and compared with existing inventories from Madagascar and the Mascarenes. Collaborative taxonomic tools and molecular genetics will uncover evolutionary relationships. Species descriptions and detailed photographs will be published on AntWeb (www.antweb.org). Interactive identification keys will be developed and placed online. Other arthropods will be analyzed by specialists. Discovering and documenting the arthropods of the Southwest Indian Ocean islands and adjacent portions of east Africa will provide insight into island biogeography, evolution and speciation in this biodiversity hotspot. The survey will provide baseline information about existing species, and identification resources will assist future efforts to monitor biodiversity. Data provided to regional collaborators will help prioritize conservation initiatives. A large pool of ant taxonomists will be fostered through student training and support, graduate student recruitment, mentorship, and ant taxonomy workshops. Choose a quarter and click "Go." Reporting Quarter April 1 - June 30, 2010 January 1 - March 31, 2010 October 1 - December 31, 2009 February 17 - September 30, 2009

AWARD OVERVIEW AWARD OVERVIEW Award Number 0842204 Funding Agency National Science Foundation Total Award Amount $276,489 Project Location - City Davis Award Date 08/13/2009 Project Location - State CA Project Status Less Than 50% Completed Project Location - Zip 956165270 Jobs Reported 0.06 Congressional District 01 Project Location - Country US

Recipient Information (Grants) Recipient Information (Grants) Recipient Name UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, DAVIS Recipient DUNS Number 047120084 Recipient Address 1850 RESEARCH PARK DR, STE 300 Recipient City DAVIS Recipient State California Recipient Zip 956186134 Recipient Congressional District 01 Recipient Country USA Required to Report Top 5 Highly Compensated Officials No

Projects and Jobs Information Projects and Jobs Information Project Title Collaborative Research: Ants of the Southwest Indian Ocean and East Africa (ASWEA): assessing phylogenetic diversity and biogeographic linkages across the Mozambique Channel Project Status Less Than 50% Completed Final Project Report Submitted No Project Activities Description Universities Quarterly Activities/Project Description Project is just now being initiated. Taxonomic studies of Malagasy and Afrotropical ants have begun. This will involve detailed morphological and molecular phylogenetic studies of selected groups of ants. Investigations are now being carried out on the ant genera Crematogaster and Tetraponera. Specimens have been sorted to putative species, and are being characterized with morphological and molecular characters. Jobs Created 0.06 Description of Jobs Created Undergraduate student assistant was trained in sorting of ant specimens for taxonomic and biogeographic studies.



Purchaser Information (Grants) Purchaser Information Contracting Office ID Not Reported Contracting Office Name Not Available Contracting Office Region Not Available TAS Major Program 49-0101

Award Information Award Information Award Date 08/13/2009 Award Number 0842204 Order Number Award Type Grants Funding Agency ID 49 Funding Agency Name National Science Foundation Funding Office Name Not Available Awarding Agency ID 49 Awarding Agency Name National Science Foundation Amount of Award $276,489 Funds Invoiced/Received $1,234 Expenditure Amount $1,315 Infrastructure Expenditure Amount $0 Infrastructure Purpose and Rationale Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Name Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Email Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Phone Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Address Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact City Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact State Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Zip Not Reported

Product or Service Information (Grants) Product or Service Information Primary Activity Code B43 - NTEE Activity Description Universities

Sub-Awards Information Sub-Awards Information Sub-awards to Organizations 0 Sub-award Amounts to Organizations $0 Sub-Awards to Individuals 0 Sub-Award Amounts to Individuals $0 Number of Sub-awards less than $25,000/award 0 Amount of Sub-awards less than $25,000/award $0 Number of payments to vendors greater than $25,000 0 Total Amount of payments to vendors greater than $25,000/award $0 Number of payments to vendors less than $25,000/award 0 Total Amount of payments to vendors less than $25,000/award $0













Project Location Detail Location Information Latitude, Longitude 38ยบ 32' 23", -121ยบ 45' 7" Congressional District 01 Address 1 One Shields Ave. Address 2 City Davis County Yolo State CA Zip 956165270