Project Summary
Grants - AWARD SUMMARY

SYRACUSE UNIVERSITY

Scientific Rationale: The transition from adolescence to adulthood involves important developmental challenges. Events during this key developmental phase can profoundly shape and influence academic and occupational achievement as well as affect health outcomes. During this time, women are particularly vulnerable to a number of health threats including depressive, anxiety and eating disorders; psychosomatic conditions; intimate partner coercion and violence; and sexually transmitted infections. Understanding gender-based health disparities is an important public health goal. Preliminary scientific reports suggest that intimate encounters between partners who have no expectation of a romantic commitment may be increasing and that these encounters may be partly responsible for gender-based health disparities. However, little research has investigated the health consequences of such encounters using a large sample, a longitudinal design, reliable and valid measures, and sophisticated data analyses. Objectives: The primary purpose of the research is to evaluate the effects of such intimate encounters on three health outcomes that affect women disproportionately: intimate partner coercion, sexually transmitted infections, and mental health conditions. In addition, the research will document the prevalence of such encounters in a large sample of young adult women and identify the antecedents and correlates of these encounters (e.g., other health behaviors, person variables, and social-environmental conditions). Study Milestones: During the first month of the grant period, we will hire a half-time research assistant and part-time temporary assistants. These research assistants will be trained and will then help to recruit participants, obtain informed consent, and collect baseline data. Within the first 6 weeks of the award, we will invite 1000 women to participate with the goal of recruiting approximately 500 women to join the study. Potential participants will receive information about the project before being asked to provide written consent. Those who do consent will complete a baseline assessment of sociodemographic characteristics, relevant health behaviors, and hypothesized predictors of future encounters. The survey data will be saved to a database built with multiple privacy protections. Next, for each of the following 12 months, participants will be contacted by email and asked to complete online surveys to assess a variety of health-related behaviors such as tobacco use, alcohol use, exercise and physical activity, sleep, and sexual behavior as well as psychosomatic and mental health symptoms; at the 8-month follow-up, participants will also be asked to provide a biological specimen for disease testing. After each month?s data collection, we will merge new data with the existing data base and conduct preliminary analyses to confirm the integrity of the database. At the end of 6 months, we will conduct preliminary analyses to provide initial, shorter-term tests of some of the research hypotheses. During the second year of the award, we will conduct more comprehensive data analyses with the assistance of a statistical consultant and guided by the specific aims. We will also prepare materials for professional presentation and publication in peer-reviewed scientific journals. Public Health Relevance: This study will provide the first large-scale, longitudinal investigation into the causes and consequences of intimate encounters among young women. The findings will help to document the behavioral epidemiology of health behaviors in order to provide scientifically valid information to medical and public health professionals who provide guidance, education, and health care to women. This information can also be used to guide the development of more effective health promotion programs with the long-term goal of improving the physical and mental health of young adult women.

Clarification of Codes Scientific Rationale: The transition from adolescence to adulthood involves important developmental challenges. Events during this key developmental phase can profoundly shape and influence academic and occupational achievement as well as affect health outcomes. During this time, women are particularly vulnerable to a number of health threats including depressive, anxiety and eating disorders; psychosomatic conditions; intimate partner coercion and violence; and sexually transmitted infections. Understanding gender-based health disparities is an important public health goal. Preliminary scientific reports suggest that intimate encounters between partners who have no expectation of a romantic commitment may be increasing and that these encounters may be partly responsible for gender-based health disparities. However, little research has investigated the health consequences of such encounters using a large sample, a longitudinal design, reliable and valid measures, and sophisticated data analyses. Objectives: The primary purpose of the research is to evaluate the effects of such intimate encounters on three health outcomes that affect women disproportionately: intimate partner coercion, sexually transmitted infections, and mental health conditions. In addition, the research will document the prevalence of such encounters in a large sample of young adult women and identify the antecedents and correlates of these encounters (e.g., other health behaviors, person variables, and social-environmental conditions). Study Milestones: During the first month of the grant period, we will hire a half-time research assistant and part-time temporary assistants. These research assistants will be trained and will then help to recruit participants, obtain informed consent, and collect baseline data. Within the first 6 weeks of the award, we will invite 1000 women to participate with the goal of recruiting approximately 500 women to join the study. Potential participants will receive information about the project before being asked to provide written consent. Those who do consent will complete a baseline assessment of sociodemographic characteristics, relevant health behaviors, and hypothesized predictors of future encounters. The survey data will be saved to a database built with multiple privacy protections. Next, for each of the following 12 months, participants will be contacted by email and asked to complete online surveys to assess a variety of health-related behaviors such as tobacco use, alcohol use, exercise and physical activity, sleep, and sexual behavior as well as psychosomatic and mental health symptoms; at the 8-month follow-up, participants will also be asked to provide a biological specimen for disease testing. After each month?s data collection, we will merge new data with the existing data base and conduct preliminary analyses to confirm the integrity of the database. At the end of 6 months, we will conduct preliminary analyses to provide initial, shorter-term tests of some of the research hypotheses. During the second year of the award, we will conduct more comprehensive data analyses with the assistance of a statistical consultant and guided by the specific aims. We will also prepare materials for professional presentation and publication in peer-reviewed scientific journals. Public Health Relevance: This study will provide the first large-scale, longitudinal investigation into the causes and consequences of intimate encounters among young women. The findings will help to document the behavioral epidemiology of health behaviors in order to provide scientifically valid information to medical and public health professionals who provide guidance, education, and health care to women. This information can also be used to guide the development of more effective health promotion programs with the long-term goal of improving the physical and mental health of young adult women. Choose a quarter and click "Go." Reporting Quarter July 1 - September 30, 2011 April 1 - June 30, 2011 January 1 - March 31, 2011 October 1 - December 31, 2010 July 1 - September 30, 2010 April 1 - June 30, 2010 January 1 - March 31, 2010 October 1 - December 31, 2009 February 17 - September 30, 2009

AWARD OVERVIEW AWARD OVERVIEW Award Number 1R21AA018257-01 Funding Agency Department of Health and Human Services Total Award Amount $398,948 Project Location - City SYRACUSE Award Date 08/17/2009 Project Location - State NY Project Status Completed Project Location - Zip 132440001 Jobs Reported 2.05 Congressional District 25 Project Location - Country US

Recipient Information (Grants) Recipient Information (Grants) Recipient Name SYRACUSE UNIVERSITY Recipient DUNS Number 002257350 Recipient Address CONTROLLERS OFFICE SKYTOP OFFICE BLDG Recipient City SYRACUSE Recipient State New York Recipient Zip 132440001 Recipient Congressional District 25 Recipient Country USA Required to Report Top 5 Highly Compensated Officials No

Projects and Jobs Information Projects and Jobs Information Project Title ALCOHOL USE AND HEALTH IN YOUNG WOMEN Project Status Completed Final Project Report Submitted Yes Project Activities Description Colleges, Universities, and Professional Schools Quarterly Activities/Project Description The transition from late adolescence to early adulthood involves important developmental challenges, often setting the trajectory for adult development, health, and achievement. During this time, young women are uniquely vulnerable to several health threats including depressive and psychosomatic conditions, intimate partner assault, and sexually transmitted diseases. Anecdotal reports suggest that intimacy outside of a committed relationship may be partly responsible for such health outcomes. However, few studies have investigated this phenomenon using a longitudinal design. Therefore, the primary purpose of this research is to evaluate the effects of such relationships on health outcomes that affect females disproportionately: intimate partner assault, sexually transmitted disease, and mental health conditions. The secondary purposes are to document prevalence, antecedents and correlates of such relationships as well as the association with substance use. To achieve these aims, we recruited 483 female first year students at college entry. These volunteers provided information regarding health behaviors and hypothesized predictors at the beginning of their first semester, and complete monthly surveys that assess substance use, smoking, physical activity, sleep, sexual risk behavior, psychosomatic and mental health symptoms. The planned twelve follow-up surveys have been completed (monthly retention rates ranging from 82% to 97%), and 310 participants submitted biospecimens for testing. This study will provide the first large-scale, longitudinal investigation into the physical and mental health consequences of intimacy outside of a committed relationship. Findings will be used to inform parents, educators, and health professionals, and to guide the development of more effective health promotion and disease prevention programs. NOTE: Work is complete and remaining balance on the award will be returned to NIH. Jobs Created 2.05 Description of Jobs Created 1) Award financial transactions are accessed through a unique 'Chartstring' which allows for the management and monitoring of expenditures in the University's PeopleSoft financial system. The University assigned a specific activity code to identify and segregate all ARRA award expenditures. 2) Labor charges, by individual employee, posted to ARRA chartstrings during the applicable quarter were selected. 3) FTE per employee was calculated from the proportion of 'Total ARRA Charges' (ARRA pay /pay period) to 'Total Pay Amount' (total pay per pay period). This value was multiplied by the employee's job record FTE to derive a 'Calculated FTE'. 4) The ARRA FTE reported is the sum of the award's Calculated FTEs. 5) FTE may reflect cost transfers processed after the start of the quarter. Positions: 0.45 Grad Student 0.90 Faculty 0.70 Post Graduate Researcher NOTE: Position descriptions have been modified slightly to allign with STAR METRIC classifications



Purchaser Information (Grants) Purchaser Information Contracting Office ID Not Reported Contracting Office Name Not Available Contracting Office Region Not Available TAS Major Program 75-0909

Award Information Award Information Award Date 08/17/2009 Award Number 1R21AA018257-01 Order Number Award Type Grants Funding Agency ID 75 Funding Agency Name Department of Health and Human Services Funding Office Name Not Available Awarding Agency ID 75 Awarding Agency Name Department of Health and Human Services Amount of Award $398,948 Funds Invoiced/Received $398,947 Expenditure Amount $398,947 Infrastructure Expenditure Amount $0 Infrastructure Purpose and Rationale Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Name Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Email Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Phone Not Reported Infrastructure Point of Contact Address SKYTOP OFFICE BUILDING Infrastructure Point of Contact City SYRACUSE Infrastructure Point of Contact State NY Infrastructure Point of Contact Zip 132440001

Product or Service Information (Grants) Product or Service Information Primary Activity Code 611310 Activity Description Colleges, Universities, and Professional Schools

Sub-Awards Information Sub-Awards Information Sub-awards to Organizations 0 Sub-award Amounts to Organizations $0 Sub-Awards to Individuals 0 Sub-Award Amounts to Individuals $0 Number of Sub-awards less than $25,000/award 0 Amount of Sub-awards less than $25,000/award $0 Number of payments to vendors greater than $25,000 0 Total Amount of payments to vendors greater than $25,000/award $0 Number of payments to vendors less than $25,000/award 27 Total Amount of payments to vendors less than $25,000/award $19,838













Project Location Detail Location Information Latitude, Longitude 43ยบ 2' 9", -76ยบ 8' 3" Congressional District 25 Address 1 CENTER FOR HEALTH AND BEHAVIOR 430 HUNTINGTON HALL Address 2 430 HUNTINGTON HALL City SYRACUSE County Onondaga State NY Zip 132440001