Training Camp Schedule FAQ
Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center FAQs

Training Camp Frequently Asked Questions

What is training camp?

Training camp is an annual ritual in the NFL, an opportunity for fans from all over the country to come see their favorite Redskins play­ers in action on the practice field and get a first glimpse of the newly signed free agents and draft picks. Camp features several practices open to the public highlighted by Fan Appreciation Day.

Where is the Washington Redskins training camp?

The Washington Redskins will kick off the 2013 Training Camp at their new world-class Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center in Richmond, Va. (Behind the Science Museum of Virginia – 2401 West Leigh Street, Richmond, Va. 23220).

What is the official name of the training center?

The official name of the Redskins new training facility located in Richmond is the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center.

Where can I find the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center logo?

Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center logo is as follows:

To downloaded logos and photos of the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center, visit http://redsk.in/Zu9cu0.

What are some of the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center’s features?

The new $10 million dollar state-of-the-art training center will feature two full-size natural grass fields, a natural grass drill field, spectator areas, locker rooms and a high-tech training room. The Bon Secours Virginia Health System will also ensure the facility serves as a valuable year-round resource for the community when camp is not in session. They will operate the facility as a full service sports medicine rehabilitation and men’s health center on the property throughout the year, in addition to offering men’s health, fitness and education programs. The facility will also be home to movin’ mania, Bon Secours’ healthy kids initiative.

The Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center will also include a new city park with a three-tier outdoor amphitheater and walking trails to enhance the benefits for residents as well as camp attendees.

The Training Center will also feature the movin’ mania, Bon Secours’ healthy kids initiative. For more information on the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center, visit www.redskins.com/trainingcamp.

What will the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center provide the surrounding community outside of the three-week training camp?

When the Washington Redskins are not conducting Training Camp at the site, Bon Secours Virginia Health System will operate a full-service sports medicine and men’s health center on the property. The City of Richmond is developing field utilization plans to ensure the facility will also be available for a variety of sporting events and other activities throughout the year. The fields will be available for youth programming, tournaments and other uses that generate revenue and positive exposure for the City of Richmond when camp is not in session.

The Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center will also include a new city park with a three-tier outdoor amphitheater and walking trails to enhance the benefits for residents as well as camp attendees.

Bon Secours will also bring health-care services and educational programs to Richmond’s underserved areas surrounding the facility, furthering the health system’s long-established Healthy Communities initiative. Healthy Communities focuses activity in Richmond’s East End and Church Hill neighborhoods and will now include communities around Leigh Street.

What is the team’s training camp schedule?

Training camp begins on Thursday, July 25. A complete list of practice dates can be found on www.redskins.com/trainingcamp. Practice times will be release closer to camp. The schedule is subject to change, so please check either website for the most up to date information on practice times, special events and giveaways.

Is there an admission fee?

Admission to training camp is free for all fans. Redskins fans are encouraged to fill out their free Washington Redskins Training Camp Fan Invitation, which will be available on www.redskins.com/trainingcamp. Fans should print out the invitation and bring it with them when they visit the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center.

Where should fans park?

The City of Richmond will offer a variety of parking options for Redskins fans during training camp.

With the exception of City Stadium, which will cost $7 and includes a shuttle, all parking facilities provided by the City will be $5. All fees are flat rates for the day (with no in-out service).

The full list of available parking lots, including additional parking for Fan Appreciation Day, can be found at the Bon Secours website.

Can I get player and coach autographs during camp?

Following practice, Redskins players and coaches will be made available to sign autographs and take pictures with fans, schedules permitting. There is no guarantee that you will have an opportunity to receive autographs during training camp. The Washington Redskins Cheerleaders will also be making appearances and signing autographs during training camp.

Can I take photos of the players and coaches during training camp practices?

Yes, however Redskins staff may request at any time that you cease using those devices.

Where can I buy Redskins merchandise at training camp?

The Redskins Team Store will have a tent onsite and will be the source for all the newest Redskins merchandise such as jerseys, hats, men's apparel, women's apparel, youth apparel, training camp gear, souvenirs and more.

Are food and beverages available at training camp?

Yes, there is a variety of food and non-alcoholic beverages that will be available for purchase on site.

Can I bring a cooler to training camp?

Outside beverages and food are allowed on the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center premises. However, a variety of snacks and beverages from vendors on site will be available for purchase. Alcoholic beverages are not allowed.

Can I bring my pet to training camp?

No, pets are not permitted at the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center (except for certified guide dogs assisting disabled guests).

Is seating provided for fans at training camp?

There will be no bleachers on-site; however, fans can watch practice from the three-tier outdoor amphitheater which is one of the numerous amenities fans can enjoy. Fans are encouraged to bring lawn chairs or blankets to sit on during practice, overlooking the practice fields. Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center’s visitors can walk around designated areas outside the practice fields to watch their favorite players.

What activities are offered at training camp?

In addition to the opportunity to watch practice, the Redskins will offer special events, giveaways and other unique fan experience destinations. Fans can also enjoy various interactive tents and purchase their favorite Redskins merchandise at the Redskins Team Store tent. Located next to the Science Museum of Virginia and the Children’s Museum of Richmond, fans can also take advantage of special exhibits that will be featured during camp. For more information on training camp events, please visit www.redskins.com/trainingcamp.

Is there an age limit for training camp attendees?

Training camp is open to children and adults of all ages. From Play 60 youth fitness obstacle courses and various interactive tents to special events, giveaways and other unique fan experience destinations, there are exciting opportunities for Redskins fans of all ages.

Are there special activities for kids at training camp?

The Redskins Kids Club will be on site and will have numerous activities and Play 60 youth fitness stations for children. For more information on Redskins training camp Kids Club events, please visit www.redskinskidsclub.com.

There will also be a Youth Dance Clinic & Performance (ages 7-17) on Thursday, Aug.1 from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Participants will be invoted back for a performance in front of the fans on Saturday, Aug. 3 during Fan Appreciation Day. T-shirt and poms included. Sign up here.

Are there any WOW (Women of the Washington Redskins – the team’s official women’s fan club) events during training camp?

WOW, the Redskins official women’s club, will be on site and will have numerous events, giveaways and activities specially geared toward female fans. For more information on Redskins training camp WOW events, please visit www.wowredskins.com.

Where are the restrooms located at training camp?

Restrooms are located outside the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center facility at various locations surrounding the complex.

What is security like at training camp?

For security purposes, all visitors and bags entering the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center’s grounds are subject to search by team security.

Are any items prohibited from camp?

The following items are prohibited at Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center: alcohol and illegal drugs, weapons, firearms, glass bottles, video cameras and animals (except for certified guide dogs assisting disabled guests).

What if there is inclement weather?

In the event of inclement weather during a practice session open to the public, practice will close for the day. For up-to-the-minute information on weather issues that could interrupt practice, visit www.redskins.com/trainingcamp.

Will emergency services be at training camp?

In the case of an emergency, the Washington Redskins will have Emergency Medical Service technicians on the premises during all practices. Should an emergency arise, please inform security staff located throughout the Washington Redskins Bon Secours Training Center.

What is the economic impact of bringing training camp to Richmond?

The world-class training facility will bring an estimated $40 million investment to Richmond, in addition to hundreds of new jobs. The economic impact of the camp alone is estimated to be $8.5 million per year. The Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center will also generate investment and business expansion throughout the city. Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center is expected to draw approximately 100,000 fans each year, 60 percent of which will be tourists traveling to Richmond from an average 100-mile radius.

Directions to the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center:

From the North:

Take I-95 South

Take exit 78 for Boulevard

Head to the right off the exit

Turn Left onto Moore Street

Continue onto Leigh Street

Turn Right onto DMV Drive to enter parking lot

From the South:

Take I-94 North

Take exit 78 for Boulevard

Head Left off the exit

Turn Left onto Hermitage Road

Turn Right onto Leigh Street

Turn Left onto DMV Drive to enter parking lot

From the East:

Take I-64 West

Take exit 78 for Boulevard

Keep left at the fork, follow signs for VA-161 S

Turn left onto Hermitage Road

Turn Right onto Leigh Street

Turn Left onto DMV Drive to enter parking lot

From the West:

Take I-64 East

Take exit 78 for Boulevard

Keep right at the fork, follow signs for VA-161 S

Continue on Boulevard

Turn Left onto Moore Street

Continue onto Leigh Street

Turn Right onto DMV Drive to enter parking lot

Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center Parking Lots Provided By the City of Richmond:

923 N. Meadow Street, Richmond, VA 23220

928 N. Meadow Street, Richmond, VA 23220

840 Hermitage Road, Richmond, VA 23220

2220 West Broad Street, Richmond, VA 23220

915 N. Allen Avenue, Richmond, VA 23220

The Diamond, 3001 N. Boulevard, Richmond, VA 23220

City Stadium, 3201 Maplewood Avenue, Richmond, VA 23221 (offers roundtrip shuttle service)

Where do I get more Redskins training camp information?

For more information on the Bon Secours Washington Redskins Training Center, please visit www.redskins.com/trainingcamp. For additional up-to-the-minute information, follow the Redskins on Twitter at @Redskins or on Facebook at Facebook.com/redskins.