U.S. Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid >> Reid: Kochs Spending Record Amounts To Deny Climate Change, Clean Energy
“I call attention to the web of denial financed by the Koch Brothers and other fossil fuel interests. The Kochs’ money and power has amplified the climate denier voices. The government belongs to the people. Our planet belongs to the people, not the Kochs’ multi-billions.”

“The wealthy moguls, the Kochs, aren’t just on the other side of this debate. They’re on the other side of reality.”

“Why would the Koch brothers mastermind a plot to convince America that climate change doesn’t exist? Because denying climate change is fundamental to the Koch business model. The volume of pollution the Koch Industries’ emit into our environment is staggering.”

Washington, D.C. – Nevada Senator Harry Reid spoke on the Senator floor today about the corrupt influence of the Koch brothers and their impact on the environment and economy of Nevada and states throughout the country. Below are his remarks:

Over the next two days, Senate Democrats, led by Senator Sheldon Whitehouse, will speak about how the world is being distracted and misled on climate change. The Senator from Rhode Island has been the champion on this frightening issue, climate change. He has spoken 143 times on the Senate floor calling for action.

Dozens of shadowy organizations are waging a campaign to mislead the public and undermine American leadership on climate change, the Paris climate agreement, and clean energy initiatives across the country. All of these shadowy, dark entities – such as the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the Heartland Institute and the Cato Institute – are all fronts for the Koch brothers. Clearly, these groups all have one thing in common – they are bankrolled by the multi-billionaire Koch brothers. Charles and David Koch and the shadowy groups they fund have a simple agenda: Promote their own interests at everyone else’s expense.

These two brothers own Koch Industries, one of the largest privately held corporations in the world. Together, Charles and David Koch are worth at least $80 billion. Why would the Koch brothers mastermind a plot to convince America that climate change doesn’t exist? Because denying climate change is fundamental to the Koch business model. The volume of pollution the Koch Industries’ emit into our environment is staggering.

The company is among the worst in toxic air pollution entire United States.

Koch Industries churns out more climate-changing greenhouse gases than oil giants Chevron, Shell and Valero.

To acknowledge that climate change exists is to acknowledge that the Koch brothers’ empire contributes to it. But the Kochs won’t take responsibility, because they don’t care.

The Kochs don’t care about climate change. They don’t care that it’s making wildfire more frequent and intense, endangering the lives and property of millions of Americans, especially in the West. As I speak, there are fires raging all over the western part of the United States. Arizona, California, and other states. But really they’re very, very vicious in those states of which we speak.

The Koch brothers, as wealthy as they are, don’t care about Nevada. They don’t care Nevada is enduring the 15th year of a terribly difficult drought. They don’t worry about the water levels of Lake Mead. They don’t worry they dropped to the lowest level since the Great Depression when the lake was first filled.

The Kochs ignore the underlying cause of the California and Nevada droughts: the unsustainable amounts of carbon being dumped and pumped into our atmosphere because of fossil fuels. And one of the chief contributors of course is the Koch brothers.

Those who ignore the climate crisis or deny it exists do not have a valid point of view. They’re wrong. They’re out of touch with reality.

These wealthy moguls, the Kochs, aren’t just on the other side of this debate. They’re on the other side of reality. Their flagship dark organization, Americans for Prosperity, is carrying the Kochs’ toxic agenda into statehouses and city halls across America. They’re involved in every level of government, trying to buy government. They’re doing pretty well. They buy their own scientists to publish misleading reports to confuse the public about the overwhelming scientific consensus on climate change.

This isn’t my theory. This is fact. A Drexel University professor found that in seven years, half a billion dollars was spent by the Koch network on a: “campaign to manipulate and mislead the public about the threat posed by climate change.”

Consider the example of one of their front groups, the Nevada Policy Research Institute. The Kochs use this institute to fight efforts to increase my state’s use of clean energy. Even though, to date, $6 billion has been invested in clean energy projects in Nevada, creating tens of thousands of jobs and hundreds of millions in tax revenue. This is in spite of the Kochs bankrolling more coal and oil. I can remember when I came out against coal-fired plants in Nevada. I didn’t know where all the opposition was coming from. I know now. It’s the Koch brothers.

The Kochs don’t appreciate Nevada’s renewable energy acceleration, so they fund the Nevada Policy Research Institute to bash clean energy solutions.‎ They are heavily involved in the Nevada State legislature. This Koch front group recently hired an academic to write a report saying that renewable energy was raising Nevada’s energy costs. How about that one?

But, the report, of course, was false and misleading. When experts studied the report, it was found to be without basic facts. The Nevada Policy Research Institute went so far as to oppose Tesla’s Gigafactory that is being constructed just outside of Reno, which will use clean energy, and employ thousands of Nevadans. This is a project that every state wanted to have in their state. Nevada was fortunate to get it there. The footprint of that facility is so small for such a large building. The only building any larger with such a small carbon footprint is the Boeing factory in Seattle.

This kind of deceitful activity from large corporations has occurred before, but not to the extent of the Kochs. The Kochs deserve to be in the Hall of Fame. They have done so much and deceitful activity that all other corporations are in the minor leagues in comparison.

For more than 40 years, big tobacco confused scientific consensus about the effects tobacco had on our health, leading to millions of premature deaths. Just like the tobacco companies, big oil has known about the harm it is causing. As early as 1981, Exxon’s in-house climate expert knew that climate change was an issue. In spite of knowing, Exxon provided over $30 million to 69 organizations to cast doubt on the science of climate change.

This is what a clean environment confronts: Lots of Koch money and lots falsehoods. The Koch brothers and their shadow organizations know the truth. The science has long been proven – but they don’t care. They will sacrifice the future of our planet for bigger Koch profits.

I call attention to the web of denial financed by the Koch Brothers and other fossil fuel interests. The Kochs’ money and power has amplified the climate denier voices. The government belongs to the people. Our planet belongs to the people, not the Koch brothers, these multi-billionaires. It belongs to the people.

The public deserves to know who is behind these deceitful efforts, to allow better informed decisions about understanding climate change. And we’re going to continue to do everything we can to show the evil nature of the Koch brothers.