U.S. Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid >> Reid: Trump Stands On Republican Platform Of Hate
“Trump’s proposal to bar Muslims from entering this country is hateful, despicable and vile.”

“Trump’s statement is a slap in the face to the millions of peace-loving Muslims living here and to those who want to travel and live here.”

“This sort of racism has been prevalent in Republican politics for decades. Trump is just saying out loud what other Republicans merely suggest.”

Washington, D.C. – Nevada Senator Harry Reid spoke on the Senate floor today regarding Donald Trump’s proposal to bar all Muslims from entering the United States. Below are his remarks:

Donald Trump is standing on the platform of hate. And I’m sorry to say that it’s a platform that the Republican Party built for him. Last week I came to the floor and said that that Republican Party is running on a platform of hate. Yesterday, Donald Trump provided the strongest evidence yet that this is true. Trump’s proposal to bar Muslims from entering this country is hateful, despicable and vile.

We are a country founded on religious liberty, not a country that imposes religious tests. Trump’s statement is a slap in the face to the millions of peace-loving Muslims living here and to those who want to travel and live here. We welcome them all, and to them I say: Donald Trump is not America. Sadly, however, Donald Trump is the Republican Party.

Because it’s not just Trump. Many of the leading candidates for the Republican nomination have said hateful things. Especially about Muslims. Jeb Bush and Ted Cruz proposed religious tests for refugees. You can’t condemn Trump when you want to impose a religious test on women and children fleeing death and persecution. Ben Carson has called Muslims “rabid dogs.” Chris Christie has said they should be tracked.

Today, Donald Trump offered the only true statement he’s made in some time. Referring to some of his fellow Republican presidential candidates: “They have been condemning almost everything I say and then they come to my side.” That is disturbing, but true. Republican candidates condemn Trump’s remarks, and then adopt his racist policies as their own.

Let’s not fool ourselves. This sort of racism has been prevalent in Republican politics for decades. Trump is just saying out loud what other Republicans merely suggest. Political leaders must condemn these hateful, un-American statements with their words and their actions. Silence only empowers the bigots.