Viril X Testosterone booster review – Consumer reviews
Description

Editor’s note:– Although this T booster claims to be made of 21 different ingredients, it still doesn’t contain DAA, the latest breakthrough in Testosterone enhancement and available in only in few supplements like PrimeMale. Secondly, there are several websites which obviously promote this product. And they use images different from the one on the Dignity Biolabs website, the company behind Viril X.

Also, some of them state that Viril X is made in the United Kingdom. Yet, the manufacturer’s official website doesn’t indicate that address. In addition, some reviewers report different ingredient lists. It would make you think that maybe they received different products.

Could it be that a T-booster with 21 ingredients is almost too good to be true? Is it really possible to pack all of it in one capsule? Or can it be a scam?

Chances are, even if they do include 21 different ingredients, they are using it in a proprietary blend, which makes it very difficult to find out actual quantities of the ingredients used. They can be very minimal or too low to cause any impact. You can read more about proprietary blends scams and why most Testosterone boosters don’t work.

Our recommendations for Testosterone enhancers are PrimeMale and Prosolution , they don’t use proprietary blends and list the exact quantities of ingredients.

Read more on how to chose a T booster.

Viril X is a male sexual performance enhancer. The supplement is designed to target and remedy sexual performance levels of any man. The testosterone boosting supplement has the ability to boost your sexual drive and lift your libido to the desired levels.

Viril X is composed of natural ingredients. They are designed to deliver the said benefits of the supplement by improving* on your sexual drive. The ingredients are safe for use by all men of a legal age. In addition, they have no adverse effects on its users.

Viril X Ingredients ?

Viril X contains a Proprietary Blend of these ingredients:

Muira Puama – A medicinal plant used for preventing sexual disorders. It is also used as an aphrodisiac and as a remedy for erectile dysfunction.

Tribulus Terrestris – A steroid, antibiotic, and libido enhancer. It supports healthy hormone production in men.

Kola Nut – Boosts the immune system, increases heart rate, raises energy levels, improves cognition, and increases circulation.

Maca – Treats anemia and fatigue while enhancing memory, energy, stamina, and athletic performance.

Eleuthero – Relieves stress, increases cognitive function, boosts the immune system, reduces fatigue, and increases energy.

Catuaba – Tree bark that heightens sexual arousal and treats male sexual performance problems.

Avena Sativa – The common oat is a natural alternative to pharmaceutical erection enhancers. Both men and women feel stimulated quickly and effectively.

Nettles – Treats urinary tract infection and prostate enlargement, and facilitates increased levels of testosterone.

Pumpkin Seed – Edible seed good for the heart, liver and immune system, and men’s prostate health.

Ginger – An herb for boosting circulation, lowering high blood pressure, healing the flu, and easing joint pains.

Sarsaparilla – Treats arthritis, heals skin problems, balances hormones, and detoxes the liver.

L-Arginine HCL – Amino acid found in red meat, poultry, fish and dairy products. Men and women use it to treat sexual problems.

Barrenwort – Treats erectile dysfunction and premature ejaculation, and arouses sexual desire in men.

Korean Ginseng – Improves physical stamina, treats male sexual dysfunction, and prevents premature ejaculation.

American Ginseng – Another herb used for the treatment of erectile dysfunction, to combat stress, to boost the immune system, and as a stimulant.

L-Citrulline – Your kidneys change this amino acid into L-arginine and nitric oxide. Nitric oxide enables men to overcome erectile dysfunction.

Orchic Substance – Made from the testicles of cattle, men use this to maintain healthy testicular function.

Boron Citrate – Builds strong bones, treats osteoarthritis, builds muscles, and increases testosterone levels.

Cayenne – Hot chili pepper rich in potassium, manganese, and vitamins C, B6 and E. It aids in weight loss and circulatory problems.

Other Ingredients:

Niacin – Also known as Vitamin B3, it improves cholesterol levels and lowers cardiovascular risks.

Zinc (Oxide) – Food additive to fortify its nutritional content.

How Does Viril X Work?

Viril X male sexual performance supplement is composed of ingredients that make it work and deliver satisfying results at the very end. It does this through boosting the production of testosterone in the body. Testosterone is the hormone in the body that is responsible of all male functionalities including individual physical appearance.

Testosterone is responsible for individual sexual drive and low levels of the hormone may be why you need a testosterone boosting supplement. In addition, these ingredients also promote healthy sexual relationship and improved* sexual health. At the same time, they ensure stamina, strong and higher sexual drive.

Although this T booster claims to be made of 21 different ingredients, it still doesn’t contain DAA, the latest breakthrough in Testosterone enhancement and available in only in few supplements like PrimeMale.

Besides, the best T supplements should also contain these 7 ingredients.

Viril X Side Effects

The manufacturer didn’t provide information on the possible side effects of using this product. Yet, some of its ingredients can result in discomforts.

American Ginseng can set off diarrhea, itching, insomnia, headache, and nervousness. In some people, it may trigger rapid heartbeat and increased or decreased blood pressure.

Tribulus Terrestris is safe when taken for a short period of time. Side effects include stomach pain, cramping, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, constipation, and difficulty in sleeping.

If you are diabetic, this product is probably not for you because tribulus terrestris can decrease blood sugar levels.

Bottomline

First of all, there are several websites which obviously promote this product. And they use images different from the one on the Dignity Biolabs website.

Also, some of them state that Viril X is made in the United Kingdom. Yet, the manufacturer’s official website doesn’t indicate that address.

In addition, some reviewers report different ingredient lists. It would make you think that maybe they received different products.

Finally, the information on the manufacturer is very limited. The address they provide is just a P.O. Box. One reviewer tried calling their phone number and discovered it is not even theirs.

Could it be that a T-booster with 21 ingredients is almost too good to be true? Is it really possible to pack all of it in one capsule? Or can it be a scam?

Chances are, even if they do include 21 different ingredients, they are using it in a proprietary blend, which makes it very difficult to find out actual quantities of the ingredients used. They can be very minimal or too low to cause any impact. You can read more about proprietary blends scams and why most Testosterone boosters don’t work.

Our recommendations for Testosterone enhancers are PrimeMale and Prosolution , they don’t use proprietary blends and list the exact quantities of ingredients.

Read more on how to chose a T booster.