Restoration PAC releases TV ad “Catastrophic” in U.S. Senate race in Wisconsin
NEWS RELEASE

YOUTUBE LINK: https://youtu.be/aMiB4pg46Eo

Contact: Dan Curry dan@deloscommunications.com

JULY 22 — Restoration PAC is getting involved in the pivotal U.S. Senate race in Wisconsin with a hard-hitting 60-second TV ad titled “Catastrophic” that spells out the folly of President Barack Obama’s nuclear deal with Iran.

The ad supports Republican incumbent Senator Ron Johnson, who believes the Obama administration fails to understand the dire threat that Iran poses to America and the world.

“History teaches us that weak deals with fanatical regimes bent on destruction of the West are worse than no deals,” said Doug Truax, founder and executive director of Restoration PAC and Restoration Action, Oak Brook, IL-based organizations. “America’s weakness on the world stage brings us closer to war, not peace. Ron Johnson understands this and Restoration PAC is supporting those who understand our history.”

Starting today, the ad is running in the key Wisconsin TV markets of Madison, Milwaukee and Green Bay.

Truax, a 2014 candidate for U.S. Senate in IL, is a West Point and Army Ranger School graduate and successful health care consulting entrepreneur. As a political newcomer, he gained 44 percent of the vote statewide against an established, self-funded candidate and has been described by a cable outlet as one of Illinois’ rising political stars.

He said Restoration PAC is focusing its efforts on making sure Republicans maintain control of the U.S. Senate in 2016. He said the PAC plans to get involved in other pivotal Senate races in order to elect conservative candidates who agree with Restoration’s Blueprint for the Restoration of America policy agenda.

Producing “Catastrophic” is award-winning ad-maker Rick Reed, who specializes in national security issues and whose Swift Boat Veterans for Truth ad campaign was pivotal in re-electing George W. Bush President in 2004.

Also participating in the project was noted message expert Frank Luntz, whose firm conducted a focus group that found widespread support for Ron Johnson’s strong stand for restoring America’s security leadership in the world.

The ad’s script is below:

CATASTROPHIC

IN DANGEROUS TIMES, THE AMERICAN PEOPLE DESERVE THE

FACTS. Iran is the #1 state sponsor of terrorism in the world. IRAN even played a role in helping the 9/11 killers. AND Iran’s radical Islamist LEADERS HAVE MADE IT

CLEAR: THE WORST IS YET TO COME. Iran is funding terrorism NOT JUST in the Middle East

BUT IN Africa, Asia, South America and RIGHT HERE in the

United States. Some of our leaders, like Ron Johnson, understand that

preventing Iran from getting the bomb is essential to

our safety. Others, like President Obama, insist on signing a

toothless agreement that makes us less safe. Economist Thomas Sowell said: “Clearing the way for

Iran to get nuclear bombs COULD be the most catastrophic

decision in human history.” Ron Johnson understands this. Visit RestorationPac.com

to support Johnson and leaders like him who will take

the action necessary to keep America safe.

Truax said Restoration PAC is raising money to run the ads in other markets in Wisconsin and other states with tightly contested U.S. Senate races.