Letting Go of the Status Quo
With six no-confidence votes from faculty at UW System schools and another from the UW Colleges’ Faculty Council of Senators from the 13 two-year colleges, I feel it’s time to set the record straight on tenure reform and hopefully, with professors getting their anger off their chests, perhaps they will listen.

We in the legislature want the best and brightest people to teach our students to become the best and brightest. We want our UW System graduates to succeed in their careers and life. We want the state to benefit from the wealth of knowledge within the university system and our businesses to employ these highly trained and educated individuals. People often refer to our UW Systems schools with pride saying they’re world-class institutions and we want them to stay that way.

It’s a simple concept. In order to move forward, you can’t stand still, rest on your laurels. You need to innovative, reform and find ways to improve. That means at the UW System, it’s time to let go of the status quo when it comes to tenure. By taking the tenure policies out of state statutes, we were able to give university leaders and their faculty more flexibility to offer the best product to students and the state. By working together, they came up with tenure policies that could work for both the UW System and its staff.

It’s important to point out that tenure still exists. Let me repeat that again. Tenure exists.

However, this tenure reform will hopefully mean that the “job for life” employment status and the status quo mentality will no longer exist. Tenure has proven to be ironclad job protections in the UW System and we have the numbers to prove it.

A review of employment records over the last two decades illustrate that only in a few rare, isolated cases, a tenured professor was dismissed. Records provided to the Speaker’s Office show only six tenured faculty members were fired for just cause in the last 20 years. That translates to .007 percent dismissal rate for cause in any given year. In comparison at the national level, it’s estimated that two-percent of tenured faculty are dismissed in a typical year. The odds of being let go for cause for UW System tenured faculty is three-hundred times less likely than their national peers.

The UW Extension defined tenure on its website as "an unlimited appointment which the University grants to faculty members who produce a consistent and high level of scholarship." The UW System has 4,560 tenured faculty and 1,772 employees more on the tenure track.

The Speaker’s Office review found that 60 percent who apply for tenure receive it. During the past school year, we learned that 201 professors received tenure in the UW System or an “unlimited appointment.”

Let’s put that job protection into perspective. You have a greater chance of getting a hole in one in golf than being fired from your UW System tenured position. Another way of looking at it: there are twice as many people in space currently than have been fired as tenured faculty by the UW. And the Chicago Bears have had more starting quarterbacks in the last 10 years than the total number of tenured faculty fired during the last two decades.

This type of job security job is nonexistent in the real world. There are no guarantees in life; if you don’t meet expectations or your position isn’t needed, the UW System should have the flexibility to make the right call. UW-Madison Athletics fired two head coaches this year. If it’s acceptable to let go a coach, why isn’t it okay to let go an underperforming professor?

As a product of the UW System and a former student regent, I want the best for our universities, colleges, students and the state. It’s unproductive to continue the back and forth of verbal jabs and no-confidence votes. UW System can continue to innovate, research, teach and influence the minds of tomorrow but it can’t do it effectively if we’re stuck in a perpetual state of protest. It’s time to refocus on the mission of the UW System. It’s not a novel idea but the Wisconsin Idea needs to be reexamined with 21st Century eyes with a forward approach for the future. And, I am confident that tenure reform will positively impact the state and every school in the System under the current leadership of President Ray Cross and the UW System Board of Regents.