Rhode Island General Assembly > Press Releases
News: Recent Press Releases Op-Ed Publications About the Legislative Press Bureau 2/3/2011 Sen. Sosnowski proposes lottery game to benefit Lyme disease prevention



Sen. V. Susan Sosnowski (D-Dist. 37, South Kingstown, New Shoreham) is proposing a unique way to raise money for tick-bite protection and Lyme disease prevention, research and outreach: a “Scratch-A-Tick” lottery game.



The legislation (2011-S0134) would authorize the state lottery division to create the instant-win ticket and would dedicate the proceeds from the first three months of sales to the University of Rhode Island’s Center for Vector-Borne Disease and the Tick Encounter Resource Center.



“Lyme disease is one of the fastest growing infectious diseases in the United States, and Rhode Island has the second-highest incidence of this disease in the country,” said Senator Sosnowski. “Wiping out Lyme disease can only be done by providing the public with information on how to avoid tick bites. It is my hope that the ‘Scratch-A-Tick’ will not only raise money for URI’s Center for Vector-Borne Disease, but will also raise awareness for Lyme disease prevention.”



According to the Center for Vector-Borne Disease, 68 percent of Rhode Islanders live in areas where they are likely to encounter deer ticks, the insects responsible for spreading the disease. Yet an estimated 86 percent of Rhode Islanders report that they don’t regularly employ any of the strategies available to reduce their likelihood of being bitten by a tick, like tucking pants into socks when working or playing outdoors or treating clothes with insect repellent.



The Center for Vector-Borne Disease runs a public-outreach initiative called the Tick Encounter Resource Center aimed at wiping out Lyme disease by providing the public with information on how to avoid tick bites. For information on the center and ways to prevent infection, visit www.tickencounter.org.



Senator Sosnowski’s bill has been referred to the Senate Committee on Special Legislation.







For more information, contact:

Shana Mancinho, Publicist

State House Room 20

Providence, RI 02903

(401) 222-2457