Rhode Island General Assembly > Press Releases
News: Recent Press Releases Op-Ed Publications About the Legislative Press Bureau 1/25/2011 Comprehensive sex offender bill introduced in House



STATE HOUSE – Legislation has been introduced in the House of Representatives to set sex offender registration and notification requirements in Rhode Island, move the responsibility of sex offender registry to the Rhode Island State Police and remove the subjectivity of the current offender Tier assessment system and replace it with an offense-based tier system.



Introduced by Rep. Peter G. Palumbo (D-Dist. 16, Cranston), the legislation, (2011-H5129), creates the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (SORNA), which complies with the federal Adam Walsh Child Protection and Safety Act of 2006. (The act was named for Adam Walsh, a boy who was abducted from a Florida mall and later found murdered.)



“The intent of this legislation is to strengthen Rhode Island laws regarding sex offender registration and notification, to make sure that any gaps in our laws are plugged and to make sure our state laws help strengthen the nationwide network of offender notification and registration,” said Representative Palumbo.



“Across the nation, there are nearly 500,000 registered sex offenders and at any one time about 100,000 of them are unaccounted for,” said Representative Palumbo, who co-chaired a legislative commission studying ways to improve and strengthen the state’s sex offender laws. “As long as there is one sex offender out there that we cannot account for, there is the potential for great harm, the potential for another victim.”



The Palumbo legislation – similar to a bill he introduced last year that was passed by the House but was not acted upon by the Senate -- repeals a section of state law dealing with sex offender registration and replaces it with a new, more comprehensive offender registration and community notification act.



The new legislation will require registered sex offenders to register and keep their registration current in the jurisdictions in which they live, work or go to school. It will require sex offenders to provide more extensive registration information (including phone numbers, residence addresses, temporary lodging information, professional licenses, vehicle information, criminal history, fingerprints, DNA).



Under the bill, incarcerated sex offenders must be registered before their release from imprisonment or, in the case of a non-imprisonment sentence, within three business days of sentencing for the registration offense. The bill also requires sex offenders to make periodic in person appearances to verify and update registration information (every year for 15 years for Tier I offenders; every 180 days for 25 years for Tier II offenders; every 90 days for the rest of their lives for Tier III offenders), and expands the amount of information available to the public regarding registered sex offenders.



The legislation will also move full responsibility of the sex offender registry and notification to the Rhode Island State Police/Department of Public Safety, putting all the functions under one agency. Currently, the State Police, Attorney General’s office, Department of Corrections and Parole Board have responsibilities under the various sex offender statutes.



“We have done a lot in the past few years in Rhode Island to strengthen our sex offender laws, and especially those involving crimes against children. But there are still gaps that need to be addressed,” he said. “This legislation closes those gaps, not only for those currently serving time for sex offenses but also those who have completed their incarceration or who are appealing their sex offender tier level, and those who re-enter the system through a subsequent criminal conviction.”



Approval of the SORNA legislation and its enactment into law is also of fiscal concern to the state, said Representative Palumbo. Federal enactment of the Adam Walsh Act required all state to comply with the provisions of SORNA. Those that failed to substantially implement SORNA by 2009 faced a mandatory 10 percent reduction in funding under the Byrne Justice Assistance Grant, which provides support for state programs in public safety, corrections, the judiciary and other areas.



Rhode Island had already been granted an extension on implementation until July of 2010, and the state reapplied for an extension until July, 2011. Fiscal year 2011 projected funding for Rhode Island under the Byrne Grant is $1.9 million.



In addition, the Rhode Island State Police has received a $203,000 grant from the U.S. Department of Justice to begin the implementation process, contingent upon enactment of the law this year.



Representative Palumbo spearheaded Rhode Island’s enactment of Megan’s Law, which requires the state’s parole board and courts to evaluate all sexual offenders leaving prison and determine the risk posed to the community, and also Jessica’s Law, which requires first-degree child molesters and Level 3 sex offenders to wear a global positioning system monitor.



“As comprehensive as this legislation is, it is still just about one thing – keeping people, and especially young people, safe from sexual offenders and predators,” said Representative Palumbo. “Our state has earned compliments for the work it has done in this area, but we can’t stop trying to make our laws better and keep our citizens safer.”



The Palumbo bill has been referred to the House Committee on Judiciary. It is co-sponsored by Rep. John G. Edwards (D-Dist. 70, Tiverton, Portsmouth), Rep. Gregory J. Schadone (D-Dist. 54, North Providence), Rep. Arthur J. Corvese (D-Dist. 55, North Providence) and Rep. Jon D. Brien (D-Dist. 50, Woonsocket).





For more information, contact:

Randall T. Szyba, Publicist

State House Room 20

Providence, RI 02903

(401) 222-2457