State police open criminal probe into Appomattox project failure
State police are investigating a failed Appomattox factory project that received $1.4 million in taxpayer money partly based on phony credentials posted on a company website.

Virginia State Police in recent weeks expanded an initial inquiry into Lindenburg Industry LLC to a criminal investigation, spokeswoman Corinne Geller said. The probe is assigned to one case agent in the Appomattox field office, Geller said.

Lindenburg missed a deadline earlier this month to repay a seven-figure grant from the Governor’s Opportunity Fund, and the state has sued the site consultant in the deal. Those developments followed an investigation by The Roanoke Times that revealed the bogus company website and the lack of vetting by the state’s economic development arm.

In late 2014, Virginia announced it would invest $1.4 million in plans by Lindenburg to manufacture industrial clean-air products in Appomattox, 20 miles east of Lynchburg. Lindenburg, whose Chinese principals said they would export the goods to China, pledged to invest $113 million in equipment and improvements at a former furniture plant and hire 349 employees at an average annual salary of $32,000.

Months passed without visible activity at the site. Lindenburg never retrofitted the factory or hired any workers. Bills piled up. Finally, in December, Lindenburg lost the plant in a foreclosure auction arranged by the site consultant to collect fees it claims the company owed.

The Roanoke Times’ investigation published in mid-January exposed lapses in the vetting of Lindenburg by the Virginia Economic Development Partnership and the agency’s heavy reliance on Development Advisors, a Charlotte, North Carolina-based site consultant, for information about the company.

Virginia’s legislature ordered a two-year review of the partnership by a state auditor. The partnership said it would enhance internal procedures to better vet companies seeking state money to locate or expand in Virginia.

In addition, the partnership contacted state police for help in learning whether “there was any fraud involved in the transaction,” agency general counsel Sandi McNinch has said.

In a civil filing, the partnership petitioned a judge in Appomattox Circuit Court to freeze $859,000 raised by the foreclosure sale. The partnership said it should receive the money instead of Development Advisors.

The site consultant opposed the action; Lindenburg did not. The case is marked “active” by court officials and awaits further review.

Martin Briley, the partnership’s president and CEO for the past four years, left the agency March 10. Chris Lumsden, the agency’s board chairman, said last week that Briley wasn’t fired.

“We just exercised our option within the agreement to terminate the relationship,” he said, referring to Briley’s employment contract, which permitted VEDP to discharge Briley at its option in exchange for a year’s base pay, most recently $299,250, and health benefits.

After a discussion of “the skill set that was going to be needed to maybe move the Virginia Economic Development Partnership in a different direction, which really involves collaboration, partnering, team building, building alliances, communicating, telling the story well, we just felt as we reset the VEDP going forward, that Martin was not the right leader for VEDP going forward,” Lumsden said. “It was nothing that he did wrong. Our feeling was that we needed new leadership as we reset VEDP going forward.”

Lumsden said he hopes the board can name a successor before the end of the year.