The Budget Committee Republicans
Contents



Introduction: A Choice of Two Futures

Today's Major Domestic Challenges



A Roadmap for America's Future: Description of the Legislation

Appendix I: Summary of the Legislation Appendix II: Summary of Estimates

[Click Here to View Entire PDF]

[To view Footnotes, please refer to the PDF provided above]

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

INTRODUCTION

A Choice of Two Futures

Rarely before have the alternatives facing America been so starkly defined.

For the past year, Washington’s leaders have taken an already unsustainable budget outlook and made it far worse. They have exploited Americans’ genuine economic anxieties to justify an unrelenting and wide-ranging expansion of government. Their agenda has included, among other things, a failed, debt-financed economic “stimulus”; an attempt to control the Nation’s energy sector; increasing domination of housing and financial markets; the use of taxpayer dollars to seize part ownership of two nearly bankrupt auto makers; and, of course, the planned takeover of Americans’ health care, already heavily burdened, manipulated, and distorted by government spending and regulation. This domineering government brings taxes, rules, and mandates; generates excessive levels of spending, deficits, and debt; leads to economic stagnation and declining standards of living; and fosters a culture in which self-reliance is a vice and dependency a virtue – and as a result, the entire country weakens from within.

Increasingly, Americans are rejecting this approach, and for good reason. But the status quo is not acceptable either. The Federal Government’s current fiscal path is unsustainable: it leads to unprecedented levels of spending and debt that will overwhelm the budget, smother the economy, weaken America’s competitiveness in the 21st century global economy, and threaten the survival of the government’s major benefit programs. The President and congressional Majority are only hastening America’s march toward this reckoning, adding to trillions of dollars worth of unfunded liabilities, and accelerating the erosion of Americans’ health care and retirement security. Their “progressivism” ironically points backwards – to a future in which America’s best century is the past century.

There is another choice, as reflected by the proposal described in this report: A Roadmap for America’s Future. It is a comprehensive, alternative approach to the Nation’s most pressing domestic priorities. Specifically, the plan addresses the following:

▫ Health Care. It provides universal access to affordable health coverage, not by expanding government, but by reinforcing the role of consumers – patients – in a truly competitive marketplace. In conjunction with this, the plan takes on the necessary task of restructuring the government’s medical entitlements, making them sustainable for the long term.

▫ Retirement Security. It saves and strengthens Social Security, making the program sustainable for the long run, and helping expand investments needed for economic growth.

▫ Tax Policy. It offers an alternative to today’s needlessly complex and inefficient tax code, providing the option of a simplified mechanism that better promotes and rewards work, saving, and investment.

▫ Job Training. It helps the Nation’s workforce prepare for success in the global economy by transforming 49 job training programs, scattered across eight agencies, into a flexible, dynamic program focused on results, and accompanied by clear measures of transparency and accountability. The plan requires the development of performance measures, and gives each State the option to consolidate funding into one program, if such an approach can be shown to improve outcomes and achieve job training goals.

This plan is not simply a slimmer version of the “progressive” ideology. It is a true alternative, and a complete legislative proposal consisting of specific policies supported by Congressional Budget Office estimates of its fiscal and economic consequences. More important, it is based on a fundamentally different vision from the one now prevailing in Washington. It focuses government on its proper role; it restrains government spending, and thus limits the size of government itself; it rejuvenates the vibrant market economy that made America the envy of the world; and it restores an American character rooted in individual initiative, entrepreneurship, and opportunity – qualities that make each American’s pursuit of personal destiny a net contribution to the Nation’s common good as well. In short, it is built on the enduring truths from which America’s Founders established this great and exceptional Nation.

This proposal does not attempt to abandon commitments Americans established over the past century, or to dismantle government. It recognizes that government has a necessary role in supporting the institutions through which Americans live their lives, and in providing a safety net for those who face financial or other hardships. But it rests on the conviction that government’s principal role is to maintain the freedoms through which individuals can pursue their own destinies. As Jefferson put it: “A wise and frugal government, which shall restrain men from injuring one another, which shall leave them otherwise free to regulate their own pursuits of industry and improvement, shall not take from the mouth of labor the bread it has earned. This is the sum of good government.”

The balance of this introduction describes these two futures in detail. The remainder of the report describes the principal domestic challenges through which this choice appears at present, and then presents a full description and explanation of the policies embraced in this legislation.

AN EXPANDING CULTURE OF DEPENDENCY

In 1930, just after the great stock market crash, Federal Government spending totaled just 3.4 percent of gross domestic product [GDP]. As late as 1935, the cumulative spending of State and local governments still exceeded total outlays from Washington. The New Deal created programs designed to aid an economically devastated country, and to try to put people back to work. Some were significant achievements. Some longer-term administrative measures have led to a growth of bureaucracies that over time weakened Americans’ control of the Federal Government. They also planted the seeds for a gradual change in thinking about the government’s limited powers and mission in its relationship with the people. The effect has been to increase, step by step, the extent to which Americans depend on their government – not only for assistance during temporary hardships, but for their livelihoods, housing, savings, and means of retirement.

These so-called “progressive” reforms had well-intentioned aims as they unfolded in the Great Society programs of the 1960s. But addressing the challenges of modern society with a steady expansion of government brought its own unintended burdens – and they are looming larger every day. One is that public programs have extended their reach into America’s economy and Americans’ lives. Further, the government’s largest entitlement programs, now deeply entrenched, are driving an unsustainably rapid rate of spending growth – one that threatens to overwhelm the Federal budget and smother the economy.

Equally troubling has been the effect on national character. Until recently, Americans were known and admired everywhere for their hopeful determination to assume responsibility for the quality of their own lives; to rely on their own work and initiative; and to improve opportunities for their children to prosper in the future. But over time, Americans have been lured into viewing government – more than themselves, their families, their communities, their faith – as their main source of support; they have been drawn toward depending on the public sector for growing shares of their material and personal well-being. The trend drains individual initiative and personal responsibility. It creates an aversion to risk, sapping the entrepreneurial spirit necessary for growth, innovation, and prosperity. In turn, it subtly and gradually suffocates the creative potential for prosperity.

Now America is approaching a “tipping point” beyond which the Nation will be unable to change course – and this will lead to disastrous fiscal consequences, and an erosion of economic prosperity and the American character itself. The current administration and Congress are propelling the Nation to the brink of this precipice.

The consequences of this growing culture of dependency, and its implications for America’s future, are described from four perspectives: 1) public policy; 2) fiscal policy; 3) economics; and 4) the American character.

Public Policy: A Larger and More Intrusive Government

Throughout 2009, the President and Congress pursued another great surge of “progressive” government expansion – one comparable in size and scope to the New Deal or the Great Society; and they exploited a genuine economic crisis to justify this ambitious program. Among its principal components have been the following:

▫ Fiscal 'Status.' With the slippery promise of “saving or creating” three-and-a-half million jobs, the Majority passed a $787-billion “stimulus” bill that failed to halt the rise in unemployment, but did include numerous policy changes consistent with the big-government agenda. By expanding Medicaid – a program in desperate need of reform – and launching a new “comparative effectiveness” health program, the bill started the movement away from patient-centered medical care and toward the planned government takeover of the health care sector. The “stimulus” also heaped another $1 trillion in debt onto the taxpayers’ already large burden.

The legislation rested on the Keynesian-inspired notion that government can somehow “manage” a free-market economy, commanding it to grow with heavy doses of borrowed money. All the measure really did was set off a weak and temporary spike in consumer spending, while unemployment continued to rise. Worse, the heavy borrowing used, unsuccessfully, to “prime” the economic pump drained resources the economy will need for sustained growth. Yet the House refused to accept reality, and in December 2009 poured another $150 billion into this failed economic doctrine.

▫ TARP extension. The Troubled Asset Relief Program [TARP] was intended to thaw credit markets that seized up during the financial crisis – and it succeeded in its short-term objective. But it has now morphed into a $700-billion fund for whatever interventions the administration desires. These have included buying shares of two U.S. auto companies, launching new housing programs, and bailing out large insurance companies – in other words, effecting further transformation of America’s free-market economy.

In the latest version of the administration’s exploitation of TARP for purposes other than stabilizing financial markets, the House – with the President’s blessing – claimed to offset $75 billion in additional “stimulus” spending with a reduction in TARP authority. This move ignored carefully wrought statutory instructions to protect the taxpayer and not use authority to offset new spending. The package further enshrined TARP as Washington’s latest slush fund.

▫ Cap and Trade. This proposal effectively establishes a government takeover of most of the energy market. The legislation requires companies responsible for more than 86 percent of U.S. energy resources to obtain new emissions permits from the Federal Government to stay in business, includes a series of new mandates on the production and use of energy, and expands bureaucracies – or creates new ones – to oversee this program. Yet it fails to boost two of the most reliable sources of clean energy: nuclear and hydro-power.

By sharply increasing the cost of energy, the bill imposes substantial tax increases that will be absorbed largely by middle-income earners – breaking the President’s promise not to raise taxes for those making less than $250,000 per year. Although the measure contains a complex scheme of allowances, tax credits, and tax rebates that attempt to reduce the impact on households, the bottom line is inescapable: the higher energy costs will have to be absorbed by someone; and the “someone” will be the U.S. taxpayer. Meanwhile, in contrast to the President’s pledge to “change the way Washington works,” the legislation gives away 83 percent of its carbon allowances to energy- and climate-related special interests, at the expense of U.S. taxpayers.

Yet after all this, the benefits of cap-and-trade remain highly doubtful. Some studies show the scheme might move temperatures by no more than a fraction of a degree by the end of this century – which would make little difference on whatever climate effects result from greenhouse gas emissions. There are no effective limits on emissions by foreign countries, such as China and India, that are responsible for the fastest current growth in greenhouse gases.

▫ Financial Market Legislation. In a single stroke late last year, the House passed the most significant overhaul of the Nation’s financial system since the creation of Depression-era banking and securities laws.

The new legislation expands the role of government in the financial arena on multiple levels for institutions and individuals. Instead of forcing insolvent banks to close down, and allowing market discipline to deter imprudent decisions, the bill further enshrines the notion of “too big to fail,” and insulates certain firms from the fear of bankruptcy resulting from poor management. It gives a new government council the power to designate which large, interconnected institutions fall into this category. It also establishes a permanent bailout fund of up to $200 billion – in essence, a “TARP II” – which will exaggerate market distortions, artificially lowering the price of risks taken by large firms and by those who invest in them. Such protection given to big banks creates further disadvantages to the smaller banks – leaving them “too small to succeed.”

The financial bill creates a new government agency designed to safeguard consumers from risk-taking for a broad array of products, from mortgages to credit cards. But ironically, the new bureaucracy will harm the very consumers it seeks to protect: by writing far-reaching rules and restricting risk, it will limit consumer choices, ration credit, and hamper individuals’ ability to make investment decisions. Another provision in the bill would limit institutions’ ability to issue debt to raise capital, and would disrupt bond markets by requiring senior, secured creditors to take a 10-percent “haircut” on the short-term bonds in the event of failure, disrupting a key tenet of debt financing, and making it more expensive and difficult for institutions to raise capital.

▫ Housing Markets. For years, the Federal National Mortgage Association [Fannie Mae] and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation [Freddie Mac] enjoyed the special status of “Government-Sponsored Enterprise” [GSE] – a title carrying the implicit guarantee that Washington stood behind every loan they securitized. When in 2008 they were taken into conservatorship – along with their $5.3-trillion portfolios – the taxpayer guarantee became explicit. Private sector participants in the market, most unable to compete after the housing bubble burst, were squeezed out.

Mortgage origination has now become a public oligopoly, with the government controlling 94 percent of the market. Fannie’s and Freddie’s market share has grown from 39 percent in 2006 to 72 percent in 2009, while that of the Federal Housing Administration’s has leapt from 3 percent in 2006 to 22 percent in 2009. In addition, the Federal Reserve has been a major force in suppressing interest rates and providing liquidity in the housing market. In 2009, it agreed to purchase up to $1.25 trillion in agency mortgage-backed securities [MBS], or at least 80 percent of Fannie’s and Freddie’s new MBS issuance.

Instead of shrinking the housing giants and reducing the risk on the Federal Government’s balance sheet, the administration, on 24 December 2009, increased Treasury’s commitment to Fannie and Freddie to unlimited amounts for the next 3 years – and has allowed for expansion of the firms’ trading portfolios. The administration also has placed Fannie and Freddie at the center of its loan modification and refinancing efforts, further deteriorating the GSEs’ financial health at taxpayers’ expense.

▫ Health Care. The most ideologically driven policy the President and Congress have pursued threatens to further encumber and distort America’s health care sector, and intrude even more deeply into this most valued, most sensitive, and most personal of services. It is the clearest and most pervasive manipulation of Americans’ individual lives; and its overbearing nature is reflected by its more than 2,000 pages of legislative text.

The legislation increases government’s leverage in deciding which medical treatments are worth paying for and which are not. It imposes government control over physicians’ medical decisions, and causes private-sector insurers to limit coverage in line with the government’s choices. Whether directly or not, it will effectively bind all Americans to a “one-size-fits-all” national managed care program that disregards personal choice and compassionate care.

If enacted, the bill’s rating restrictions, coverage mandates, and benefit requirements will halt innovation and drive individualized health products out of the market. It will disqualify Health Savings Accounts, which provide more than eight million people with access to low-cost health care. It will cause 64 percent of seniors in Medicare Advantage to lose their coverage over the next 5 years, and would subject plans to approval by a new health care bureaucracy, with the authority to audit, review, and penalize any health plan that does not comply with the rules set by this Washington-based office.

The health bill activates the “Comparative Effectiveness Research” program, giving the Federal Government even greater leverage in deciding which medical treatments are worth paying for and which are not. This will inevitably impose government control over physicians’ medical decisions, and cause private-sector insurers to limit coverage in line with the government’s choices. Further, while proponents assert that providers will be able to negotiate rates with the government, they will do so under a heavily regulated regime; and there is nothing to prevent this from becoming a take-it-or-leave-it, price-setting system. Put simply, prices will be dictated to health care providers at rates determined by a cost-wary Federal Government.

These are some of the major elements of the government expansion envisioned by Washington’s current leaders. Put simply, they all contribute to an extensive and deliberate power grab in which government seizes ever more of the economy – and controls more of Americans’ lives.

Fiscal Consequences: An Unsustainable Path

The fiscal impact of the President’s policies – which he and the Congress are seeking to implement step by step – is a level of spending, deficits, and debt unprecedented outside of wars. According to the Congressional Budget Office [CBO], the President’s policies will increase spending to $5.1 trillion by 2019, nearly a full quarter of the Nation’s economic resources. His deficits never fall below $633 billion in the next 10 years, and exceed $1 trillion by the end of the decade.

Debt as a share of the economy is projected to exceed 60 percent this year (2010) – greater than the 2009 level, which was the highest in 50 years – and will reach 82 percent of GDP by the end of the next decade under the administration’s policies. (In nominal dollars, debt held by the public will triple over the next 10 years.) The U.S. has not seen debt at these expected levels since the end of World War II. Even the countries of the European Union, hardly exemplars of fiscal rectitude, are required to keep their debt levels below 60 percent of GDP.

All this would be bad enough on its own. But it only adds to a fiscal crisis already well under way. The status quo is unsustainable and unacceptable.

For several decades, fiscal experts have warned of the untenable and overwhelming nature of the Federal Government’s budgetary trends. The threat comes entirely from domestic entitlement programs, as clearly reflected in CBO’s biennial report, The Long-Term Budget Outlook, the most recent of which was released in June 2009. The report, looking forward 75 years, shows that within the next several decades, the government’s current fiscal path will lead to catastrophic levels of debt, even if Congress imposed substantial tax increases.

Extension of Current Fiscal Policies. In a scenario that essentially extends today’s underlying fiscal policies, CBO assumes the 2001 and 2003 tax relief provisions and alternative minimum tax [AMT] “patches” are permanently extended. As a result, revenues grow slightly faster than the economy and equal 22 percent of GDP by 2080.

The projection also assumes Medicare physician reimbursement payments will track the historic growth of Medicare rather than the “sustained growth formula” [SGR], which has in recent years called for steep reductions in those payments. (Congress has repeatedly boosted physician payments, an action called the “doc fix.”)

The scenario projects that Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid will grow faster than the economy. But CBO also makes an artificial downward adjustment in the future growth rates of the two health entitlements. Without this adjustment – applying historical rates of health care spending growth – Medicare and Medicaid spending as a share of the economy (currently 4.9 percent of GDP) would double in 20 years, triple in 30 years, and equal the size of today’s entire government in less than 50 years. Other spending is allowed to grow with GDP rather than inflation after 2011.

It is noteworthy that even without deliberate tax increases, tax revenue as a share of the economy is still projected to grow – rising from 15.5 percent of GDP in 2009, to 19.9 percent in 2050, and to 21.9 percent in 2080. For comparison, Federal revenues peaked at 20.9 percent of GDP in 2000. Yet even with revenues at historically high levels, spending still outpaces revenue by significant amounts, leading to more government borrowing and debt, and still higher interest payments.



CLICK HERE TO VIEW TABLE

To summarize:

▫ Spending. Even with no legislated expansion of government programs other than the “doc fix,” primary (non-interest) Federal spending grows to levels unprecedented in peacetime, despite the assumed moderation in health care spending growth. For instance, in just 40 years, by 2050, this spending would exceed 28 percent of GDP.

▫ Deficits. Because spending outpaces revenue by increasing amounts, budget deficits rise to staggering levels – reaching 22.2 percent of GDP in 2050, more than the entire Federal budget in 2008.

▫ Interest Payments. The growing gap between spending and revenue leads to increased government borrowing. That will result in expanding government interest payments, causing total spending to exceed 42 percent of GDP by 2050.

▫ Debt. The path also will drive debt held by the public to catastrophic levels – more than three times the size of the economy by 2050, and more than seven times by 2080.

Also noteworthy is that substantial tax increases do not solve the problem. CBO has projected that even if all the 2001 and 2003 tax relief provisions expired in 2011 as scheduled, and the alternative minimum tax were not indexed for inflation in the future – meaning it would reach 45 percent of households by 2035 (compared with 3 percent now), and 70 percent by 2080 – spending would still outpace revenue by increasing amounts, leading to growing deficits, debt, and interest payments. One assessment of this kind of fiscal policy – which calls for tax increases of roughly $3 trillion over the next 10 years – comes from the Brookings-Heritage Fiscal Seminar, a group of policy experts spanning the ideological spectrum:

[R]estoring tax rates to pre-2001 levels will not close the gap between spending and revenues. . . . Even raising revenues as a percent of GDP to European levels – levels that are unprecedented in the United States – will not be sufficient. If the wedge between spending and revenues attributable to social insurance programs continues to grow, taxes would have to be raised continuously and would eventually cripple the economy.

The Fiscal Gap. CBO quantifies the degree of long-term budget shortfalls using a concept called the “fiscal gap.” It is a present-value measure that reflects the excess of Federal spending over revenue during a given time period. It represents the extent to which the government would need to immediately and permanently raise tax revenues, cut spending, or use some mix of both to make the government’s debt the same size – relative to the size of the economy – at the end of that period as it was at the beginning.

Table 2 below shows the results of CBO’s fiscal gap analysis under current fiscal policies, with revenues holding at 19.9 percent of GDP. Once again the conclusion is clear: projected levels of spending are not only unsustainable, they also are the primary culprit behind expected future budget imbalances.

CLICK HERE TO VIEW TABLE



Under these estimates, the fiscal gap in 2033 is 5.4 percent of GDP. The figure essentially means that, on average, spending is expected to exceed revenue by the equivalent of 5.4 percent of GDP throughout the next 25 years. To close the fiscal gap – or to put it another way, to keep the debt from growing larger relative to GDP – Congress would need either to raise revenues or to cut spending by the equivalent of 5.4 percent of GDP immediately and permanently. This amount is more than the government now spends for all of national defense, or all of Social Security; and the gap worsens after that.

In fact, revenues actually are projected to rise higher than 19.9 percent of GDP, even if the 2001 and 2003 tax relief provisions are retained. Revenues are expected to exceed their peak of 20.9 percent of GDP, achieved in 2000, rising to 21.9 percent of GDP (or to 25.9 percent under the scenario in which taxes increase as scheduled under current law. But even these higher revenue levels will be far outstripped by spending increases. The growing debt that would result would be unsustainable for both the budget and the economy. As CBO put it:

The large amounts of debt that would accumulate . . . imply that the government would have to spend increasing amounts to pay interest on that debt. The growth of debt would lead to a vicious cycle in which the government had to issue ever-larger amounts of debt in order to pay ever-higher interest charges.

CBO has noted that if the fiscal gap were closed by raising marginal tax rates, “incentives to work and save would be reduced and economic growth would slow.” When asked to evaluate the economic impact of closing the fiscal gap solely through increases in marginal tax rates, CBO concluded:

With no economic feedbacks taken into account and under an assumption that raising marginal tax rates was the only mechanism used to balance the budget, tax rates would have to more than double. The tax rate for the lowest bracket would have to be increased from 10 percent to 25 percent; the tax rate on incomes in the current 25-percent bracket would have to be increased to 63 percent; and the tax rate of the highest bracket would have to be raised from 35 percent to 88 percent. Such tax rates would significantly reduce economic activity and would create serious problems with tax avoidance and tax evasion. Revenues would probably fall significantly short of the amount needed to finance the growth of spending; therefore, tax rates at such levels would probably not be feasible.

Unfunded Liabilities. Another way of viewing the government’s disastrous budgetary situation is by looking at its fiscal position the way a private company would. To do so, analysts focus on the “unfunded liabilities” of the Federal Government’s major benefit programs. These liabilities reflect the excess of projected spending in these programs over the amount of revenue currently estimated to be available for them.

The problem is most acute in Medicare. Like Social Security, Medicare faces the daunting demographic challenge of supporting the baby boomers as they retire. But its much larger problem is that of medical costs, which are rising at roughly double the rate of growth in the economy. Today Medicare has an unfunded liability of $38 trillion over the next 75 years (see Figure 1). This means that the Federal Government would have to set aside $38 trillion today to cover future benefits for the three generations of Americans: retirees, workers, and children. This translates to a burden of about $335,350 per U.S. household. Moreover, the problem worsens rapidly: in just the next 5 years, by 2014, Medicare’s unfunded liability is projected to grow to $52 trillion – or about $458,900 per household.

When Social Security and Medicare are taken together, the total unfunded liability is

$43 trillion, or about $379,475 per household (see Figure 2). In the next

5 years, that total will grow to $57 trillion, or $500,414 per household.

Without fundamental changes, the government would have to finance these obligations with higher taxes, higher debt, or a combination of the two. Either way, the results would be crippling for the U.S. economy: they would entail shifting unprecedented amounts of economic resources away from growth-generating activities of the private sector:

[A]bsent a significant rise in revenue beyond the historical level of GDP, spending on Social Security, Medicare, and interest on the debt could squeeze out all other areas of the budget. Taxes could, in principle, be increased to cover these costs, but the unprecedented tax levels required would have an extremely negative impact on employment, wage growth, and our ability to compete internationally. Borrowing to pay for the programs, on the other hand, would lead to such high deficits that the debt would be unsustainable.

Debt. As noted, even if Congress and the President adopted huge tax increases – as much as $3 trillion over the next 10 years – government spending would still outpace this huge revenue increase. The result will be increasing government borrowing and debt. The accumulating debt will increasingly crowd out more productive private-sector investment, and thereby squeeze capital formation.

That in turn will lead to productivity declines and lower rates of real economic growth, materially affecting living standards. The U.S. already relies on foreign investors to finance about half of the Federal debt. As this debt rises, these investors will come to realize that the path of the deficit was unsustainable. As a result, foreign investors will likely reduce their purchases of U.S. securities, which could cause a reduction in the exchange rate of the dollar; interest rates could rise, and consumer prices would face upward pressure. With higher interest rates, sharp inflationary pressures, and a mix of fundamentals that will lower business profits, the stock market also would decline.

In short, the debt arising from government spending trends is sacrificing the prosperity of future generations. This trend is in place now, under current laws, and is inevitable without a fundamental transformation of America’s domestic programs and spending. The current administration and Congress have not only ignored this crisis, but are hastening its approach with policies that vastly increase Federal Government spending.

Economic Consequences: Losing the American Legacy

The longstanding American economic tradition is simple: work to fulfill one’s potential today, and make tomorrow better for the next generation. But the government’s current fiscal path has put that legacy very much in doubt; and the added spending and debt sought by Washington’s current leaders only make matters worse..

The debt impact described above reflects only the macro-economic consequences of the current fiscal trend. The effect on personal standards of living will be devastating, and it will be felt as those born today are completing college and beginning their careers. By 2050, workers and families will begin seeing the growth in their wages and incomes erode. Standards of living will begin to stagnate, and then decline in real terms. By 2058, the economy enters a free-fall, beyond which the catastrophe cannot be measured: CBO cannot model the impact because debt rises to levels the economy cannot support.

CBO also concluded that financing this unrestrained rate of Federal spending with higher marginal tax rates yielded results similar to those from financing it with debt: over the long run, the economy cannot sustain the tax rates needed to finance this spending. CBO focused on three points in time: 2030, 2050, and 2080. Analysts found that by 2080, income tax rates (individual and corporate rates) would have to more than double to fund the projected spending path. Specifically, the current 10-percent income tax bracket would rise to 25 percent, and the current middle bracket of 25 percent would have to increase to 63 percent. The current top rate of 35 percent would rise to 88 percent. These tax rates would end up sinking the economy, CBO concluded.

These rates also would more than double the income tax burden on the average family. Today, a family of four with a median income of roughly $66,000 pays slightly more than $3,100 in individual income taxes; applying the high-tax scenario to today’s dollars, this family’s income tax bill would jump to $7,750 – an increase of $4,650 (and this figure does not include payroll taxes).

This is the outlook under current fiscal policies; the expansions sought by Washington’s current leaders will hasten the reckoning.

Erosion of American Character

During the 20th century, America created a safety net for those suffering hard times. Americans established the principle of retirement security through private savings, pensions, and the Social Security Program. In the 1960s, the government created health care programs for retirees, and those less well off.

These missions are not in question. Reasonable minds differ about the extent to which government should be the main provider of these benefits. But the issue is becoming moot: the major entitlement programs have expanded beyond the government’s ability to sustain them in the future. Trying to do so will bankrupt the country, and deprive the next generation of retirees the promised services for which they worked, and to which they contributed, all their lives.

More ruinous in the long run is the extent to which the “safety net” has come to enmesh more and more Americans – reaching into middle incomes and higher – so that growing numbers have come to rely on government, not themselves, for growing shares of their income and assets. By this means, government increasingly dictates how Americans live their lives; they are not only wards of the state, but also its subjects, increasingly directed in their behavior by the government’s “compassion.” But dependency drains individual character, which in turn weakens American society. The process suffocates individual initiative and transforms self-reliance into a vice and government dependency into a virtue. The Nation becomes a sort of vast Potemkin Village in which the most important elements – its people – are depleted by a government that increasingly “takes care” of them, and makes ever more of their decisions for them. They take more from society than they provide for themselves, which corrodes society itself, from the inside out. The environment also becomes ripe for exploitation and control by the few who remain “ambitious.”

If the government continues following the “progressive” ideology now prevailing in Washington, America will increasingly resemble a European welfare-state – a society in which the majority of the people pay little or no taxes but grow dependent on government benefits; where tax reduction is impossible because more people have a stake in the welfare state than in free enterprise; where permanent high unemployment is a way of life; and where the spirit of risk-taking is smothered by a thick web of regulations and mandates from an all-providing centralized government.

The U.S. already has drawn perilously close to this “tipping point.” The Tax Foundation estimates that today 60 percent of Americans receive more in benefits and services from the government than they pay in taxes. The President’s fiscal agenda exacerbates this problem, raising the net reliance on government from 60 percent to 70 percent. Another analysis shows that from 1950 through 2007, the share of the population reliant on the government rose from 28.7 percent to 58.2 percent (see Figure 3). The study predicted that even without enactment of legislation such as cap-and-trade and health care, the share of the population dependent on the government will rise to 67.3 percent by 2018.

In the past, Democrats and Republicans, progressives and conservatives, understood the threat to the American character from uncontrolled government and redistribution programs. Even while developing his New Deal measures in the Great Depression, President Roosevelt – in words later repeated by President Reagan – warned:

The lessons of history, confirmed by the evidence immediately before me, show conclusively that continued dependence upon relief induces a spiritual and moral disintegration fundamentally destructive to the national fiber. To dole out relief in this way is to administer a narcotic, a subtle destroyer of the human spirit. . . . It is in violation of the traditions of America.

Now America is drawing toward a “tipping point” for this culture of dependency. It is a line that, once crossed, precludes any likelihood of turning back.

Conclusion

This is the path on which America is now embarked. It creates a government that grows in size, scope, and influence to a magnitude unprecedented in peacetime. It generates unsustainable levels of spending and deficits, leading to a vicious cycle of unmanageable and ever-growing debt. This drags down the economy, causing standards of living to fall, leaving the next generation – for the first time in American history – worse off.

At the heart of all this is a growth of dependency on government, which erodes self-reliance and individual responsibility – and thus weakens America from the inside out.

BACK FROM THE BRINK: A ROADMAP FOR AMERICA’S FUTURE

But there is a choice. To pull back from the culture of dependency and its hazards requires a bold change of course. This proposal, A Roadmap for America’s Future, is steered by the same compass that guided America’s Founders – a restoration of the self-evident truths enshrined in America’s most fundamental principles:

▫ As declared by America’s Founders, the “laws of Nature and of Nature’s God” are the surest touchstone for a just and free Nation.

▫ That all human beings are created with equal natural rights – to live, to be free, to acquire property and other means of seeking happiness, fulfilling human potential and satisfaction in one’s achievements. The very idea of “equal rights” implies that individuals’ results should differ from one another, because “justice” or “fairness” requires that each individual obtains what each has earned and merited.

▫ That the great purpose of government is to secure these natural rights: protecting each person’s life, liberty, and freedom to pursue happiness is its high mission, true to America’s founding. When government strays and expands beyond this limited mission, it does so at the expense of the people and the other institutions of American culture through which they live.

But as noted earlier, this is not a call to dismantle government. Rather, the vision of this plan reflects a view expressed by President Reagan more than a quarter century ago: “It is not my intention to do away with government. It is, rather, to make it work – work with us, not over us; to stand by our side, not ride on our back. Government can and must provide opportunity, not smother it; foster productivity, not stifle it.”

The Founders enshrined in the U.S. Constitution the principles of a government drawing its legitimacy from the consent of the governed, of freedom, and of leaving future generations better off – the second and third of which are best captured by the phrase to “secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity.”

The Founders also understood the importance and value of free enterprise. In addition to the Declaration of Independence, the year 1776 saw the publication of Adam Smith’s treatise The Wealth of Nations, which argued in part that the “system of natural liberty,” or free markets in commerce, would vastly increase national wealth. The Founders saw Smith not only as an economic thinker, but as a moral philosopher whose other great work was The Theory of Moral Sentiments. They were just as committed to an American economics of freedom as they were to American moral greatness. In Federalist 12, Hamilton wrote: “The prosperity of commerce is now perceived and acknowledged by all enlightened statesmen to be the most useful as well as the most productive source of national wealth, and has accordingly become a primary object of their political cares.”

Economic arrangements – systems of commerce, however large or small – are as important to the organization of societies as are governments. That is why some of the greatest political and economic thinkers – Weber, Durkheim, Hayek, Friedman, and others – examined economic and social systems as a starting point for evaluating their politics. History has shown that politically free societies demand free markets, and vice versa: each validates and reinforces the other. It is this combination of political liberty and free enterprise that made America the world’s economic leader in the 20th century.

The attack on economic freedom has always revolved around its moral standing: the system is blamed for promoting greed, dishonesty, materialism, social Darwinism, and indifference to society’s most vulnerable. Such critics express their wish for the supposed higher morality of collectivist forms of government. With the demise of the Soviet Marxist experiment 20 years ago, the appeal has shifted to European-style socialism, with its redistribution of resources. But no collectivist approach has ever come close, over the long run, to matching free-market democracy’s ability to produce and create widespread prosperity – and there is genuine, and often overlooked, moral virtue in this:

It may have been John Locke (1632-1704) who first articulated the new possibility for economic organization. Locke observed that a field of, say, strawberries, highly favored by nature, left to itself, might produce what seemed to be an abundance of strawberries. Subject to cultivation and care by practical intelligence, however, such a field might be made to produce not simply twice but tenfold as many strawberries.

Human productivity, through the cultivation of resources, fulfills nature’s promise: “There was born in Locke’s vision a novel and invigorating sense of the human vocation. . . . The vocation of the human being came to seem ennobled. . . . to be inventive, prudent, farseeing, hardworking.” Free markets and private property promote this vocation by rewarding individual initiative; and individuals’ productivity benefits the entire society.

The prosperity that market freedom produces offers non-material benefits as well. First, it creates expanding opportunities so that no individual or family is bound to their circumstances: they can advance, they can improve their conditions, through their own efforts. Only a growing economy can create the opportunities in which personal advancement can become a reality.

Second, such growth helps maintain individuals’ confidence and trust in the system of political freedom to which they belong: “[L]egitimacy flows from the belief of all individuals that they can better their condition. This belief can be realized only under conditions of economic growth. Liberty requires expanse and openness.”

Nevertheless, government does have important roles. Government must secure property rights, enforce laws that protect individual freedoms and personal security, and provide for the society’s defense. It can play a useful role in providing for needed public works. It must also ensure a safety net, maintained by government if necessary, for those facing financial or other hardships.

Less obvious is that it is up to government to ensure the maintenance of a competitive, free market system. The participants will always seek advantages over their competitors – even through anti-competitive means (monopolies, trade barriers, and so on) – and only the government can prevent this. While government should limit itself to maintaining the rules of the game – not choosing winners and losers – it should maintain those rules with conviction: it is government’s responsibility to uphold the principles of free and competitive markets.

The discussion below describes the effect of these understandings, these First Principles, on public policy, fiscal policy, the economy, and the American character.

Public Policy: Limited Government

Often lost in the “size-of-government” debate is that limited government does not mean weak government. When government is limited to a smaller number of tasks, it can do them well. Limiting government leaves more room for the exercise of economic freedom, and greater vitality in the other key institutions through which Americans live, including family, community, vocation, and faith. When government expands, it encroaches on one or more of these institutions, as expressed, in economic terms, as follows:

Grover Cleveland once asked, “If the government supports the people, who will support the government?” His meaning was this: The government is wholly dependent upon tax receipts (or occasionally other types of payments) for its revenues. It is a nonsensical reversal of roles for the people to be dependent upon the government for their material well-being. To put it yet another way, the government produces no goods; rather, it consumes some portion of the goods taken from the people. It can only play a larger role by increasing the portion that it takes and thus reducing the amount available to the people generally.

The purpose of limiting government is to enhance and strengthen the role of these fundamental institutions, resulting in greater prosperity and happiness.

The strategy of A Roadmap for America’s Future applies this vision to the major domestic challenges facing America. The policies are described in detail later in this report. To summarize:

▫ Health Care. Empowering consumers – patients – is the critical element in restraining the growth of health costs without government rationing, and removing the distortions in the health sector that have resulted from excessive government involvement. Also necessary is the restructuring of medical entitlements and tax preferences, which are pushing costs upward. Without concurrent reform of these programs, any attempt to slow medical cost growth and expand access to coverage will fail.

▫ Retirement Security. Social Security, too, must be reformed to be saved; but equally challenging is the question of whether the economy itself will be capable of generating sufficient resources to support the growing population of retirees. Restructuring Social Security will allow market forces to strengthen its financial underpinnings, making it sustainable for the long run, while helping expand investments needed for future economic growth.

▫ Tax Policy. The U.S. tax code is needlessly complex and non-competitive. Taxes must be levied to finance the government; but government should do so in a way that imposes the least burden on work, saving, and investment.

▫ Job Training. To help the Nation’s workforce prepare for success in the global economy, the Roadmap transforms 49 job training programs, scattered across eight agencies, into a flexible, dynamic program focused on results, and accompanied by clear measures of transparency and accountability. The plan requires the development of performance measures, and gives each State the option to consolidate funding into one program, if such an approach can be shown to improve outcomes and achieve job training goals.

Fiscal Consequences: A Sustainable Path

As shown in the previous discussion, the government’s current fiscal path threatens a national economic catastrophe. The Roadmap charts a path of fiscal sustainability first by gaining control of explosive spending growth. Next, it avoids a rapid increase in the tax burden by holding revenues to roughly their historical average. The result is that interest and debt accumulate at much slower rates than projected under current fiscal policy, and actually begin to decrease after peaking in mid-century.

Under this plan, Federal spending peaks in 2033 at 24.1 percent of GDP. With revenue projections never exceeding 19 percent of GDP, this means the largest deficit faced under this plan is 5.1 percent of GDP. Although this number is large (the 50-year historical average is just over 2 percent of GDP), recent history shows it is sustainable for a short period. (In 1983, the Federal Government ran a deficit of 6 percent of GDP, and last year the deficit surged to a post-World War II high of 11 percent of GDP.)

What is important about this plan, however, is not how it compares with the past, but how it compares with the trajectory under current policy. Absent policy reforms, the Federal Government will face a deficit of 6.2 percent of GDP in 2022, which will then swell to nearly 20 percent of GDP in 2041, and continue growing to more than 50 percent of GDP in 2083. In contrast, deficits in the Roadmap peak in 2041 and then begin a rapid decline until the budget reaches surplus. Although the plan continues projecting revenues at 19 percent of GDP, Congress should seriously consider reducing taxes when surpluses are achieved.

Similarly, the Roadmap keeps debt held by the public from spiraling to unsustainable levels. Under current policy, debt held by the public soars to the improbable level of more than 750 percent of GDP (though the economy would crash well before this level were reached). As CBO notes in The Long-Term Budget Outlook, countries that carry debt of more than 100 percent of GDP must change their fiscal policies because those levels are not sustainable over the long run. The Roadmap also slows the accumulation of debt held by the public, and eventually reduces debt year-over-year beginning just before the middle of the century.

Economic Consequences: Maintaining the American Legacy

Although deficit and debt levels rise moderately in the Roadmap, CBO concluded the economy could sustain them, and would be “considerably stronger” than under current policy. Most important, real living standards continue to increase under this budget path. Data from CBO show that, under this scenario, the standard of living for a child born today wou ld double (i.e. per-capita output would rise from $45,000 to more than $90,000) by the time he or she reached middle age, just after the middle of the century. In this way, the sustainable budget path continues the American legacy of providing the next generation with the opportunity for continued prosperity. This contrasts with current fiscal policy, which leads to stagnant, and declining, standards of living.

In short, unlike the current fiscal path, the Roadmap supports the distinctly American legacy of leaving the next generation better off.

Moral Consequences: Restoring the American Character

In the Nation’s first inaugural address, President Washington said:

[T]he foundation of our national policy will be laid in the pure and immutable principles of private morality . . . [T]here is no truth more thoroughly established than that there exists in the economy and course of nature an indissoluble union between virtue and happiness . . . [T]he propitious smiles of Heaven can never be expected on a Nation that disregards the eternal rules of order and right which Heaven itself has ordained.

Consistent with this is the longstanding recognition among Americans that freedom and responsibility are two sides of the same coin. If one exercises liberty irresponsibly – ignoring consequences, and refusing to accept them – that freedom eventually will be lost. On the other hand, only by taking responsibility for oneself, to the greatest extent possible, can one ever be free; and only a free person can make responsible choices – between right and wrong, saving and spending, giving or taking. These moral characteristics inhere in individuals, growing from the coupling of freedom and responsibility; and this in turn is the root of the Nation’s virtue.

Throughout history, Americans established world standing as a people of exceptional character. In the 1830s, Tocqueville wondered about the heedlessness of frail Yankee clippers that sailed the world for 2 years so they could sell Chinese tea in Boston for a penny a pound less than English merchants. “Americans put a sort of heroism into their manner of doing commerce,” he said. A French observer around 1890 said Americans succeeded because of their “character, personal energy, energy in action, creative energy”; and another in 1908 praised “the greatness of the United States . . . ready for any kind of enterprise.”

America’s democratic character opposes militarism and prefer the pursuits of peace and prosperity. Still, since the American Revolution, America’s national character has sustained U.S. citizens in long struggles to keep the Nation free, independent, and safe.

The late Nobel Laureate Alexandr Isayevich Solzhenitsyn, soon after being expelled from Russia by the Soviet government, assessed the American character this way:

The United States has helped Europe to win the First and Second World Wars. It twice raised Europe from postwar destruction – twice – for 10, 20, 30 years it has stood as a shield protecting Europe while European countries counted their nickels to avoid paying for their armies (better yet, to have none at all), to avoid paying for armaments, thinking about how to leave NATO, knowing that in any case America will protect them . . . The United States has long shown itself to be the most magnanimous, the most generous country in the world. Wherever there is a flood, an earthquake, a fire, a natural disaster, an epidemic, who is the first to help? The United States. Who helps the most, and unselfishly? The United States.

This is the character on which the policies described in this report are built. Its approach draws from, and reinforces, the most real source of America’s strength: its people, acting through family, community, vocation, and faith – with a limited government supporting the growth of these most important institutions. It promotes personal liberty and initiative, coupled with personal responsibility. It rewards work, saving, and investment, so individuals can experience the satisfaction of enjoying the fruits of their own labor, and providing a better life for their children and future generations.

THE NEED TO ACT NOW

America is not the servant of inexorable historical forces. Americans make history, by their choices and actions in a free society that rewards personal initiative, promotes individual responsibility, and provides expanding opportunities.

The two futures described here entail such a choice – one of historic dimensions. The challenge is long term, but the need to address it is urgent. The longer policymakers delay, the worse circumstances will become. Avoiding reforms of the government’s major entitlement programs does not protect them. Indeed, a failure to reform puts those programs, and their benefits, in greater jeopardy; and the longer reform is delayed, the more wrenching the inevitable changes will be. CBO has described the accumulating hazards of the current path this way:

The longer that policy action on the budget is put off, the more costly and difficult it will be to resolve the long-term budgetary imbalance. Delays in taking action would create three major problems:

The amount of government debt would rise, which would displace private capital – reducing the total resources available to the economy – and increase borrowing from abroad.

The share of Federal outlays devoted to paying interest on the Federal debt would grow, so lawmakers would have to make ever-larger policy changes to achieve balance. As interest costs rose, policymakers would be less able to pay for other national spending priorities and would have less flexibility to deal with unexpected developments (such as a war or recession). Moreover, rising interest costs would make the economy more vulnerable to a meltdown in financial markets.

Uncertainty about the economy would increase. The longer that action was put off, the greater the chance that policy changes would ultimately occur suddenly, possibly creating difficulties for some individuals and families, especially those in or near retirement. [Italics added.]

CBO also has quantified the cost of delay, as reflected in Figure 9. It shows that waiting just 11 years to take action increases by nearly 20 percent the amount of spending reductions or tax increases (as a percentage of GDP) needed to close the fiscal gap. Waiting until 2030 increases the amount by about 50 percent; and waiting until 2040 nearly doubles the spending cuts or tax hikes needed to close the gap.





It may seem unlikely that the United States’ standing in the world ever could be seriously threatened. America’s exceptionally resilient economy and extraordinary industrial and technological might have overcome economic and military crises before, and surely can do so again. But history’s greatest powers have fallen in very similar circumstances; and historian Niall Ferguson has warned that the Federal Government’s current fiscal path, and the debt accumulating from it, could have the same corrosive effect on America:

If the United States doesn’t come up soon with a credible plan to restore the Federal budget to balance over the next 5 to 10 years, the danger is very real that a debt crisis could lead to a major weakening of American power.

The precedents are certainly there. Habsburg Spain defaulted on all or part of its debt 14 times between 1557 and 1696 and also succumbed to inflation due to a surfeit of New World silver. Prerevolutionary France was spending 62 percent of royal revenue on debt service by 1788. The Ottoman Empire went the same way: interest payments and amortization rose from 15 percent of the budget in 1860 to 50 percent in 1875. And don’t forget the last great English-speaking empire. By the interwar years, interest payments were consuming 44 percent of the British budget, making it intensely difficult to rearm in the face of a new German threat.

Call it the fatal arithmetic of imperial decline. Without radical fiscal reform, it could apply to America next.

Nor will small or incremental actions suffice. “The American people know – or sense – that there is something wrong,” former Comptroller General David M. Walker has said. “[W]e cannot grow our way out of this problem; eliminating earmarks will not solve the problem; wiping out fraud, waste, and abuse will not solve the problem; ending the war or cutting way back on defense will not solve the problem; restraining discretionary spending will not solve the problem; and letting the recent tax cuts expire will not solve this problem.”

But in fact, transformation need not be some radical departure from American tradition. It does not require abandoning the commitments Americans made throughout the 20th century, or the missions of the government’s major benefits programs. Instead it should rely on the fundamental strengths that have always brought out the best in American society: a reliance on individual creativity in free markets and a free society, with government maintaining the economic rules, and a sturdy safety net for those who need it. It is the kind of restoration called for in this proposal and described in this report.

There is still time to change America’s course – but that time is not unlimited. Guided by the idea of equal freedom of opportunity, A Roadmap for America’s Future represents a plan to break away from the current path of national decline; to put America on a path to fiscal sustainability; and to reach new heights of prosperity, restrained by nothing but the limits of human imagination.

Today’s Major Domestic Challenges

The principles described in the previous section could be applied to the challenges specific to any point in history. Today – and with respect to this proposal – they are aimed at health care (including the Federal Government’s medical entitlements), retirement security, taxes, and job training.

To address these areas properly, the discussion below summarizes the particular nature of the problems in each. The text also examines the broader questions of government spending in general and America’s challenges in the global marketplace of the 21st century, and concludes with a discussion of why it is necessary to take action now.

THE STATE OF HEALTH CARE TODAY

Overview

The rising cost of health care in the United States is the fastest-growing burden on families, businesses, governments, and the economy. In 2007, the U.S. spent an estimated $2.1 trillion to provide, administer, and finance health care – nearly twice the amount per capita spent by any other industrialized nation in the world. Moreover, the rapid growth of health care costs – about 7 percent per year – is eroding paychecks for millions of Americans; and skyrocketing insurance costs are overburdening businesses across the U.S., and in 2010, 50 million people – 19 percent of the non-elderly population – will lack access to health insurance at some time during the year.

Even with public health programs such as Medicare and Medicaid, families and individuals face increasingly limited access to care and coverage. State budgets are unable to keep pace with the financial resources these programs demand while the number of physicians and health care practitioners choosing to participate are steadily declining. Failed Federal policies and inadequate reimbursement levels are threatening the existence of these programs for future generations.

The personal realities of this crisis also have a distressing effect on U.S. economic stability. The Federal Government devotes 21.7 percent of its budget to the two major health entitlements, Medicare and Medicaid, which is more than national defense (17.8 percent, including war costs). Overall health care costs are absorbing 15.2 percent of national gross domestic product [GDP]. If the status quo continues, health care costs will consume 20 percent of GDP by 2016.

Rising health care spending also is the major contributor to the unsustainable projected increases in the Federal Government’s two major health programs, Medicare and Medicaid, which are the main contributors to projected chronic Federal budget deficits. The effect of this spending growth is even greater than that of lengthening life-spans and the forthcoming retirement of the baby boomers. “Long-term deficits are driven not only by the aging of the population,” says Dr. Isabel V. Sawhill, senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. “[T]hey are much more driven by increasing health care costs per capita . . . The demographics play a role. But if you look at the numbers carefully you will see that the problem has been health care spending per capita that has been growing 2 to 3 percent faster than per-capita incomes or per-capita GDP.” During the period 1999 through 2008, the monthly premium for seniors who participate in Medicare has risen at nearly the same rate as those in private insurance, from $45.50 to $96.40.

Furthermore, the government health programs rely on the infrastructure of private health care. As noted by the Congressional Budget Office [CBO]: “[M]ost [public] services are furnished by private providers. For example, Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries receive most of their care from physicians, hospitals, and other providers that deliver services to the general population.” Therefore, inadequacies or inefficiencies in private health care services affect Medicare and Medicaid as well. It is another reason why correcting problems in the government health entitlements also requires addressing inefficiencies in the market.

But if rising private health costs drive the growth of Medicare and Medicaid spending, the converse also is true: Medicare and Medicaid themselves contribute in their own way to medical inflation. These two programs account for roughly 37 percent of all health care spending nationally (including the State share of Medicaid), according to the most recent figures from CBO. Another 10 percent comes from other public programs, including those of State and local health departments, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and workers’ compensation. Such large infusions of government funds inevitably stoke rising medical costs.



CLICK HERE TO VIEW TABLE

Also noteworthy is that real per-capita growth in Medicare and Medicaid spending has outpaced that occurring in the market (see Table 4). This demonstrates that government spending tends to be less efficient than spending in the market. Hence, overall medical costs cannot be tamed without also addressing the structure of the Federal health entitlements.

Failings of Recent Health Care Proposals

The overhaul legislation considered in Congress during the past year failed to correct the fundamental problem in U.S. health care: the distortions of the health care market created by ever-deepening government intrusion. Instead, it sought to expand the government’s role, impose further regulation, as well as job-killing taxes on small businesses. It failed to bend down the medical “cost curve,” meaning more rapid cost increases, resulting in government rationing and price setting. As recently summarized about the legislation under consideration:

[I]ts principles are a reprise of previous reforms – addressing access to health care by expanding government aid to those without adequate insurance, while attempting to control rising costs through centrally administered initiatives. Some of the ideas now on the table may well be sensible in the context of our current system. But fundamentally, the “comprehensive” reform being contemplated merely cements in place the current system – insurance-based, employment-centered, administratively complex. It addresses the underlying causes of our health-care crisis only obliquely, if at all; indeed, by extending the current system to more people, it will likely increase the ultimate cost of true reform.

It also sought to establish a huge new government entitlement, and aimed to drive private insurance out of the market. The proposals were rooted in an ideological view that always sees government as the necessary solution to any significant problem.

The Real Sources of America’s Health Care Problem

The problems in American health care have been caused not by a failure of the health care market, but mainly by distortions imposed on the market from several directions; and the most significant of these are Federal tax subsidies and programs that have created a third-party payment system, which insulates consumers from prices and market forces. As one description puts it:

All of the actors in health care – from doctors to insurers to pharmaceutical companies – work in a heavily regulated, massively subsidized industry full of structural distortions. They all want to serve patients well. But they also behave rationally in response to the economic incentives those distortions create. Accidentally, but relentlessly, America has built a health-care system with incentives that inexorably generate terrible and perverse results. Incentives that emphasize health care over any other aspect of health and well-being. That emphasize treatment over prevention. That disguise true costs. That favor complexity, and discourage transparent competition based on price or quality. That result in a generational pyramid scheme rather than sustainable financing. And that – most important – remove consumers from our irreplaceable role as the ultimate ensurer of value.

At the heart of the problem is the Federal tax exclusion for employer-provided health coverage. This policy undermines the health care market by hiding the true cost of insurance from those covered by it, and contributing to more expensive care and more costly insurance. As C. Eugene Steuerle of the Urban Institute describes it:

The exclusion is open-ended. The more insurance we buy, the larger the amount of income we get to exclude from tax and the more the government subsidizes us. The exclusion favors most those of us who have the most generous health insurance policies. Moreover, because more insurance means that we face even less of the cost of what we buy – we and our doctors now bargain over what the plan, not us, will pay – we demand more care and more expensive care. . . . Additionally, the increased demand for health care tends to encourage growth in the health care sector in a less than optimal way. For instance, it tends to encourage suppliers of medical care to increase the quantity of what we get, with less incentive to increase quality.

One reflection of the problem is the dramatic decline in private and personal out-of-pocket spending for health care – even for routine procedures – while government spending has steadily grown:

From 1975 to 2007, the share of total health care spending that was financed privately shrank slightly, dropping from 59 percent to 54 percent, while the share that was financed publicly expanded correspondingly, increasing from 41 percent to 46 percent. During that period, consumers’ out-of-pocket payments fell from 31 percent of total expenditures to 13 percent, and payments by private insurers rose from 25 percent to 37 percent.

The combination has encouraged overuse of health care services. “Because so many Americans rely on an insurance policy or a government program to pay their health care bills, the internal governors that temper the rest of their purchases are turned off,” writes Investors Business Daily. “When a visit to the doctor’s office or a diagnostic test costs them a mere $10 or $20 co-payment out of pocket – or there is no charge at all – cost has little impact on their decision to see a doctor.”

The tax policy that contributed to all this came about not by plan, but as an accident of historical events. During the Second World War, when the Federal Government imposed wage and price controls, employers sought to attract workers from a tight labor pool by offering modest health coverage, and excluding the costs from wages. When these employers sought endorsement of the practice from the Internal Revenue Service [IRS], the IRS approved. After the war, when the IRS tried to rescind this decision, Congress wrote it into law. The exclusion, which this year totals an estimated $155 billion, has made employer-provided coverage the most common form of health insurance.

Although the employer-based tax benefit has been important to the provision of health care, it has evolved into an expensive, inflexible, and unfair subsidy. It also contributes to the insecurities felt by those who have employer-based health insurance, because they fear sacrificing coverage if they lose or change jobs.

The tax provision also has failed to encourage the expansion of health coverage. Since 2000, the percentage of businesses offering health benefits has fallen 69 percent – mainly due to the continued rise in insurance costs. Rising costs also make health coverage unaffordable to many small businesses, self-employed persons, and low-income persons. Indeed, the current tax policy actually increases the number of the uninsured:

As the increased amount of money spent on the exclusion effectively increases the average cost of health care and of health care insurance, the greater the number of individuals in the economy who forego purchasing private health insurance. Not only are low-income people more likely to avoid purchasing health insurance, but many middle-class people and people between jobs decide to take a chance and save the amount of the health insurance premium. Employers, beset by demands from their workers for cash wages, are also more likely to drop health insurance. At times, this happens directly, but more often than not it works its way into the system indirectly. The company with expensive health care insurance reduces the number of its employees, or, if growing, tries to outsource to groups for whom it does not have to pay for insurance. New companies without health insurance displace older ones that carry health insurance.

The third-party insurance arrangement also sharply reduces the options of health coverage packages available. Americans are limited in their choices of health insurance plans based on what their employers can afford – if a health plan is even offered at all. Consequently, Americans are deprived of a diverse health insurance market in which they can find affordable coverage options truly suited to their needs.

Adding to the problem is the lack of transparency in health care price and quality data, which further prevents patients from making the kinds of judgments they do in purchasing other services. For example, in the Milwaukee, WI area a heart bypass operation costs $100,000 at one hospital, while the same procedure costs $48,000 at another. Yet patients, and sometimes even doctors, are unaware of this difference.

Obviously, nearly all patients would rely on third-party coverage for such an event; it is the kind of episode for which consumers most need insurance. But because prices are opaque, patients have no incentive even to consider and compare them – let alone variations in the quality of services – in choosing where to undergo such procedures.

Medicaid

In fiscal year 2009, 67.8 million people were enrolled in Medicaid at some time during the year. Some 34 million of these beneficiaries were children, and 18 million were adults in families with dependent children. The program has provided Americans of limited means access to health care they could not have obtained otherwise.

But Medicaid spending, too, is spiraling out of control: it is growing at a rate of about

7.5 percent per year, and the combined Federal and State costs to run this program in fiscal year 2008 was $353 billion. As a share of total economic resources, Medicaid spending is projected to increase from 3 percent of GDP today to 5 percent by 2035, and 15 percent by 2080. State budgets are overwhelmed with these costs and Federal officials are struggling to meet the growing fiscal needs required to keep this program running. States are trying to shift their Medicaid costs to the Federal Government.

At the same time, Medicaid has fostered a two-tiered hierarchy within the health care marketplace that stigmatizes Medicaid enrollees. Providers are paid based on bureaucratically determined formulas that do not reflect the market. As a result, fewer and fewer providers are willing to participate in the program, meaning longer lines for beneficiaries, fewer operational clinics, and insufficient care.

Patients suffer as a result. With administrators looking to control costs and providers refusing to participate in a system that severely under-reimburses their services, Medicaid beneficiaries ultimately are left navigating an increasingly complex system for even the most basic of procedures.

Medicare

When President Johnson signed Medicare into law more than 40 years ago, he cited a principal goal of the program that cannot be achieved under its current spending path: “No longer will young families see their own incomes, and their own hopes, eaten away simply because they are carrying out deep moral obligations to their parents, and to their uncles, and their aunts.” Absent reform, the program will end up delivering exactly what it was created to avoid: it will consume the prosperity of today’s younger generation to finance an unsustainable path of spending.

Medicare was created with the worthy mission of providing health coverage for America’s retirees, and for many it has done so. But the program suffers from unsustainably rapid spending increases that continue to drain economic and fiscal resources on its way to insolvency. In short, the program, as currently structured, cannot keep its promises to future generations.

The cost of Medicare has always been higher than expected. For example, in 1965 it was estimated that benefit payments for Medicare’s Hospital Insurance [HI] program would total $8.8 billion in 1990. The actual spending was $65.7 billion (see Table 5). Today, Medicare outlays are growing at a rate of 7.2 percent per year, more than twice the average rate of current real GDP growth. Over the next 25 years, Medicare spending as a share of the economy will nearly triple – from 3 percent of GDP today to 8 percent by 2035. By 2080, it will have grown to 15 percent of GDP.

CLICK HERE TO VIEW TABLE



To rescue Medicare from financial collapse requires transforming the program to make it financially sustainable, and more consistent with the character of medical care in the

21st century.

RETIREMENT

In 1935, the year Social Security was enacted, there were about 42 working-age Americans for each retiree. The average life expectancy for men in America was 60 years; for women it was 64. With these demographics, it was easy for the program to generate sufficient revenue to meet its promises to those over 65. The initial Federal Insurance Contributions Act [FICA] tax rate was 1 percent each for workers and employers, up to $3,000 of income.

But even President Roosevelt knew this could not last. “Roosevelt himself saw that while the program’s revenues might cover its costs now, the numbers from the actuaries suggested that there would not be enough money for old-age pensions for future generations.”

President Roosevelt was right; and today, the challenge facing Social Security is more inexorable than at any time in the past – including its near-collapse of 1983. What’s more, the risk to Social Security is nearer at hand than most acknowledge. Due to the recession, Social Security surpluses will disappear in 2010 and 2011, with small and declining surpluses after that. By 2016, the program will hit a permanent “negative cash flow” – when annual benefit payments exceed annual payroll tax revenue – less than a decade from now. (See Figure 5.)

The cash flow trend is significant for the following reasons. Since the 1983 Social Security reform, the program’s trust fund has run substantial cash surpluses: it has been collecting significantly more in dedicated tax revenue than it needed to pay annual benefits. These cash surpluses were “borrowed” by the general fund to finance other government programs, and were replaced by government bonds that promised the cash would be returned when needed, with interest.

For the next 2 years, and starting permanently in 2016, Social Security will have to begin redeeming the trust fund bonds that have accumulated in recent decades. This will lead to one of four options, or some combination: 1) other government programs will have to be squeezed to finance Social Security; 2) taxes will have to rise sharply to cover benefits; 3) benefits will have to be cut; or 4) the government will have to run large and chronic deficits to pay Social Security benefits. By 2037, the Social Security Trust Fund will be exhausted and the program will be unable to pay all its promised benefits. Without reform, benefits will have to be cut by 24 percent, or payroll taxes raised by 31 percent.

The latter would tear the social fabric of the program itself. “Hiking payroll taxes is neither an economically sound nor a generationally equitable option.” says Robert L. Bixby, Executive Director of the Concord Coalition. “The burden will fall most heavily on lower- and middle-income workers and on future generations. Younger Americans in particular will be skeptical of any plan that purports to improve their retirement security by increasing their tax burden and by further lowering the return on their contributions.”

As is well known, a major part of the problem is demographic. The first members of the baby-boom generation – those born between 1946 and 1964 – are now eligible for early retirement. At the same time, life expectancies now average 75 years for men and

80 years for women – and these too are expected to lengthen. These factors result in a permanent, long-term shift in which the percentage of the U.S. population over 65 will grow from 12 percent in 2007 to 19 percent by 2030, and the share of those who are 20 years old to 64 years old is projected to decline from 60 percent to 56 percent. The effect on Social Security translate as follows: today there are only 3.3 workers for each Social Security beneficiary, and that number is projected to fall to 2.2 by 2030, and continue dropping thereafter. These figures compare with the 42 workers per Social Security-eligible retiree in 1935, and 16 workers per beneficiary in 1950.

This demographic realignment is not a temporary phenomenon, associated solely with the retirement of the baby boomers, but a long-lasting shift; and it is more than a problem just for Social Security or Federal Government spending: it poses a challenge to the economy to generate sufficient resources to support the income and health needs of a growing population of retirees. Long-term economic growth depends on two factors: employment growth and productivity growth. But employment growth is tied to an expanding labor force, which under current projections is expected to decline (see Figure 11). Additionally, there has been a demographic shift to a lower retirement age. In 1945, the average age of retirement was 69.6 years; in 2007, it was 63.6 years. As the nonworking-age population grows, there will be lower labor force participation and therefore lower per-capita output. The economy will need some means of boosting labor-force growth, or compensating for the lack of it, to support future retirees.

But even if the prospects for economic growth could be vastly improved – by enhancing productivity and wages, for example – it would not ease the problem with Social Security, because the program’s benefits are partly indexed to such economic factors. “[B]ecause of the structure of Social Security, that growth in productivity and wages automatically translates into higher future benefits, offsetting a significant portion of the fiscal gains from a larger economy,” says a recent paper by the Brookings-Heritage Fiscal Seminar. “In short, if the status quo continues and entitlement programs are not reformed, there is no feasible growth rate of the economy that will produce a sustainable budget path.”

The combination of demographic and benefit patterns will drive total Social Security spending to unprecedented levels. CBO estimates that: “[U]nless changes are made to Social Security, spending for the program will rise from 4.3 percent of GDP in fiscal year 2008 to 6.0 percent by 2035. Spending for Social Security will dip slightly as members of the large baby-boom generation die, but it will then resume its upward course because of increasing longevity, reaching 6.1 percent of GDP in 2080.”

There are other reasons to reform Social Security.

First, the current program is not a good deal for workers. For the average individual currently paying in to the system, the real rate of return from Social Security is between

1 percent and 2 percent. For some individuals, particularly younger ones, the rate of return is expected to be negative. By contrast, the average rate of return from the stock market since 1926 has been at least 7 percent, even taking into account significant stock market decline, including that of 2008.

Second, the current system is unfair to minorities. The projected shorter life expectancies of minorities significantly reduces their benefits compared with Caucasians. For example, a 30-year old white man with average earnings and average life expectancy will receive nearly $70,000 more in lifetime Social Security benefits than an African American man with the same characteristics.

Third, today’s workers have no legal rights to the taxes they have paid into Social Security. According to the Supreme Court in Flemming v. Nestor, workers and their families have no legal claim on the payments that they make into the U.S. Treasury. As a result, Congress is free to change these benefits at any time.

Finally, Social Security benefits are not inheritable. A worker may pay into the Social Security system for a lifetime and have nothing to pass on to heirs – in stark contrast with other types of retirement funds that are inheritable.

TAXES

While government spending drives the need to tax (or borrow), the Federal tax code as currently written will become a kind of “revenue machine,” claiming ever-growing shares of individuals’ income and the economy’s resources. Under current-law projections by CBO, tax revenue is scheduled to approach an unprecedented one-fourth of GDP by mid-century. To put this in context, Federal revenue has exceeded 20 percent of GDP only once since World War II, reaching 20.9 percent of GDP in 2000.

The start of this reckoning is near at hand. As Professor Michael J. Graetz of Yale Law School has put it:

[T]he scheduled expiration in 2010 of large tax cuts enacted in 2001 and 2003 builds a large tax increase into the current tax law. If Congress fails to act, income tax rates will rise, as will tax rates on capital gains and dividends, and people will lose many current benefits, including credits for children and relief from marriage penalties. Under current law, the estate tax exemption rises to $3.5 million next year with a 45-percent top rate, the tax is repealed in 2010, and in 2011 the tax comes back with a $1 million exemption and a 55 percent top rate. . . . And, as this committee knows well, the alternative minimum tax [AMT] is currently structured in a way to catch millions more Americans and must be fixed or repealed.

The AMT is in fact a perfect example of the faulty assumptions in Federal tax law. When originally enacted, the tax was designed to prevent a small number of high-income individuals from avoiding taxes by manipulating the complex rules of an already flawed tax code. But because Congress failed to index the AMT for inflation, the tax threatens, every year, to ensnare millions of middle-income families. CBO estimates that, if left unchanged, the AMT would hit about two-thirds of American taxpayers by 2050. Nearly everyone agrees this scheduled AMT expansion is illegitimate; and though each year Congress has tried to “patch” the AMT, its expected revenue increase is built into current law projections, creating a presumption of higher revenue that masks the magnitude of budget deficits that the current path of government spending will create.

In addition, individual income taxes are needlessly complex, riddled with special provisions that manipulate individuals taxpayers’ behavior and reduce economic efficiency. Professor Daniel N. Shaviro of the New York University School of Law has testified: “[T]he tax system needlessly aggravates and complicates the lives of lower and middle income taxpayers. Congress can and should address this, by making filing and compliance less painful, even insofar as taxes paid by such individuals remain approximately constant.”

When the U.S. tax code was established in 1913, it contained roughly 400 pages of laws and regulations. Since then, the Federal tax code has grown exponentially and stands at more than 70,000 pages today. Since 2001 alone, there have been more than 3,250 changes to the code, or more than one per day. Many of the major changes over the years have involved carving out special preferences, exclusions, or deductions for various activities or groups. The special tax breaks and preferences now add up to more than $875 billion per year. These layers of carve-outs and changes have made the code unfair, inefficient, and wildly complex. The Treasury Department’s guide book on tax regulations, issued to help users interpret the meaning of the code, comprises six full volumes and sums to nearly 12,000 pages.

The National Taxpayer Advocate at the Internal Revenue Service [IRS], Nina E. Olson, calls the complexity of the code “the most serious problem facing taxpayers” and says the only meaningful solution is a drastic simplification. The code is so complex that 60 percent of Americans have to use paid tax preparers to complete their forms correctly. Another 20 percent rely on tax preparation software, such as Turbo Tax, to complete their forms. Even the IRS commissioner admitted in a recent interview that he relies on a tax professional to complete his returns, in part because of the code’s complexity.

The average tax preparation fee for a standard itemized 1040 Form and an accompanying State tax return is just over $200, while small businesses pay between $500 and $700 for help with their forms, according to the National Society of Accountants. The total cost of complying with the individual and corporate income tax (gathering the requisite information, preparing the forms, etc.) amounts to roughly $200 billion per year, or 14 percent of all income tax receipts collected. If tax compliance were an actual industry engaged in productive economic activity, instead of a metric of wasted time, energy, and money, it would be one of the largest in the U.S.

Taxpayers who are unwilling or unable to pay for outside help with their taxes must turn to an IRS whose level of service has been deemed “unacceptable” by the National Taxpayer Advocate. According to the Advocate’s latest report to Congress, the IRS has a self-imposed goal of answering only about 70 percent of the phone calls placed through its toll-free help line this year The IRS says that its tax advisors have a high accuracy rating in terms of their tax advice, but that is small consolation for the portion of callers who cannot reach anyone. In fact, the share of callers who 1) connect to an IRS tax advisor (after waiting an average of 12 minutes) and 2) get a correct answer to their question is just 65 percent.

In the realm of tax policy, Congress sometimes focuses its efforts on improving tax compliance and trying to narrow the “tax gap” (i.e. the difference between what is owed in taxes and what is actually paid). Estimates suggest that the net tax gap is roughly $290 billion per year. But the tax gap is not the key underlying problem. It is merely a symptom of a complex and broken tax code. The most direct way to reduce this complexity, thereby improving tax compliance and easing the administrative burdens of the system, is to dramatically simplify the tax code.

Taxes impose two types of economic costs: the direct cost of the taxes themselves, and the indirect costs of the changes in behavior that result. For instance, taxes can affect the incentive to work. When marginal income tax rates are high, they penalize productivity, as people keep less of their earnings. This reduces the potential to maximize labor force participation.

The U.S. tax system also discourages capital investment, a necessary component of long-term growth and rising living standards, by essentially taxing savings twice. Individuals pay income taxes on their wages and salaries and, if they choose to save these funds, pay another round of taxes when they reap investment gains. This arrangement encourages individuals to consume their wages and salaries immediately rather than saving and investing them.

The double-taxation of corporate profits offers another example of the disincentive effects on investment of the current U.S. tax code. Corporate profits are taxed once at the business level and once again at the individual level, when the profits are distributed as dividends or capital gains. This double taxation boosts the cost of capital and leads to lower investment in the corporate sector.

In short, tax policy is a key element that will influence the two components of long-term economic growth: investment and labor force participation.

Here are several other factors that come into play in tax policy.

Tax Rates. The importance of taxes to competitiveness is echoed by a recent study released by the U.S. Treasury. Treasury finds that business location and investment decisions are becoming more sensitive to country tax rates as global integration increases. Foreign investment is important to an economy because it is a key source of innovation and jobs. In response, many countries have been lowering business taxes. But the U.S. risks falling behind: it already has the second highest corporate income tax in the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development [OECD] (see Figure 12). The U.S. may soon have the highest rate, as Japan and France have signaled their intention to lower their corporate income tax rates, joining the trend set by many other industrialized countries in recent years. As described in recent testimony by Robert J. Carroll, Vice President for Economic Policy at the Tax Foundation:

By standing still, the United States can expect to see reduced inflows of foreign capital and investment because the United States will be a less attractive place in which to invest, innovate and grow. U.S. firms will face a higher cost of capital than foreign firms, making it more difficult to compete in foreign markets. In the near-term, this would translate into slower economic growth, a slower advance in labor productivity, and less employment. The industries that are being hurt the most are those that manufacture or buy capital-intensive products.

Although corporate taxes may be a politically popular revenue source, they actually create perverse incentives that impede economic growth, and therefore penalize workers and consumers.

Economists are unanimous . . . that the corporate tax is a bad one. It creates incentives for investing in noncorporate businesses and housing instead of corporations, and it induces many distortions in corporate finance. For example, since interest but not dividends are deductible and thereby not subject to the corporate tax, the tax creates a bias in favor of debt over equity finance. The combination of individual and corporate income taxes also has created an advantage for corporations to repurchase shares rather than paying dividends. The invention and deployment of innovative financial products has added new distortions as companies structure their financial transactions to achieve income tax advantages. The internationalization of businesses, along with the greater mobility of capital, has made collecting corporate income taxes much more difficult. Companies, for example, now routinely manipulate their corporate structures, finances and inter-company prices to take advantage of lower corporate tax rates in other countries. These are just some of the reasons that economists hate a tax the public seems to love.

Elevated corporate tax rates hinder American competitiveness by making the U.S. a less desirable destination for investment and jobs. By deterring potential investment, the tax restrains economic growth and job creation. The U.S. tax rate differential with other countries also fosters a variety of complicated multinational corporate behaviors intended to avoid the tax – profit shifting, corporate inversions, and transfer pricing – which have the effect of moving the tax base offshore, costing jobs and decreasing corporate revenue.

U.S. tax policies also create an unlevel playing field in the international market. The overwhelming majority of America’s competitors rely to some degree on consumption-based taxes, which, according to World Trade Organization rules, can legally be rebated on products leaving a country for export and imposed on products entering that country. The United States happens to be the only major industrialized country in the world that does not use a similar tax system and therefore cannot engage in the same practice. Hence, when Milwaukee-based Harley-Davidson makes a motorcycle it plans to sell overseas (to Japan, for example), the motorcycle is taxed once in the U.S. before being shipped, and once again when it reaches the Japanese border. In contrast, when a Honda motorcycle is shipped from Japan to the U.S., the Japanese government lifts the tax on the motorcycle before export, and it arrives in the U.S. essentially tax-free. This combination of tax policies gives foreign producers a clear cost advantage and hampers the ability of U.S. manufacturers, such as Harley-Davidson, to compete in the global market.

Tax Certainty and Consistency. Equally important over time is maintaining a consistent and predictable tax policy. Only in such an environment can businesses effectively plan the long-term investments needed to sustain economic growth. In addition, foreigners will be unlikely to invest in the U.S. if they conclude that U.S. tax laws are likely to keep changing, or rates to keep rising.

Flexibility and Adaptability. In an ever-changing international marketplace, economic flexibility and adaptability are increasingly important. The U.S. economy has been successful historically due in part to its flexible and efficient capital markets, which direct investment resources to their most productive uses – seeking out new and profitable ventures and redeploying investment from old industries into new fields. High tax rates on investment and capital can impair this innovation dynamic and can harm U.S. economic competitiveness.

A CHANGING ENVIRONMENT FOR WORKERS

As technological advancements and global competition churn through old jobs and create new and better ones, more workers from time to time will have to obtain additional skills to meet the changing demands of the modern job market. That is why it is vital to ensure Federal job training programs are effectively serving workers and continually improving. Unfortunately, training opportunities funded by the current system not only can be difficult to access, they often fail to benefit trainees, or provide only modest benefits.

The greatest challenges with the current system are lack of accountability and incentives to maximize effectiveness. There are 49 Federal job training programs, administered by eight different agencies. Each program has its own unique set of performance goals and requirements that States must follow. This makes it extremely difficult for administrators to avoid duplication, to be efficient with funding streams, and to tailor training to local needs. As summarize