You Are Cordially Invited to a Night of Shameless Promotion, Crude Remarks and Drug Busts with Congressmen Alan Grayson and Barney Frank

RPOF Press Release - February 26, 2010

Text Size A A A Print

Tallahassee – The Republican Party of Florida today commented on Congressman Barney Frank (D-MA) traveling to Florida for a fundraiser with Orlando Congressman Alan Grayson.



“Over the last two years Alan Grayson has certainly made a name for himself in our nation’s capital, but instead of being recognized for his work for the people of Florida, he stands out as a quirky, irreverent embarrassment to his constituents and to the entire state of Florida,” said RPOF spokeswoman Katie Betta.



“It’s only fitting that Alan Grayson, who in recent months has called an adviser to Ben Bernanke a ‘K Street whore,’ trivialized the evils of slavery, compared a former Vice President to a vampire, used taxpayer money for shameless self promotion, and compared America’s health care system to the Holocaust, would seek help filling his campaign coffers from another infamous congressman, Barney Frank whose most notable indiscretions include, soliciting a prostitute, allowing a brothel to be run out of his home and recently admitting he was present during a drug bust at the home of his domestic partner,” continued Betta. “The voters of Central Florida deserve better. We’re looking forward to November when Alan Grayson receives his pink slip, and we can end this circus sideshow once and for all.”



Congressman Alan Grayson

Calls an Adviser to Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke a "K Street Whore

This lobbyist, this K street whore, is trying to teach me about economics," he [Grayson] said. Grayson has been widely criticized for his comment, as Politico and the Associated Press report. Republican Washington Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers said Grayson is "out of control," while Democratic Rep. Anthony Weiner asked, "Is this news to you that this guy’s one fry short of a Happy Meal?" (CBS News, 10/27/09)



Trivializes of the Evils of Slavery

The measured, circumspect Alan Grayson thinks today's SCOTUS decision on campaign finance is the worst ruling since the 1857 Dred Scott decision declaring anti-slavery laws unconstitutional. (Politico, 1/21/10)



Compares Vice President Dick Cheney to a Vampire

Grayson has said he has ‘trouble listening to what [Vice President Dick Cheney] says sometimes because of the blood that drips from his teeth while he's talking.’ (RealClearPolitics, 12/16/09)



Says Vice President Cheney Should ‘STFU’

Last week, in response to Cheney characterizing Obama as a ‘radical,’ Grayson said Cheney should ‘STFU.’ (Translation: Shut The F*** Up.)” (RealClearPolitics, 12/16/09)



Uses Taxpayer Money for Relentless Self- Promotion

“Few members of Congress are as relentless at self-promotion as U.S. Rep. Alan Grayson. Since January, the Orlando Democrat has flooded inboxes and mailboxes in his four-county Central Florida district with glowing accounts of his first year in Congress…But Grayson's re-election campaign isn't paying for the outreach. Taxpayers are — to the tune of $82,000 through Sept. 30…Overall, Grayson's spending on franked communications is the largest reported by the eight members of the Central Florida congressional delegation this year. And in the July-to-September quarter, according to congressional spending records put online for the first time, he ranked eighth in the 435-member U.S. House.” (Orlando Sentinel, 12/14/09)



Has Some Issues With Who He Is And Where He Came From

Grayson clearly has some issues with who he is and where he came from. And that shows, not only in his bio but also with the way he deals with those who may disagree with him. Grayson was elected to Congress not because of who he is and was, but because he wasn’t Ric Keller, the incumbent Republican. The challenger won because of a big Democratic wave in a competitive but Republican-leaning district that President George W. Bush won with 55 percent in 2004. Barack Obama carried it with 52 percent last year — roughly the same showing as Grayson. The district’s Democratic Performance Index is only 44 percent, making it a difficult district for any Democrat in a normal year. (“A Lesson on How Not to Win Re-Election in Florida’s 8th District” Roll Call, 11/2/09)



Compared to a Character on the Lam from an Orlando Theme Park

“…a character on the lam from one of his Orlando district’s theme parks…Mr. Grayson could be the latest incarnation of what in the American political idiom is known as a wing nut…‘You cringe,’ said Representative Earl Blumenauer, Democrat of Oregon and an unabashed liberal but also a buttoned-down gentleman. ‘We’re at risk of having a self-reinforcing corrosive process that drives reasonable people away.’ (“Alan Grayson, the Liberals’ Problem Child,” New York Times Magazine, 11/1/09)



Says Republicans Want You to Die Quickly

"And he stood by his original assertion, 'Republicans want you to die quickly if you get sick.' When Salon pressed him, 'Is what you said really true? Are they that evil?' Grayson responded, 'Uh, yes. Yes. The answer is yes.'" (Alex Koppelman, "Rep. Alan Grayson, star of the left," Salon, 10/2/09)



Claims Republicans Chose To Let Those 44,000 People Die, Every Single Year

Rep. Alan Grayson (D-FL) is keeping up his attack on Republicans, after saying that their policy is for Americans to "die quickly" and after calling the health care crisis a "holocaust" -- and now says that the GOP has willfully chosen to let tens of thousands of people without insurance die every year. (“Grayson: Republicans ‘Chose To Let Those 44,000 People Die, Every Single Year,’” Talking Points Memo, 9/30/09)



Compares America’s Health Care System to the Holocaust

GRAYSON: “Well, I would like to apologize – I would like to apologize to the dead.”

GRAYSON: “I apologize to the dead and their families that we haven’t voted sooner to end this Holocaust in America.” (House Floor, You Tube, 9/30/09)



Congressman Barney Frank

Was Present During Pot Raid on Boyfriend’s House, Claimed to Have Never Seen the Pot Plants Growing There

“US Representative Barney Frank confirmed last night that he was present when his domestic partner was arrested on marijuana charges two years ago in Maine. Frank, a Democrat who supports legalizing marijuana for medical use, said in a statement that he did not know that his partner, whom he had recently met, had marijuana plants and said he has never smoked marijuana. Police arrived at the home of James Ready in Ogunquit in August 2007 after finding marijuana plants in his backyard. Frank was on the front porch and said that he never saw them and that he would not have recognized them anyway. Ready later pleaded guilty to civil possession of marijuana.” (“Frank was There when Partner Arrested,” The Boston Globe, 11/07/09)



Engaged In Prostitution, Allowed a Brothel to Be Run Out of His Apartment

At the least, Frank's judgment was appallingly naive. After an initial encounter in which he paid Steve Gobie $80 for sex, the Congressman says he tried to lift the younger man out of drugs and prostitution by hiring him to run errands. He wrote letters to Gobie's probation officer and paid his psychiatric bills. He allowed Gobie the use of a car and sometimes his apartment when he was out of town. After 18 months, Frank says, he dismissed Gobie upon discovering that he was bringing clients to Frank's apartment. Two years later, Gobie tried unsuccessfully to sell his story to the Washington Post. He then gave the story to the Washington Times for nothing, in hopes of getting a book contract for the male version of The Mayflower Madam. This week Gobie will appear on Geraldo, discussing his prospects for a television mini-series. (Time Magazine, 9/25/89)