Commissioner David J. Porter
About Commissioner David J. Porter

Download Bio in PDF Format

David J. Porter was elected to serve a six-year term as Texas Railroad Commissioner in November 2010.

Since taking office, Commissioner Porter has been appointed to the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission as the Official Representative of Texas by Texas Governor Rick Perry. He has also been appointed as Governor Perry’s official representative on the Interstate Mining Compact Commission and currently serves as an advisory board member for the Texas Journal of Oil, Gas, and Energy Law.

Porter created the Eagle Ford Shale Task Force, the first of its kind at the Texas Railroad Commission, to establish a forum that will bring the community together and foster a dialogue regarding drilling activities in the Eagle Ford Shale. The Task Force is comprised of local community leaders, elected officials, industry representatives, environmental groups, and landowners. The goal of the group is to open the lines of communication between all parties involved, establish recommendations for developing the Eagle Ford Shale, and promote economic benefits locally and statewide. In recognition of his foresight and leadership, Porter was named “Man of the Year” by the industry publication, The Oil & Gas Year, Eagle Ford, Texas 2013.

Before taking office, Porter built a successful small business around his CPA practice in Midland Texas, providing accounting and tax services to oil and gas producers, royalty owners, oil field service companies, and other small businesses and individuals.

Porter was born in Fort Lewis, Washington in 1956 while his father was serving in the US Army. He graduated magna cum laude from Harding University in May of 1977 with a bachelor’s degree in accounting. He passed the CPA exam on his first attempt in November of 1977 and became a Texas CPA in September 1981, the same year he moved to Midland.

David met his wife, Cheryl, while attending Harding University, and they were married in 1979. They are the proud parents of one daughter and are also the proud grandparents of a four-year old granddaughter.