Undeniable Truth of Life #23
RUSH: All right. Now, what did he mean by cosmic?



CALLER: Well, the Big Bang, the whole Big Bang theory.



RUSH: Okay, the Big Bang.



CALLER: Right.



RUSH: Well, what was it that banged, what was it that blew up?



CALLER: That’s what I asked. They had no clue. They can’t tell me what banged. I went to a debate —



RUSH: Wait. Where was it when it banged?



CALLER: Nobody knows.



RUSH: Who put it there?



CALLER: Nobody knows. That’s my point.



RUSH: From what did it evolve?



CALLER: Nobody knows. I mean, I understand where you’re coming from, and they told me, oh, we have all this evidence for it and then they never —



RUSH: We do not have any evidence whatsoever.



CALLER: I know, that’s what —



RUSH: We’ve got a bunch of pointy-headed really smart people making some pretty good guesses.



CALLER: Yeah.



RUSH: We don’t have any evidence, nobody was there. Even though we’re all relatives, if this is true.



CALLER: Well, at some point, yeah.



RUSH: Okay, so the Big Bang, I’ve heard this, too, I’ve read Stephen Hawking’s book, A Brief History of Time. Boy, was I misled by that. I thought this would be a book that this brainiac wrote so that I could understand it. (Laughing) But his theory is that the Big Bang is still growing.



CALLER: Right.



RUSH: But that it’s going to retract, and whatever banged is going to end up collapsing on itself at some point.



CALLER: Yeah.



RUSH: That’s his theory. Who knows. But regardless — by the way, the reason I wrote it, “evolution doesn’t explain creation,” I’m not denying that things evolve.



ALLER: Right.



RUSH: There is evolution. But evolution cannot explain creation. Something had to be there to evolve in the first place. Evolution does not, by definition, explain the beginning of anything.



CALLER: Right. Okay.



RUSH: It’s adaptive changes, I mean this program has evolved, but it actually started someday. They want to talk about the evolution of the species and frogs and fish and so forth, there’s no question. There’s so many things these people try to say, like one day we are all related to Mrithe, the gorilla there in Uganda, wherever he lives. The next day they say that we were giant sea animals that finally found our way out of the primordial soup, were able miraculously from breathing in water to breathe in air.



CALLER: Right.



RUSH: And who really knows about it? All I know is I’ve never been a chimpanzee, I don’t believe this garbage I ever was, because we were chimpanzee, why are the chimpanzees still here? If we were baboons, you know, if we evolved from that, what happened to them? Why didn’t they evolve, how come they got stuck still being idiot gorillas and stuff and we got to be humans? Ah you can’t go out there. To me it’s nature. You cannot look at an MRI of the human body and you just cannot look at it and say “Nan, what a great accident.” You cannot look at the beauty of this world and how it all works together, you cannot look at the very different species of animals and the way they act. I mean they don’t think — they go on instinct, and a house cat today behaves the same way it did 10,000 years ago, when we first started domesticating them. They’d still do circles before they get in the litter box, they still hump their backs before they let you pick them up. And they’re not thinking about it, they’re just doing it. But you can’t look at this and say man, what a great coincidence.



CALLER: Yeah.



RUSH: There has to be — You know, some people in this audience get offended by the name God — so I would say there has to be a God because that’s an undeniable truth of life, too: there is a God.



CALLER: Right.



RUSH: You read that one?



CALLER: Yes, I did.



RUSH: Right. There is a God. Some people prefer Supreme Being, but something out there, something, it has to be. And you know what?



CALLER: Yes.



RUSH: I think that we’re going to get all the answers, because I believe that we wouldn?t be created by somebody so cruel that would enable us to be so smart as to ask all these questions but not get the answers? I don’t think we’re going to get ’em in this life. I mean, we’re capable of answering questions that we will never get the answers to here, but I believe I’m going to get the answers. I want to live a full life but I’m looking forward to the answers.



CALLER: Right.



RUSH: Because I have tons of questions, and they don’t involve evolution. I know about that. Okay?



CALLER: All right, and one more thing before you go. You’re going to have to do a new EIB studio tour of your new studio.



RUSH: Well, we’re not, oh yes, that’s true, but we’re not — the furniture is not in here yet, and we just have the basic broadcast elements here. When we get the room done and I get all the, you know, the pictures and stuff that I want in here we’ll do a new studio tour.



CALLER: Awesome.



RUSH: Okay. Thanks for the call out there, Jack. Don’t let these bigots in school or whoever is telling you this get away with this stuff.



CALLER: All right, I usually don’t.



RUSH: Good.

END TRANSCRIPT



<*ICON*> Visit the eStack for Classic Limbaugh Wit and Wisdom…

<a target=new href=”//home/folder/undeniabletruths.member.html”>(Rush’s First 35 Undeniable Truths of Life)</a>