Obama Regime Planned the Influx of Illegal Alien Children at the Border

RUSH: Let me get to this Southern border business. I want to share with you some of the details from our Morning Update today, for those of you who didn’t hear it. Six months ago the Regime began planning.

Six months ago now, folks. We’ve been speculating. We’ve been asking ourselves very logical questions. We’ve got 40,000/50,000 whatever it is, the number of unaccompanied children from El Salvador, Guatemala, Central American countries. They’re not close. They’re having to take trains. The train is called the Train of Death, by the way. They’re taking trains here. The logical question is: Where are their parents?

How’d they get out of the house or the village or wherever they live? Why are their parents not with them? Why all of these kids at once? How is this happening? When did it start? Why are we not sending them back? The border patrol has become day care centers for these arriving kids. You tell me this is not purposeful. Listen. “Six months ago, the Regime began planning how to transport tens of thousands of undocumented children from the border.

“A January 29th application was posted on Federal Business Opportunities, a website that advertises government contract openings. The post says the government was preparing for the arrival of undocumented kids. They sought vendors to handle transportation logistics” once they got here. January 29th, the Regime posts job openings on a website called Federal Business Opportunities. They’re advertising contract openings.



They need transportation services for undocumented children that are gonna be arriving. On January 29th, they knew. Now, “The document states Immigration and Customs Enforcement, ICE, has a ‘mission-critical responsibility for accepting custody of Unaccompanied Alien Children from US Border Patrol and other Federal agencies,’ and then, ‘transporting these juveniles to Office of Refugee Resettlement shelters located throughout the Continental United States.’

“It says there will be ‘approximately 65,000’ of these Unaccompanied Alien Children.” To sum up: On January 29th, the Feds post on Federal Business Opportunities, a website that advertises government contract job openings, openings preparing for the arrival of undocumented children, be ‘approximately 65,000,” seeking vendors to handle transportation logistics.

“ICE, has a ‘mission-critical responsibility for accepting custody of Unaccompanied Alien Children from US Border Patrol and other Federal agencies,’ and then, ‘transporting these juveniles to Office of Refugee Resettlement shelters located throughout the continental United States.'” So they were seeking transportation for 65,000 unaccompanied alien children back on January 29th.

“A spokeswoman for ICE, Barbara Gonzalez, confirmed the posting was authentic, but couldn’t provide additional information in response to questions from [the website] The Blaze. She did promise to get back to them when more information becomes available.” They are still holding their breath at The Blaze. They are turning blue there.

Well the “children crossing the border from Mexico and Central America didn’t just wake up one day, tell their parents ‘so long,’ adios, and skip town. Apparently, as many suspected, somebody in the [Regime] had advance knowledge that these thousands of undocumented children would be flooding the border, illegally, and would require transportation to” the Office of Refugee Settlement shelters.

“Whoever that ‘somebody’ in the Obama Regime is, oughta tell President Obama” about this. Somebody needs to go to the Oval Office. I don’t know who. I wouldn’t want to be the guy, but somebody better make tracks to the Oval Office right now and tell Obama that this whole thing was planned in advance by somebody. Don’t wait for the newspapers on this — and they’re not gonna trust me when they hear about it.

Somebody’s going to have to go tell Obama about this, that all these kids were planned in advance to show up.

He’s gonna be mad as hell. Can you believe it?

BREAK TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: Okay. So we just learned that back on January 29th the Regime had told everybody to be ready for an influx of up to 65,000 unaccompanied children, who, after crossing the border illegally, would need to be transported to refugee shelters. AP, of all places, a story yesterday.

“The Obama administration has released into the US an untold number of immigrant families caught traveling illegally from Central America in recent months and although the government knows how many it’s released, it won’t say publicly.”

Well, look at how they lied and covered up the fact that ICE released 36,000 illegal aliens with criminal convictions in 2013. Remember that? There were murderers and rapists in that release. So why should it surprise us when they refuse to tell us about releasing families. The Regime has a government to grow. The Regime has a party to grow here, and they’re gonna do it one way or another.



Now, from the article is this interesting little factoid. “The figure is widely believed to exceed 40,000 since October. It’s believed to be slightly below the roughly 52,000 children caught traveling illegally from Central America over the same period, an extraordinary increase since last year that is driving a humanitarian crisis at the border.”

So, in other words, the number of those released is only thought to be slightly below those who have come across the border. The bottom line is, in January the Regime was predicting and readying the transportation for 65,000 unaccompanied alien children.