Left Creates “Polar Vortex” to Make You Think Winter is Caused by Global Warming

RUSH: So, ladies and gentlemen, we are having a record-breaking cold snap in many parts of the country. And right on schedule the media have to come up with a way to make it sound like it’s completely unprecedented. Because they’ve got to find a way to attach this to the global warming agenda, and they have. It’s called the “polar vortex.” The dreaded polar vortex.

Do you know what the polar vortex is? Have you ever heard of it? Well, they just created it for this week. Actually, there is a piece. I’ve got a piece in the Stack that actually makes the case that all of this frigid, chilling cold is due to global warming, strange as it may sound, it says. Other wackos are saying it’s a great example of climate change, but regardless, the agenda is that we’re responsible, we’re causing it, we have to pay the price. And so any weather extreme now is said to be man-made, and therefore it fulfills the leftist agenda on this.

Now, in their attempt, the left, the media, everybody, to come up with a way to make this sound like it’s something new and completely unprecedented, they’ve come up with this phrase called the “polar vortex.” If you’ve been watching television, they’ve created a graphic, all the networks have, and it basically consists of a view of the planet if you are right above the North Pole. They put this big purple blob, or blue blob, or red blob, depending on the network you’re looking at, over the entire North Pole, and they call that the polar vortex. It actually sounds like a crappy science fiction movie to me, but anyway, that’s what they’re calling it. It makes it sound like the jet stream is being forced lower across the United States.



See, normally the polar vortex stays up there in the polar region, but something is causing it to dip down like it’s never happened before. We’ve never had arctic air blasts before. And remember, now, the key to all this is you have to understand one of the fundamental concepts of man-made global warming is ice melting at the poles. One of the ways they have always sought to convince you that the world is warming is not the climate where you live, but rather where you aren’t, where you can’t see what is really happening. So they tell you the ice is melting at the North Pole and the South Pole. And then they publish pictures, which are fraudulent pictures of poor little polar bears stranded on three square feet of ice that you are told used to be the North Pole.

That’s how fast it’s melting. The polar bears are in deep trouble. Algore participated in it. It’s an abject, total fraud. Well, obviously there is no melting of ice going on at the North Pole. If they’re gonna tell us the polar vortex is responsible for this cold, that means record cold is also happening in the North Pole, which means there isn’t any ice melting, and we know about the global warming expedition that went down to the South Pole, Antarctica, to prove that the ice is melting, and they got stuck, and then the rescuers got stuck, and then the people rescuing the rescuers got stuck, but never mind that. In none of the stories about the global warming expedition going to the South Pole needing to be rescued, not once did you see any reference to their mission.

They were just exploring the Antarctic, the news said. No; what they were doing was going down to prove the ice was melting, and they got stuck in it because they ran into ice where they didn’t expect to find any. So no matter how they go at this, they’re losing. They’re in the middle of a hoax, they’re perpetrating a hoax, but they’re relying on their total dominance of the media to lie to you each and every day about climate change and global warming. So they created the polar vortex, and the polar vortex, something’s happened, and that cold air which normally stays is in the North Pole, something’s happening, something deeply mysterious and perhaps tragic is happening.

Whatever it is that keeps the polar vortex vortexed in the Arctic Circle is vanishing, and that cold air is coming to us. Normally it stays up there. But now it’s down here. How did it get here? That’s the deepening mystery. That is the crisis. That is what is man-made. Man is destroying the invisible boundaries that keeps that air up there. How did it get cold in previous winters? Well, it got cold in previous winters, but, see, as far as most people are concerned, this is as cold as it’s ever been in their lives. Well, but, Snerdley, I’m just telling you their technique. Forget truth. The truth and the Democrat Party, the truth and the American left never intersect.

You take a 30-year-old. To him, history began the day he was born. He doesn’t know how cold it was 70 years ago unless he’s told. He doesn’t care. He thinks what’s happening now is either the best or the worst, whatever it is, ever. Everybody thinks that. Everybody’s historical perspective begins with the day they were born, unless they learn history, which is what we’re about here, is teaching it. So my point is you have a lot of people who are believing that this is as cold as it’s ever been. You might think that flies in the face of global warming. Ah, ah, ah, ah. Global warming’s not climate change, and we, folks, are causing all of this, you must understand. The hoax continues.

So now we got the polar vortex complete with graphics of a giant blue, red, whatever, blob up there. It’s escaped. Whatever keeps it there isn’t working anymore. Oh, no! That’s why we have this record cold, and man is doing that. This is how it works. In truth, folks, this is why it gets cold every winter. Arctic air finds its way down to us, and some winters the arctic air comes further south sooner than other winters, but it always happens. That’s why it gets cold. Where does the cold air come from? It always comes from the North Pole.

It always goes to Canada first, then comes to us, and it happens via the jet stream. Now, the jet stream is part of this, too. The jet stream is dipping down lower across the United States. That’s also said to be new and unique. In reality, this happens every winter as well, to a greater or lesser extent. But if they can make it sound new… This is the point. If they can make it sound new and unprecedented, then they can blame it all on man (particularly Republicans). They can blame it all on progress. They can blame it all on success, which leads to excess.

Success means people use more than their share of things like oil and fossil fuels, and they destroy the planet when they do this. You may think this ridiculous, folks. I’m telling you, some low-information people eat this up when they are told this. There’s an article. I referenced this a moment ago. It’s in The Daily Beast, which is a Tina Brown website. The leftists love this site. “Global Warming is Freezing You,” is the headline. It’s journalistic malpractice. I’m telling you, the truth and the left never intersect anymore.

It’s just stunning how everything their entire agenda is based on one lie after another. “Global Warming is Freezing You,” and the article claims that man-made global warming is slowing down the jet stream, and that’s why the cold air is coming down. Global warming is slowing down the jet stream! They don’t explain how. They just say, “It must be,” because, see, they’ve bought it. They have bought — hook, line, and sinker — man-made global warming. They believe it. I’ve told you; I read the tech blogs. Stunning, folks. They believe it.

There’s no questioning it, in a lot of sectors, particularly Millennials. Young people, those who think they’re experts in science, there’s no doubt. They just believe it, and so there has to be an explanation — and whatever man is doing has caused the jet stream to slow down, and that is permitting the polar vortex. Cold arctic air. Now, let’s say that President Obama called his science advisor. What is his science advisor’s name, Clapper? No, that’s the national security guy.

Oh, the science guy’s John Holdren. John Holdren was and is tight with Paul Ehrlich, the fraud behind The Population Bomb. No, no. I kid you not. John Holdren participated with Ehrlich in the bet that Julian Simon made with Ehrlich and Ehrlich lost it. Holdren is as wacko leftist as Ehrlich is. Holdren’s a science advisor. So let’s say this. Let’s say that Obama, because it’s really hot — say it’s August and it’s 95 degrees. Obama says, “We need to cool off Washington!”

So he calls up Holdren and he says, “Mr. Holdren, John, I want you to take action now to slow down the jet stream so that whatever that arctic air mass is comes down now. I want the autumnal blast now. I don’t want to wait ’til November for it. So, John, do what you have to do to get the jet stream slowed down so that arctic air comes south sooner, to cool everybody off in August.” Could Holdren or anybody do it? No. It isn’t possible. There’s not one thing you could do, while leaving civilization untouched. It’s absurd.

But they’re out there promulgating this stuff and taking advantage of every weather event. What they don’t know is — this is either Gallup or Pew — they’ve gone to the well too many times. On the long list of issues in a poll people were asked to rank in terms of importance, global warming is third from the bottom. I mean, they’ve really shot their wad on this. They’ve overdone it, and the reason that this has happened is, you can’t go to this well all these times. You can’t talk about warming and heating and melting and rising sea levels while people are freezing their rear ends off.

But they’re not giving up. I mean, the left never does. It is part of their agenda to grow government, raise taxes, limit freedom, and control people. It’s part of the agenda. It’s never gonna go away. They’re never going to admit that they’re wrong about this. They’re gonna continue to promulgate this hoax as long as they can. In fact, this Daily Beast story — which, again, is headlined, “Global Warming is Freezing You” — ends by saying, “Isn’t science neat?” I guess it is if you can rewrite the laws of physics.

If you can rewrite the laws of atmospherics to suit your political agenda, I guess science is neat, or if you can rewrite the terms of your religion to fit your agenda. Gosh, religion would be neat, too. But then it wouldn’t be science. Man-made global warming has nothing to do with science anyway. By the way, speaking of all this, US Coast Guard icebreaker on its way to rescue the crews on the Russian and ChiComs ships that are now stuck in the ice in Antarctica.

There are two rescue ships stuck in the ice in Antarctica. Why don’t they ever try to get the jet stream to come from the South Pole? You know, it’s summer down there now. Why not get the jet stream down there to counter the jet stream from the North Pole. I mean, if we’re doing something to cause the jet stream to slow down, let’s speed the one up from Antarctica.

BREAK TRANSCRIPT



RUSH: By the way, folks, on this cold snap. All of the long range weather I’ve been looking at, ’cause I’ve been trying to find as much as I can on what the weather’s gonna be for the New York area first week of February for the Super Bowl. I have some desires there, but the point is some of the best weather prognosticators I am exposed to were saying is that after this cold snap, winter is gonna moderate somewhat, and the next 30 days are gonna be normal or near above normal in a lot of places.

So let’s look at this. We have maybe three days of record-breaking, intense cold — and then, end of the week, places where it’s zero are gonna be 35 and 40, two or three days. Okay, so what’s somebody gonna do to put the boundaries back on the polar vortex? Somebody destroyed the polar vortex. Something happened. The jet stream for three days here has moved on south, and it’s freezing everybody, but only for three days — and then, all of a sudden, the cold air’s gonna go back to the North Pole.

Now, if man is causing that, who’s doing it, and what are they doing?

Jack Frost?

You think Jack Frost is the culprit here? Wow, interesting. No, that’s a serious question. George Bush’s weatherman who steered Katrina into New Orleans? Yeah, could be. Who’s responsible? If man is responsible for this cold snap, then how’s it gonna end up back in the forties and thirties in places it’s below zero today? Who’s gonna change whatever it is their doing and keep the cold air at the North Pole? Well, to me it’s a logical question. If man’s causing this cold snap, then who is the man behind the curtain that’s gonna end the cold snap, and why?

Why doesn’t he keep it cold?

Why doesn’t the polar vortex stay vortexed?

Who’s playing around with the jet stream?

BREAK TRANSCRIPT

RUSH: I am not gonna get trapped in this soap opera, which is what the news is. That’s what they want us all talking about, and you can watch the cable news networks to find out what the soap opera is.

The soap opera is simply what the Democrats want you to think the news of the day is, and that is whatever the Democrat agenda is, and the Democrat agenda is: “We’ve got to get people’s attention distracted from Obamacare. So, guess what? We need to extend unemployment benefits, and we’ll tug at people’s heartstrings again. It’s cold, it’s miserable, and people have lost their unemployment benefits!

“How could we be so cruel? We’ll force the Republicans into that — and, of course, income inequality and all that.” I have been there, done that. It’s like, on CNN right now, “Polar Vortex Grounds 2500 Flights!” So now we’re creating this brand-new weather disaster (man-made, obviously), and we just cannot escape this. Sorry not to let this go. But, folks, if I’m obsessive about anything on this program, it is the truth.

Our last caller, it troubles me. I don’t mind admitting it to you. You know, I’m not — and don’t misunderstand. I’m not taking any of this personally. I’m digesting it professionally and asking myself aloud here, letting you into my thoughts: How can I do this better? We just had a guy call who admits to listening every day, who is a smart guy. You could obviously tell he’s a smart guy.

He’s an entrepreneur, he’s a self-starter, a small businessman. He’s done well, he’s done poorly, but he’s a smart guy, and he clearly understood what Obamacare was all about, but he didn’t at the same time. I asked him, “You’re a regular listener here. I told you what it was going to be. Why are you surprised?” That’s not a criticism of him. I’m asking that because for 3-1/2 years I’ve done my level best to explain this.

To me, this is simply taking information in, processing it, and figure how I can do this better. Because, to me, defeating the left is all about honesty and truth. They’re not. How many times have I said, “If we could just get people to understand, on an ideological basis, what liberalism is, how much easier it would be to explain to everybody every element of the Democrat Party agenda?”

If they understood liberalism or statism, take your pick, whatever you want to call it. I’m constantly searching for ways to be more persuasive, to be taken seriously, ’cause I don’t make things up. I mean, I’m not into that. I don’t want to advance myself through falsehoods. I have an agenda, too, and I don’t want to be advance it falsely. I don’t want people believing what I say if I’m lying to ’em — and, consequently, I don’t lie.

I want everything to be legit, you know, up and up. Global warming is a great example. It’s a full-fledged, now documented hoax. Yet if you listen to the news media, it’s still in full swing, and it explains this cold snap. I have here in my formerly nicotine-stained fingers a website. It’s Business Insider, of all things, that explains the polar vortex.

Now, I want to read this to you. “As tundra-like temperatures and wind chills as cold as 70 below zero fan out across the country, everyone is blaming the ‘polar vortex.’ Polar vortexes, though, are nothing new. They occur seasonally at the North Pole, and their formation resembles that of hurricanes in more tropical regions: fast-moving winds build up around a calm center.

“Unlike a hurricane, these are frigid polar winds, circling the Arctic at more than 100 miles per hour. The spinning winds typically trap this cold air in the Arctic. But the problem comes when the polar vortex weakens or splits apart, essentially flinging these cold wind patterns out of the Arctic and into our backyards. NOAA scientists have suggested,” which means they don’t have the foggiest idea.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration “scientists have suggested that warming temperatures in the Arctic may be responsible for the weakening of the polar vortex.” So, you see, it’s magic! Supposedly, man-made global warming is causing record cold, because warming temperatures may be responsible for the weakening of the polar vortex — and when the polar vortex weakens, it’s more likely to break apart and become a factor in our winter weather.

For example, boys and girls, “A 2009 vortex breakdown drove temperatures in parts of the Midwest down to -22F. Here’s a NASA illustration of the polar vortex and it splitting in two,” and they’ve got a graphic here. I’m not gonna bother showing it to you, ’cause it didn’t print out. It doesn’t matter. No big deal. Now, this is reported here as fact, as news, but the word “suggested” was used in connection with what scientists think.

So despite the polar vortex freezing everybody’s buns off, it’s because arctic air is getting warmer and it’s breaking down the boundaries of the polar vortex. Now, I’m here to assure you this is a crock, but this is how the left works, and you don’t have anybody in the media questioning this. All you have to do is have somebody put this news out, and the agenda has been set. “Man is causing the climate to warm, period!”

There’s no challenge to that. There’s nobody in the American news media that does not believe that. Well, not “nobody.” There are some detractors. But I’m talking ABC, CBS, NBC, New York Times, Washington Post. In the Drive-By Media, there’s nobody questions it, and so something like this there has to be something man is doing that causes this, and there isn’t.

But then to add insult to injury, we have warming temperatures at the North Pole where the ice sheet formed earlier and is larger than it’s been in a while. There’s no warming of any kind going on in the arctic, is the point — and yet, arctic air is getting warmer, causing the vortex to split apart and fling itself at us. Okay, fine. Well, by Friday it’s gonna be 40 degrees where today it’s five below.

Wherever it’s five below today it’s gonna be 40 by Friday, five days from now. Okay, so what’s gonna happen to put that boundary back in the polar vortex? Is the arctic air gonna all of a sudden get dramatically cool again and the vortex is gonna seal itself back up? This is all absurd stuff.