Stack of Stuff Quick Hits Page March 9, 2010 Story #1: Bart Stupak Now "Optimistic" on Health Care Deal



RUSH: I'm wondering right now, based on everything I've read in the news today, I'm wondering how much of the stimulus package, the Porkulus package, is being parceled out this week by Nancy Pelosi to buy votes in the House of Representatives for the Senate health care bill. It's a good thing that money wasn't wasted on shovel-ready jobs and infrastructure so that Pelosi would have that money remaining to buy off recalcitrant House members as they still don't have the votes. I warned you about Bart Stupak yesterday. There's a story out, Stupak, "I think we're very close here to a compromise on it." Here it is. It's from FoxNews.com. "Stupak 'More Optimistic' Abortion Fight Will End." I told you yesterday: These are Democrats and they're out looking for something personal here.



They're not taking some stand. Look, if you want to know how malleable Stupak is on abortion... He's got this great image of pro-lifer, but last year (maybe the year before, I forget which) the House Republicans, knowing they would never get this passed but they still circulated a proposal (it was either an amendment to some bill or a stand alone) that they wanted to federally defund Planned Parenthood. Because the dirty little secret is that if you really want to cut abortions, if you want to reduced them, you defund Planned Parenthood. Planned Parenthood is responsible for most of the abortions that take place in the country. So if you take the money away from them... So they sent this to Stupak. He wouldn't go along with it. Now, here's a guy who is the Democrat pro-life champion. Here's a proposal that would defund Planned Parenthood and significantly reduce the number of abortions. Nope, nope, nope!



So he's a Democrat first. There's no such thing as "moderate Democrats." They're just Democrats. Blue Dogs, lapdogs, junkyard dogs, you name it: They are Democrats first. "A key anti-abortion Democrat in the House said he's confident a deal will be struck that resolves a critical dispute over abortion language in Obama's sweeping health care overhaul." Now, a lot of people are looking at this and oh, they're shocked! This is not a shock. This is imminently predictable. "Stupak said he expects to resume talks with House leaders this week in a quest for wording that would impose no new limits on abortion rights but also would not allow use of federal money for the procedure. Prospects are good for resolving a dispute over abortion that has led some House Democrats to threaten to withhold support" for Obama, Stupak said.



We can keep reading from this, and I think I will. "'I'm more optimistic than I was a week ago,' Stupak told The Associated Press between meetings with constituents in his northern Michigan district... 'The president says he doesn't want to expand or restrict current law (on abortion). Neither do I,' Stupak said. 'That's never been our position. So is there some language that we can agree on that hits both points -- we don't restrict, we don't expand abortion rights? I think we can get there.' ... Residents offered mixed messages on health care Monday during several stops in small towns near the southern end of the district. Donna Reminder, 77, said she didn't like abortion but didn't want Stupak to let the issue keep him from supporting a health bill. 'I'd say go for it anyway. We need it,' Reminder said during lunch at a senior center. 'Not having good health care is killing a lot of people.'"



Well, we never saw this coming. The AP somehow goes out and finds a pro-lifer who's willing to throw the issue away for health care. I wonder how long that took 'em. Five seconds? And, of course, the ever obliging AP gets in on this, too, to give Stupak cover. "



What it means is that federal funding for abortion is the endgame and it's in there and that's why they're not protesting. Here's another expert: "'I actually think the Senate bill will more effectively prohibit federal funds from going to abortion,' said Stephen Schneck, director of the Institute for Policy Research & Catholic Studies at Catholic University of America in Washington. 'That legislation will actually reduce the demand for abortion in the United States.'" Now, how convenient that the Associated Press found such an expert in somebody who works at the Catholic University. (interruption) I know it's a notoriously liberal place in Washington. Don't forget, the Catholic Church has got many different factions. In California some official church group of bishops or cardinals or whoever it was, priests, established new things you could do for Lent like not drive your car one day a week, or turn off a lightbulb. For Lent!



So anyway... See? Even abortion opponents agree that the Senate bill does not expand the current federal law on abortion, even though it does include federal funding for abortion, which is in direct contradiction to the federal law known as the Hyde amendment. So what on earth is the problem with Stupak voting for the bill now? I knew this was going to happen. Stupak's got, what did he say, 12, 13 people with him? Pfft! This is as easy to read... This is like reading the stitches on a softball, slow pitch, underhand that this was going to happen.



Story #2: New Obamacare Provision Slams Small Businesses



RUSH: You small business people -- ha-ha -- get this: "A Democratic aide says a new provision in the health care bill will require businesses to count part-time workers when calculating penalties for failing to provide coverage." A lot of businesses in this tough economic climate are hiring part timers for that express reason. "The bill originally passed by the Senate only penalized businesses for full-time workers who weren’t covered. The Senate bill is being used as the basis for a final package President Barack Obama wants Congress to pass in the next few weeks.



"The inclusion of part-time workers is part of a package of final changes that is nearing completion, according to the aide, who spoke on condition of anonymity because it's not been made public," yet it has been made public, just now. "Democrats feared that businesses would avoid penalties by hiring more part-time workers. But business groups oppose the change as overly burdensome."



Somebody that understands all this better than I do -- and that's very few people -- is going to have to explain to me how the Democrats are writing new language into bills already voted on. The Senate bill cannot be amended. It is what it is and this is not in the Senate bill, yet it says here: "A Democratic aide says a new provision in the health care bill will require businesses to count --" Where is that being added? Somebody needs to tell me. And, of course, this is State-Controlled AP, so they're probably not even curious about this. Some nameless, faceless Democrat aide comes up: "Oh, guess what, we're going to really stick it to these businesses now, we're going to penalize them if they don't offer insurance to part-timers." Oh, good, AP dutifully writes it down, puts it out on the wire. And nobody says, "How the hell can this happen?" Somebody needs to explain this to me.



I mean, I'm serious. I want to know. "A Democratic aide says a new provision in the health care bill will require businesses to count part-time workers when calculating penalties for failing to provide coverage." How? Aside from small businesses being screwed again, which is obvious here, what are they adding this to? There's only one piece of legislation. It's the Senate bill passed on Christmas Eve. What are they adding this to? There will not be any reconciliation. Anybody still talking about that is being fooled by it. They don't have the time, for one thing. The CBO does not have time to score everything that's going to happen during the reconciliation process, and I guarantee you that if Pelosi gets the votes -- and she doesn't have them now. She's probably under 200 votes right now. I'm sure she's parceling out stimulus money. But if they pass the Senate bill, that's all, folks.



They're going to take it up to Obama and he's going to sign it and that's it. I don't know where they're adding these provisions. Now, we're gonna get on the phone here and find out to what all this is being added and by who -- and who's voting on it? I mean, this story just says, "A Democratic aide says a new provision in the health care bill," and there isn't one in the House. Well, there is, but it's worthless, because the Senate's never going to pass this thing. "[W]ill require businesses to count part-time workers when calculating penalties for failing to provide coverage. The bill originally passed by the Senate only penalized businesses for full-time workers..." So they're adding it to something else here and they're not voting on it. So it hasn't happened. They're just adding it in but they're hasn't been a vote on it yet. It's not a fait accompli.



Story #3: The New Normal: 10% Unemployment in America



RUSH: It was just yesterday that I told you about this… Remember, Snerdley? Your eyes got wide and a lightbulb went off? I said, "What if they tell us that the new norm for unemployment is now ten to 12% and everything's fine at ten to 12%." Well, what's the source for this? Looks like it's CNBC.com: "A top Federal Reserve official said Tuesday that policy-makers may be accepting a higher level of unemployment as their goal in the future."



Might have to accept a higher jobless rate as normal. Right there it is, ladies and gentlemen, I hold this story in my formerly nicotine-stained fingers. So my accuracy rating may not plunge at all, especially after the delay here, assessing the accuracy of my opinion on the Republicans showing up at the summit.



Story #4: Howard Dean Leads SEIU Protest at Ritz-Carlton



RUSH: By the way, there's a Big Health Care protest at the Ritz-Carlton in Washington. There's an insurance executive meeting going on inside the Ritz-Carlton, and the SEIU is protesting out there -- the union being led by Howard Dean.



Story #5: Analyst: California Climate Laws Kill Jobs



RUSH: We have actual on-the-ground proof, ladies and gentlemen, that climate policy is a job loser. "California is likely to see modest job losses in the near term from its aggressive climate change policy due to higher energy costs and other factors, the state's independent Legislative Analyst's Office said. The budget watchdog was responding to a request by Republican state Senator Dave Cogdill to study the effects of California's 2006 climate change law, which mandates changes to cut greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020. California's environmental vanguard approach is being hotly debated in the state ahead of a November gubernatorial race and in the midst of an economic downturn that has pushed unemployment to recent records. Many other states and the federal government are watching closely." The aggregate net jobs impact will be negative. Going green, Obama's signature energy policy loses jobs, raises prices, and will cause even more unemployment, ladies and gentlemen. We gotta do it, though, to save the planet.



Story #6: Pelosi: We Must Pass Bill to Show You What's In It



RUSH: Nancy Pelosi delivered a speech this morning at the 2010 legislative conference for the National Association of Counties. Among other things, Nancy Pelosi said, "We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it, away from the fog of controversy." May I repeat that? Nancy Pelosi in a speech this morning at the 2010 Legislative Conference for the National Association of Counties said, quote, "We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it, away from the fog of controversy." Yep. We gotta pass it so everybody will then know what's in it. "You've heard about the controversies within the bill, the process about the bill, one or the other. But I don't know if you have heard that it is legislation for the future, not just about health care for America, but about a healthier America, where preventive care is not something that you have to pay a deductible for or out of pocket. Prevention, prevention, prevention -- it's about diet, not diabetes," Nancy Pelosi. I'm just telling you what she said. We gotta pass the bill so that's how we find out what's in it, away from the fog of controversy.



RUSH: I'm wondering right now, based on everything I've read in the news today, I'm wondering how much of the stimulus package, the Porkulus package, is being parceled out this week by Nancy Pelosi to buy votes in the House of Representatives for the Senate health care bill. It's a good thing that money wasn't wasted on shovel-ready jobs and infrastructure so that Pelosi would have that money remaining to buy off recalcitrant House members as they still don't have the votes. I warned you about Bart Stupak yesterday. There's a story out, Stupak, "I think we're very close here to a compromise on it." Here it is. It's from FoxNews.com. "Stupak 'More Optimistic' Abortion Fight Will End." I told you yesterday: These are Democrats and they're out looking for something personal here.They're not taking some stand. Look, if you want to know how malleable Stupak is on abortion... He's got this great image of pro-lifer, but last year (maybe the year before, I forget which) the House Republicans, knowing they would never get this passed but they still circulated a proposal (it was either an amendment to some bill or a stand alone) that they wanted to federally defund Planned Parenthood. Because the dirty little secret is that if you really want to cut abortions, if you want to reduced them, you defund Planned Parenthood. Planned Parenthood is responsible for most of the abortions that take place in the country. So if you take the money away from them... So they sent this to Stupak. He wouldn't go along with it. Now, here's a guy who is the Democrat pro-life champion. Here's a proposal that would defund Planned Parenthood and significantly reduce the number of abortions. Nope, nope, nope!So he's a Democrat first. There's no such thing as "moderate Democrats." They're just Democrats. Blue Dogs, lapdogs, junkyard dogs, you name it: They are Democrats first. "A key anti-abortion Democrat in the House said he's confident a deal will be struck that resolves a critical dispute over abortion language in Obama's sweeping health care overhaul." Now, a lot of people are looking at this and oh, they're shocked! This is not a shock. This is imminently predictable. "Stupak said he expects to resume talks with House leaders this week in a quest for wording that would impose no new limits on abortion rights but also would not allow use of federal money for the procedure. Prospects are good for resolving a dispute over abortion that has led some House Democrats to threaten to withhold support" for Obama, Stupak said.We can keep reading from this, and I think I will. "'I'm more optimistic than I was a week ago,' Stupak told The Associated Press between meetings with constituents in his northern Michigan district... 'The president says he doesn't want to expand or restrict current law (on abortion). Neither do I,' Stupak said. 'That's never been our position. So is there some language that we can agree on that hits both points -- we don't restrict, we don't expand abortion rights? I think we can get there.' ... Residents offered mixed messages on health care Monday during several stops in small towns near the southern end of the district. Donna Reminder, 77, said she didn't like abortion but didn't want Stupak to let the issue keep him from supporting a health bill. 'I'd say go for it anyway. We need it,' Reminder said during lunch at a senior center. 'Not having good health care is killing a lot of people.'"Well, we never saw this coming. The AP somehow goes out and finds a pro-lifer who's willing to throw the issue away for health care. I wonder how long that took 'em. Five seconds? And, of course, the ever obliging AP gets in on this, too, to give Stupak cover. " A Policy Change on Abortion but How Radical ?" By Ricardo Alonso-Zaldivar. "President Barack Obama's health care bill would change federal policy on abortion, but not open the spigot of taxpayer dollars that some abortion opponents fear. Abortion rights groups such as Planned Parenthood and NARAL Pro-Choice America say the House and Senate versions of the bill represent the biggest expansion of abortion restrictions in years, yet they're not trying to defeat the measures." Whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. Wait a second. That of course, folks, that puts the lie to the whole thing. If Planned Parenthood and NAGs "say the House and Senate versions of the bill represent the biggest expansion of abortion restrictions in years" but are not opposing it, then it doesn't "represent the biggest expansion of abortion restrictions" in history.What it means is that federal funding for abortion is the endgame and it's in there and that's why they're not protesting. Here's another expert: "'I actually think the Senate bill will more effectively prohibit federal funds from going to abortion,' said Stephen Schneck, director of the Institute for Policy Research & Catholic Studies at Catholic University of America in Washington. 'That legislation will actually reduce the demand for abortion in the United States.'" Now, how convenient that the Associated Press found such an expert in somebody who works at the Catholic University. (interruption) I know it's a notoriously liberal place in Washington. Don't forget, the Catholic Church has got many different factions. In California some official church group of bishops or cardinals or whoever it was, priests, established new things you could do for Lent like not drive your car one day a week, or turn off a lightbulb. For Lent!So anyway... See? Even abortion opponents agree that the Senate bill does not expand the current federal law on abortion, even though it does include federal funding for abortion, which is in direct contradiction to the federal law known as the Hyde amendment. So what on earth is the problem with Stupak voting for the bill now? I knew this was going to happen. Stupak's got, what did he say, 12, 13 people with him? Pfft! This is as easy to read... This is like reading the stitches on a softball, slow pitch, underhand that this was going to happen.RUSH: You small business people -- ha-ha -- get this: "A Democratic aide says a new provision in the health care bill will require businesses to count part-time workers when calculating penalties for failing to provide coverage." A lot of businesses in this tough economic climate are hiring part timers for that express reason. "The bill originally passed by the Senate only penalized businesses for full-time workers who weren’t covered. The Senate bill is being used as the basis for a final package President Barack Obama wants Congress to pass in the next few weeks."The inclusion of part-time workers is part of a package of final changes that is nearing completion, according to the aide, who spoke on condition of anonymity because it's not been made public," yet it has been made public, just now. "Democrats feared that businesses would avoid penalties by hiring more part-time workers. But business groups oppose the change as overly burdensome."Somebody that understands all this better than I do -- and that's very few people -- is going to have to explain to me how the Democrats are writing new language into bills already voted on. The Senate bill cannot be amended. It is what it is and this is not in the Senate bill, yet it says here: "A Democratic aide says a new provision in the health care bill will require businesses to count --" Where is that being added? Somebody needs to tell me. And, of course, this is State-Controlled AP, so they're probably not even curious about this. Some nameless, faceless Democrat aide comes up: "Oh, guess what, we're going to really stick it to these businesses now, we're going to penalize them if they don't offer insurance to part-timers." Oh, good, AP dutifully writes it down, puts it out on the wire. And nobody says, "How the hell can this happen?" Somebody needs to explain this to me.I mean, I'm serious. I want to know. "A Democratic aide says a new provision in the health care bill will require businesses to count part-time workers when calculating penalties for failing to provide coverage." How? Aside from small businesses being screwed again, which is obvious here, what are they adding this to? There's only one piece of legislation. It's the Senate bill passed on Christmas Eve. What are they adding this to? There will not be any reconciliation. Anybody still talking about that is being fooled by it. They don't have the time, for one thing. The CBO does not have time to score everything that's going to happen during the reconciliation process, and I guarantee you that if Pelosi gets the votes -- and she doesn't have them now. She's probably under 200 votes right now. I'm sure she's parceling out stimulus money. But if they pass the Senate bill, that's all, folks.They're going to take it up to Obama and he's going to sign it and that's it. I don't know where they're adding these provisions. Now, we're gonna get on the phone here and find out to what all this is being added and by who -- and who's voting on it? I mean, this story just says, "A Democratic aide says a new provision in the health care bill," and there isn't one in the House. Well, there is, but it's worthless, because the Senate's never going to pass this thing. "[W]ill require businesses to count part-time workers when calculating penalties for failing to provide coverage. The bill originally passed by the Senate only penalized businesses for full-time workers..." So they're adding it to something else here and they're not voting on it. So it hasn't happened. They're just adding it in but they're hasn't been a vote on it yet. It's not a fait accompli.RUSH: It was just yesterday that I told you about this… Remember, Snerdley? Your eyes got wide and a lightbulb went off? I said, "What if they tell us that the new norm for unemployment is now ten to 12% and everything's fine at ten to 12%." Well, what's the source for this? Looks like it's CNBC.com: "A top Federal Reserve official said Tuesday that policy-makers may be accepting a higher level of unemployment as their goal in the future."Might have to accept a higher jobless rate as normal. Right there it is, ladies and gentlemen, I hold this story in my formerly nicotine-stained fingers. So my accuracy rating may not plunge at all, especially after the delay here, assessing the accuracy of my opinion on the Republicans showing up at the summit.RUSH: By the way, there's a Big Health Care protest at the Ritz-Carlton in Washington. There's an insurance executive meeting going on inside the Ritz-Carlton, and the SEIU is protesting out there -- the union being led by Howard Dean.RUSH: We have actual on-the-ground proof, ladies and gentlemen, that climate policy is a job loser. "California is likely to see modest job losses in the near term from its aggressive climate change policy due to higher energy costs and other factors, the state's independent Legislative Analyst's Office said. The budget watchdog was responding to a request by Republican state Senator Dave Cogdill to study the effects of California's 2006 climate change law, which mandates changes to cut greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020. California's environmental vanguard approach is being hotly debated in the state ahead of a November gubernatorial race and in the midst of an economic downturn that has pushed unemployment to recent records. Many other states and the federal government are watching closely." The aggregate net jobs impact will be negative. Going green, Obama's signature energy policy loses jobs, raises prices, and will cause even more unemployment, ladies and gentlemen. We gotta do it, though, to save the planet.RUSH: Nancy Pelosi delivered a speech this morning at the 2010 legislative conference for the National Association of Counties. Among other things, Nancy Pelosi said, "We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it, away from the fog of controversy." May I repeat that? Nancy Pelosi in a speech this morning at the 2010 Legislative Conference for the National Association of Counties said, quote, "We have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it, away from the fog of controversy." Yep. We gotta pass it so everybody will then know what's in it. "You've heard about the controversies within the bill, the process about the bill, one or the other. But I don't know if you have heard that it is legislation for the future, not just about health care for America, but about a healthier America, where preventive care is not something that you have to pay a deductible for or out of pocket. Prevention, prevention, prevention -- it's about diet, not diabetes," Nancy Pelosi. I'm just telling you what she said. We gotta pass the bill so that's how we find out what's in it, away from the fog of controversy. Story #7: Heritage Foundation on Obama's Total Failure on Iran



RUSH: I was mentioning the Heritage Foundation a moment ago, and we're talking about the word "failure" all over the Obama administration, but there is an area in US foreign policy that Obama is really, really botching, and he doesn't care, or doesn't appear to be, and that is Iran. Now, failure is a one-word description that comes to mind when you look at Obama's effort to curb Iran's hostile actions, nuclear buildup and what have you. Has anybody kept track of the number of countries joining our efforts in generating a fourth round of UN sanctions? Have you been keeping track? Have you been keeping track just how successful the first three rounds of sanctions have worked? Ha-ha. I mean they haven't!



Every time there's news of Iran's nuclear weapon developments or more evidence of state-sponsored terrorism from Iran, we get an idle threat that we are thinking taking tough measures. What really happens? It may be time for some new thinking on this and the Heritage Foundation is new thinkers, unique, original. There are 600,000 members now at Heritage, thanks largely to this program. Concerns for our national security don't just pass by our friends at Heritage Foundation, they give it thought; they put forth good ideas. They've got all kinds of departments, divisions, chairs, endowments. They got people chronicling health care, informing people about the latest approach Obama's taking, but they also watch foreign policy as well. It's a whole different bunch of people that do that. Look online today at



This administration is a disaster from front-to-back, top-to-bottom, side-to-side. We are a great nation at risk in a dangerous world, and we are being led by a young man-child who is the most unqualified, inexperienced guy in whatever room he walks into, be it The Situation Room or the Oval Office or the cabinet room.



Story #8: Photo: Jay-Z in the White House Situation Room



RUSH: Did you see, by the way, that they put out a picture of Jay-Z, the well known rapper, sitting in the president's chair in the Situation Room? Now, nobody gets in the Situation Room, least of all rappers sitting there pretending to be running some foreign policy operation, but they put the picture out there.



Story #9: Obama Administration Wants to Ban Sports Fishing



RUSH: Ladies and gentlemen, I have always said to all of you that the sports media in America is as liberal, leftist, closed-minded as is the news media. So I am going to be interesting to see their reaction to this story. It's from



So fishing is on the verge becoming a privilege controlled by Barack Obama. Fishing! I have one experience as a fisherman. I went up there to Vancouver, British Columbia. I went up there with Paul Westphal, who is the coach of the Sacramento Kings, Howard Slusher; who was then (and may still be) at Nike; and the Hutch, Ken Hutcherson, the Reverend Dr. Ken Hutcherson. It's where I met the Hutch. Slusher had won this trip bidding at an auction for some fundraiser somewhere. Well, it's not the first time. I had been fishing when I was a candidate over in Illinois, and we caught something like 20,000 bluegill or carp or something whatever they were. It stunk up my hands for I can't tell you how many weeks. I wanted no part of it. I love the water but not being out on it.



So anyway, go up there. We had these tour guides and they take us out on these little boats, and a couple of us fished. I caught a salmon but a damn sea lion waited until I'd almost roped it all in and then came and just gobbled it up off the hook. In fact, there's a story. I had this story yesterday. They're treating somewhere up in Oregon sea lions as criminals because they do this. They're predators of salmon, and salmon are protected. This is one for PETA because who do you side with here? The salmon are getting wide out about the sea lions, and the story is hilarious. It treats the sea lions as a bunch of Al Capones! They don't go as far as Mirandize them, but they talking about punishing them and cordoning them off and it's hilarious. Anyways, I'm not a big angler as it is, but I know a lot of people who are. I know a lot of people, former professional athletes, who go into shock after hearing they can't go fishing anymore because of Obama.



I wonder what the sports media is going to say about this.



Story #10: Gov't May Provide Free Wireless to Some Americans



RUSH: Get this. More candy from Washington, ladies and gentlemen. "The federal government, US regulators may dedicate spectrum --" this is broadcast spectrum "-- to free wireless Internet service for some Americans to increase affordable broadband service nationwide, according to the FCC. The FCC provided few details about how it would carry out such a plan and who would qualify." They're going to give away Internet service next, but not to everybody, just certain people. Nobody's going to pay for it, Snerdley. Well, your children or grandchildren. We don't have the money for this. We don't.



Story #11: Massa Investigated for Groping Multiple Male Staffers



RUSH: Washington Post, breaking news: Eric Massa investigated for groping male staffers, multiple male staffers.



Story #12: Study Shows Women Who Drink Wine Lose Weight



RUSH: I guess Eric Massa won't be interested in this story from Reuters: "Wine May be Good for Women's Waistlines -- Light to moderate alcohol consumption, especially red wine, is not only good for a woman's heart, it's also good for her waistline, according to a study reported Monday." I think Maureen Dowd might be happy, but she drinks white wine, and this says red. There's gotta be another reason for this besides just the wine.



RUSH: I was mentioning the Heritage Foundation a moment ago, and we're talking about the word "failure" all over the Obama administration, but there is an area in US foreign policy that Obama is really, really botching, and he doesn't care, or doesn't appear to be, and that is Iran. Now, failure is aone-word description that comes to mind when you look at Obama's effort to curb Iran's hostile actions, nuclear buildup and what have you. Has anybody kept track of the number of countries joining our efforts in generating a fourth round of UN sanctions? Have you been keeping track? Have you been keeping track just how successful the first three rounds of sanctions have worked? Ha-ha. I mean they haven't!Every time there's news of Iran's nuclear weapon developments or more evidence of state-sponsored terrorism from Iran, we get an idle threat that we are thinking taking tough measures. What really happens? It may be time for some new thinking on this and the Heritage Foundation is new thinkers, unique, original. There are 600,000 members now at Heritage, thanks largely to this program. Concerns for our national security don't just pass by our friends at Heritage Foundation, they give it thought; they put forth good ideas. They've got all kinds of departments, divisions, chairs, endowments. They got people chronicling health care, informing people about the latest approach Obama's taking, but they also watch foreign policy as well. It's a whole different bunch of people that do that. Look online today at AskHeritage.org at the ten action steps that Heritage readily encourages and ask yourself if this doesn't make more sense than what Hillary Clinton's asking our neighbors in Latin America to consider this week.This administration is a disaster from front-to-back, top-to-bottom, side-to-side. We are a great nation at risk in a dangerous world, and we are being led by a young man-child who is the most unqualified, inexperienced guy in whatever room he walks into, be it The Situation Room or the Oval Office or the cabinet room.RUSH: Did you see, by the way, that they put out a picture of Jay-Z, the well known rapper, sitting in the president's chair in the Situation Room? Now, nobody gets in the Situation Room, least of all rappers sitting there pretending to be running some foreign policy operation, but they put the picture out there.RUSH: Ladies and gentlemen, I have always said to all of you that the sports media in America is as liberal, leftist, closed-minded as is the news media. So I am going to be interesting to see their reaction to this story. It's from ESPNoutdoors.com . "The Obama administration will accept no more public input for a federal strategy that could prohibit U.S. citizens from fishing the nation's oceans, coastal areas, Great Lakes, and even inland waters. This announcement comes at the time when the situation supposedly still is 'fluid' and the Interagency Ocean Policy Task Force still hasn't issued its final report on zoning uses of these waters." Robert Montgomery is the author here and he says, "That's a disappointment, but not really a surprise for fishing industry insiders who have negotiated for months with officials at the Council on Environmental Quality and bureaucrats on the task force. These angling advocates have come to suspect that public input into the process was a charade from the beginning."So fishing is on the verge becoming a privilege controlled by Barack Obama. Fishing! I have one experience as a fisherman. I went up there to Vancouver, British Columbia. I went up there with Paul Westphal, who is the coach of the Sacramento Kings, Howard Slusher; who was then (and may still be) at Nike; and the Hutch, Ken Hutcherson, the Reverend Dr. Ken Hutcherson. It's where I met the Hutch. Slusher had won this trip bidding at an auction for some fundraiser somewhere. Well, it's not the first time. I had been fishing when I was a candidate over in Illinois, and we caught something like 20,000 bluegill or carp or something whatever they were. It stunk up my hands for I can't tell you how many weeks. I wanted no part of it. I love the water but not being out on it.So anyway, go up there. We had these tour guides and they take us out on these little boats, and a couple of us fished. I caught a salmon but a damn sea lion waited until I'd almost roped it all in and then came and just gobbled it up off the hook. In fact, there's a story. I had this story yesterday. They're treating somewhere up in Oregon sea lions as criminals because they do this. They're predators of salmon, and salmon are protected. This is one for PETA because who do you side with here? The salmon are getting wide out about the sea lions, and the story is hilarious. It treats the sea lions as a bunch of Al Capones! They don't go as far as Mirandize them, but they talking about punishing them and cordoning them off and it's hilarious. Anyways, I'm not a big angler as it is, but I know a lot of people who are. I know a lot of people, former professional athletes, who go into shock after hearing they can't go fishing anymore because of Obama.I wonder what the sports media is going to say about this. Jim Hoft at the Gateway Pundit : "Obama's Latest Assault on Freedom -- New regulations will ban sport fishing. Barack Obama has a message for America's 60 million anglers: We don't need you." So I wonder what all these namby-pamby little sportswriters are going to think about this, 'cause they're going to be conflicted. They're going to be conflicted because animals are animals and they shouldn't be savaged by us, and Obama is a great young man-child president and so forth. If I had to make a prediction I'd say the sportswriter community will come out against fishing, and "This is long overdue. It's inhumane. Obama's right!" I hope I'm wrong, but I seldom am.RUSH: Get this. More candy from Washington, ladies and gentlemen. "The federal government, US regulators may dedicate spectrum --" this is broadcast spectrum "-- to free wireless Internet service for some Americans to increase affordable broadband service nationwide, according to the FCC. The FCC provided few details about how it would carry out such a plan and who would qualify." They're going to give away Internet service next, but not to everybody, just certain people. Nobody's going to pay for it, Snerdley. Well, your children or grandchildren. We don't have the money for this. We don't.RUSH: Washington Post, breaking news: Eric Massa investigated for groping male staffers, multiple male staffers.RUSH: I guess Eric Massa won't be interested in this story from Reuters: "Wine May be Good for Women's Waistlines -- Light to moderate alcohol consumption, especially red wine, is not only good for a woman's heart, it's also good for her waistline, according to a study reported Monday." I think Maureen Dowd might be happy, but she drinks white wine, and this says red. There's gotta be another reason for this besides just the wine. *Note: Links to content outside RushLimbaugh.com usually become inactive over time. OBSCENE PROFIT CENTER

Become an EIB Advertiser!

Click for more Information Terms of Use | Privacy Statement | Copyright & Trademark Notice | The Rush Limbaugh Show® Premiere Radio Networks © All Rights Reserved, 2010.