Stack of Stuff Quick Hits Page August 24, 2009 Story #1: Mr. Snerdley Shows Up for Work, Soldiers On



RUSH: Snerdley, what are you doing here? I thought you either quit or I fired you; I don't remember which. Oh, is that right? Moe Thacker? We have to deal with our own union thug here, folks. Moe Thacker of the United Screeners Association of America, USAA, advised you to come in? Have you lodged an official protest? Yes, he's lodged an official protest. Well, nice of you to not tell me before the program starts.



Story #2: Leave Our Pensises Alone, Mr. President!



RUSH: By the way, leave our penises alone, too! This is getting out of hand. There is a story that some officials in the Obama administration are pushing for circumcision for all boys born in the USA to fight HIV/AIDS. Not that I'm against circumcision, but it's a family's decision. Leave our penises alone, too, Obama! You know who's going to be really upset about this news? NOCIRC, the National Organization of Circumcision Information Resource Centers. They're a San Francisco group, and they want to eliminate circumcision. So here's Obama out there saying we have to have circumcision of every young boy born in the country. This is not going to please the NOCIRC people at all.



Story #3: Problems Between White House, State-Run Media?



RUSH: There's a story here by Chris Stirewalt who is the political editor at the Gates, and some of the other rich white people I know. Leave me alone. Leave my kids alone. I don't want anything to do with you this week. And of course the State-Controlled Media is all hurt. State-Controlled Media wanted to be invited to all the parties; they want to be invited to play golf. They think they are part of the power elite. So they're bent out of shape about this.



Mr. Stirewalt writes: "There's nothing like a summer vacation to rekindle a romance. So maybe a week on Martha's Vineyard can bring back some of the magic between the Obama administration and the media. Before White House press secretary Robert Gibbs left town, he tried to clarify President Barack Obama's comment that 'everybody in Washington gets all wee-weed up,'" and then he blew it by saying, "Yeah, it's a bunch of bed wetters in Washington" in August. "Gibbs has grown more sardonic and patronizing as the summer wears on and Obama’s poll numbers wilt… Gibbs is so crabby because, incredibly, the administration blames the media for the president’s problems.

It tried blaming Republicans, but the GOP is too far out of power," and too invisible. Nobody ever sees a Republican on TV, can you blame them? All you ever see is Chuck-U Schumer and Dick Durbin and Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi. How can I blame the Republicans? I think as a species they may be on the endangered list in terms of media coverage.



"When the leader of the free world is complaining about a posting on the former governor of Alaska’s Facebook page, he’s got problems." This is Sarah Palin and her comment about death panels. "Reporters who traveled with the Obama campaign tell horror stories about the organization -- dishonesty, rudeness and abysmal access. But those reporters still served up the glowing coverage." Didn't we see or read something like this during the Clinton years? I don't remember specifically when but we heard that the media, "Oh, yeah, these people, they're dishonest, they're rude, there's abysmal, they're arrogant, but we still love 'em." We're hearing the same thing now from the State-Controlled Media about Obama. So not only are Obama and his people still reliving the campaign, they're drawing the wrong lessons from it, hence the CIA story they're trying to distract with today.



Story #4: Laughingstock: Khadafy Ignores Obama Warning



RUSH: I'll tell you what else, folks, our beloved president is a laughingstock around the world. If you don't like that, I'll say he's ineffective. I mean he warns Khadafy not to treat the Lockerbie terrorist like a hero, and Khadafy does just the opposite. They're laughing at us around the world! He's just a hapless little college kid. God, what happened to us? What happened?



But back to the story about the Lockerbie bomber, who was released. And, of course, there's all kinds of controversy about that now, that the Brits have some kind of business deal with the Libyans, and that was why the release was made, the bomber supposedly suffering from fatal cancer, three months or so to go, etc. But we learned that Obama had warned Moammar Khadafy not to treat that terrorist like a hero. "It's gotta be low-key," and Obama, by the way, couldn't even get the Brits to hold him! Obama didn't even try to get Gordon Brown to not let this guy go. All he said to Khadafy was, (paraphrasing) "You don't treat this guy like a hero," so what does Khadafy do? He organizes a huge welcome home demonstration at the airport, and when the plane lands it turned out that Khadafy's son is on the plane with the Lockerbie bomber, the terrorist, and Khadafy's son raises the guy's hand like a great champion as the crowd is cheering and screaming.



It just continues. The Russians are doing whatever they want to do, they ignore Obama, they're drilling for oil with the Cubans; the ChiComs are going to be drilling for oil along with the Cubans; Latin America is running hard left without any opposition. Hell, they're getting handshakes from us! Plus, Obama's done nothing close to what Bush did for Africa.



This guy is a screwed-up college kid. He's a screwed-up Ivy League college graduate who loves running around playing rich guy, who happens to be a far-left-wing radical who knows better than anybody else and is doing everything he can to tear down what this country was as founded and remake it in his own image.



Story #5: Politico: Obama's Big Bang Could Go Bust



RUSH: All right, get this. Now, on Friday, right as my program was ending at 2:54 p.m., Mike Allen and Jim VandeHei at The Politico posted this story: "Obama's Big Bang Could Go Bust -- Barack Obama's Big Bang is beginning to backfire, as his plans for rapid, once-in-a-generation overhauls of energy, financial regulation and health care are running into stiff resistance, both in Washington and around the country.



"The Obama theory was simple, though always freighted with risk..." Now, get this. I can't believe this. This is a jaw-dropper. I cannot believe I actually see this, that they've actually written this. "The Obama theory... Use a season of economic anxiety to enact sweeping changes the public likely wouldn't stomach in ordinary times." The State-Controlled Media themselves has blown up the secret! Rahm Emanuel said it! We all knew what it meant, but we had to interpret it for people: Crisis, we can't "waste" it. But here they've said it at The Politico: "Use a season of economic anxiety to enact sweeping changes the public likely wouldn't stomach in ordinary times." In other words, they're saying that what Obama's all about is what America doesn't want, and now they're having trouble getting it through. There's a Big Bang that could go bust. It looks like the American public doesn't want these sweeping changes even in extraordinary times.



Continuing with The Politico story: "The prospects for winning final passage of a cap-and-trade bill this year are greatly diminished. And, while most Democrats still predict a health care bill will pass this year, it is likely to be a shadow of what Obama once had planned. … By doing so much, so fast, Obama never sufficiently educated the public on the logic behind his policies." Mr. Allen, Mr. VandeHei, there never was any logic behind his policies, not logic that anybody could understand and support. This was just a mad reach for power. You guys yourselves said it, the American people would be unlikely to accept any of this during normal times. Obama never sufficiently educated the public? He didn't want to educate 'em. He wanted to make 'em hurt. He wanted the American people feeling pain, economic pain in order to get what he wanted. There is no logic behind his policies. Well, there is, but it's not a logic that's oriented around improving people's lifestyles, growing the US economy. This is about growing the United States government.



Story #6: 1,200 VA Patients Wrongly Told They Have ALS



RUSH: I think all of you who have had to use the VA hospitals, Veterans Administration health care, would all agree that the VA is national health care. It's national health care for a group of people, correct? Well, with that in mind, I share with you the following story: "At least 1,200 veterans across the country have been mistakenly told by the VA that they suffer from a fatal neurological disease." They have been mistakenly told this! "One of the leaders of a Gulf War veterans group says panicked veterans from Alabama, Florida, Kansas, North Carolina, West Virginia, and, Wyoming, have contacted the group about the error. Denise Nichols, the vice president of the national Gulf War Resource Center, says the VA is blaming a coding error."



Who cares? Who cares how it happened? The fact is it happened. You've got national health care for veterans, 1,200 of them have been told they have a fatal neurological disease, and all because of a "coding error." Have 1,200 patients ever been told by one doctor "mistakenly" that they had a fatal disease of any kind? I don't know how many people Kevorkian saw and lied to about they had no future, but do you ever hear about things like this on the private sector, medicine-wise?



RUSH: Snerdley, what are you doing here? I thought you either quit or I fired you; I don't remember which. Oh, is that right? Moe Thacker? We have to deal with our own union thug here, folks. Moe Thacker of the United Screeners Association of America, USAA, advised you to come in? Have you lodged an official protest? Yes, he's lodged an official protest. Well, nice of you to not tell me before the program starts.RUSH: By the way, leave our penises alone, too! This is getting out of hand. There is a story that some officials in the Obama administration are pushing for circumcision for all boys born in the USA to fight HIV/AIDS. Not that I'm against circumcision, but it's a family's decision. Leave our penises alone, too, Obama! You know who's going to be really upset about this news? NOCIRC, the National Organization of Circumcision Information Resource Centers. They're a San Francisco group, and they want to eliminate circumcision. So here's Obama out there saying we have to have circumcision of every young boy born in the country. This is not going to please the NOCIRC people at all.RUSH: There's a story here by Chris Stirewalt who is the political editor at the WashingtonExaminer.com , and it follows this theme that there's trouble in paradise here between Obama and the State-Controlled Media. There really isn't, but there appears to be. Obama's told the media: shut up, don't report on me now, I'm up here at Marxist Vineyard with my buddy, SkipGates, and some of the other rich white people I know. Leave me alone. Leave my kids alone. I don't want anything to do with you this week. And of course the State-Controlled Media is all hurt. State-Controlled Media wanted to be invited to all the parties; they want to be invited to play golf. They think they are part of the power elite. So they're bent out of shape about this.Mr. Stirewalt writes: "There's nothing like a summer vacation to rekindle a romance. So maybe a week on Martha's Vineyard can bring back some of the magic between the Obama administration and the media. Before White House press secretary Robert Gibbs left town, he tried to clarify President Barack Obama's comment that 'everybody in Washington gets all wee-weed up,'" and then he blew it by saying, "Yeah, it's a bunch of bed wetters in Washington" in August. "Gibbs has grown more sardonic and patronizing as the summer wears on and Obama’s poll numbers wilt… Gibbs is so crabby because, incredibly, the administration blames the media for the president’s problems.It tried blaming Republicans, but the GOP is too far out of power," and too invisible. Nobody ever sees a Republican on TV, can you blame them? All you ever see is Chuck-U Schumer and Dick Durbin and Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi. How can I blame the Republicans? I think as a species they may be on the endangered list in terms of media coverage."When the leader of the free world is complaining about a posting on the former governor of Alaska’s Facebook page, he’s got problems." This is Sarah Palin and her comment about death panels. "Reporters who traveled with the Obama campaign tell horror stories about the organization -- dishonesty, rudeness and abysmal access. But those reporters still served up the glowing coverage." Didn't we see or read something like this during the Clinton years? I don't remember specifically when but we heard that the media, "Oh, yeah, these people, they're dishonest, they're rude, there's abysmal, they're arrogant, but we still love 'em." We're hearing the same thing now from the State-Controlled Media about Obama. So not only are Obama and his people still reliving the campaign, they're drawing the wrong lessons from it, hence the CIA story they're trying to distract with today.RUSH: I'll tell you what else, folks, our beloved president is a laughingstock around the world. If you don't like that, I'll say he's ineffective. I mean he warns Khadafy not to treat the Lockerbie terrorist like a hero, and Khadafy does just the opposite. They're laughing at us around the world! He's just a hapless little college kid. God, what happened to us? What happened?But back to the story about the Lockerbie bomber, who was released. And, of course, there's all kinds of controversy about that now, that the Brits have some kind of business deal with the Libyans, and that was why the release was made, the bomber supposedly suffering from fatal cancer, three months or so to go, etc. But we learned that Obama had warned Moammar Khadafy not to treat that terrorist like a hero. "It's gotta be low-key," and Obama, by the way, couldn't even get the Brits to hold him! Obama didn't even try to get Gordon Brown to not let this guy go. All he said to Khadafy was, (paraphrasing) "You don't treat this guy like a hero," so what does Khadafy do? He organizes a huge welcome home demonstration at the airport, and when the plane lands it turned out that Khadafy's son is on the plane with the Lockerbie bomber, the terrorist, and Khadafy's son raises the guy's hand like a great champion as the crowd is cheering and screaming.It just continues. The Russians are doing whatever they want to do, they ignore Obama, they're drilling for oil with the Cubans; the ChiComs are going to be drilling for oil along with the Cubans; Latin America is running hard left without any opposition. Hell, they're getting handshakes from us! Plus, Obama's done nothing close to what Bush did for Africa.This guy is a screwed-up college kid. He's a screwed-up Ivy League college graduate who loves running around playing rich guy, who happens to be a far-left-wing radical who knows better than anybody else and is doing everything he can to tear down what this country was as founded and remake it in his own image.RUSH: All right, get this. Now, on Friday, right as my program was ending at 2:54 p.m., Mike Allen and Jim VandeHei at The Politico posted this story: "Obama's Big Bang Could Go Bust -- Barack Obama's Big Bang is beginning to backfire, as his plans for rapid, once-in-a-generation overhauls of energy, financial regulation and health care are running into stiff resistance, both in Washington and around the country."The Obama theory was simple, though always freighted with risk..." Now, get this. I can't believe this. This is a jaw-dropper. I cannot believe I actually see this, that they've actually written this. "The Obama theory... Use a season of economic anxiety to enact sweeping changes the public likely wouldn't stomach in ordinary times." The State-Controlled Media themselves has blown up the secret! Rahm Emanuel said it! We all knew what it meant, but we had to interpret it for people: Crisis, we can't "waste" it. But here they've said it at The Politico: "Use a season of economic anxiety to enact sweeping changes the public likely wouldn't stomach in ordinary times." In other words, they're saying that what Obama's all about is what America doesn't want, and now they're having trouble getting it through. There's a Big Bang that could go bust. It looks like the American public doesn't want these sweeping changes even in extraordinary times.Continuing with The Politico story: "The prospects for winning final passage of a cap-and-trade bill this year are greatly diminished. And, while most Democrats still predict a health care bill will pass this year, it is likely to be a shadow of what Obama once had planned. … By doing so much, so fast, Obama never sufficiently educated the public on the logic behind his policies." Mr. Allen, Mr. VandeHei, there never was any logic behind his policies, not logic that anybody could understand and support. This was just a mad reach for power. You guys yourselves said it, the American people would be unlikely to accept any of this during normal times. Obama never sufficiently educated the public? He didn't want to educate 'em. He wanted to make 'em hurt. He wanted the American people feeling pain, economic pain in order to get what he wanted. There is no logic behind his policies. Well, there is, but it's not a logic that's oriented around improving people's lifestyles, growing the US economy. This is about growing the United States government.RUSH: I think all of you who have had to use the VA hospitals, Veterans Administration health care, would all agree that the VA is national health care. It's national health care for a group of people, correct? Well, with that in mind, I share with you the following story: "At least 1,200 veterans across the country have been mistakenly told by the VA that they suffer from a fatal neurological disease." They have been mistakenly told this! "One of the leaders of a Gulf War veterans group says panicked veterans from Alabama, Florida, Kansas, North Carolina, West Virginia, and, Wyoming, have contacted the group about the error. Denise Nichols, the vice president of the national Gulf War Resource Center, says the VA is blaming a coding error."Who cares? Who cares how it happened? The fact is it happened. You've got national health care for veterans, 1,200 of them have been told they have a fatal neurological disease, and all because of a "coding error." Have 1,200 patients ever been told by one doctor "mistakenly" that they had a fatal disease of any kind? I don't know how many people Kevorkian saw and lied to about they had no future, but do you ever hear about things like this on the private sector, medicine-wise? Story #7: Obama to George Soros: Drill, Baby Drill (in Brazil)



RUSH: Snerdley didn't believe me on the George Soros stuff earlier. Well,



Ha! Such an opportunity here. Brazil has for the longest time "gone green." They think they've taken the lead here in going green, and all it took was this largest Western Hemisphere discovery in 30 years, and all of Brazil says, "Get it! Get it! Get it! Mmmmmoney, money, money, money!" and the Greenpeace people start going nuts. Can you imagine the damage we can inflict to our stupid local environmentalist wackos if we even go out and find our own oil?



Okay, so Brazil has found this Big Oil deposit. Here's more from



So you want the details, there it is: $2 billion to Brazil, most of it to George Soros and the company he's the largest stakeholder in. Meanwhile, we're going green windmill, wind, bubble cars. At the same time, they're just knocking Greenpeace Brazil for a loop, showing that it can be done. So while you're sitting out there on the cusp, you maybe have lost your job or you're looking at losing your job, Obama is enriching George Soros, who doesn't need it. I mean, the famous Democrat last words: He doesn't need it. If anybody doesn't need $2 billion, it's George Soros who does not need $2 billion.



RUSH: Snerdley didn't believe me on the George Soros stuff earlier. Well, this is AP . "Brazil, long proud of its push to develop renewable energy and wean itself off oil, has a bad case of fossil-fuel fever. An enormous offshore field in territorial waters -- the biggest Western Hemisphere oil discovery in 30 years -- has Brazilians saying, 'Drill, baby, drill,' while environmentalists fear the nation will take a big leap backward in its hunt for crude. ... 'The government is whipping Brazil into a euphoria that this is going to be a solution for all our societal problems,' said Sergio Leitao, director of public policies for Greenpeace Brasil. 'Brazil is no longer seriously looking at alternatives.'"Ha! Such an opportunity here. Brazil has for the longest time "gone green." They think they've taken the lead here in going green, and all it took was this largest Western Hemisphere discovery in 30 years, and all of Brazil says, "Get it! Get it! Get it! Mmmmmoney, money, money, money!" and the Greenpeace people start going nuts. Can you imagine the damage we can inflict to our stupid local environmentalist wackos if we even go out and find our own oil?Okay, so Brazil has found this Big Oil deposit. Here's more from another story : "[A]s of June 30, the stake in Petrobras, as the Rio de Janeiro-based oil producer is known, made up 22 percent of the $3.68 billion of stocks and American depositary receipts held by Soros Fund Management LLC. Billionaire investor George Soros bought an $811 million stake in Petroleo Brasileiro SA in the second quarter [of this year], making the Brazilian state-controlled oil company his investment fund's largest holding," and we have just sent $2 billion to help Brazil get the oil from this largest find in the Western Hemisphere in 30 years and the company doing it is George Soros'.So you want the details, there it is: $2 billion to Brazil, most of it to George Soros and the company he's the largest stakeholder in. Meanwhile, we're going green windmill, wind, bubble cars. At the same time, they're just knocking Greenpeace Brazil for a loop, showing that it can be done. So while you're sitting out there on the cusp, you maybe have lost your job or you're looking at losing your job, Obama is enriching George Soros, who doesn't need it. I mean, the famous Democrat last words: He doesn't need it. If anybody doesn't need $2 billion, it's George Soros who does not need $2 billion. *Note: Links to content outside RushLimbaugh.com usually become inactive over time. OBSCENE PROFIT CENTER



Become an EIB Advertiser!

Click for more Information Become an EIB Advertiser!

Click for more Information Terms of Use | Privacy Statement | Copyright & Trademark Notice | The Rush Limbaugh Show® Premiere Radio Networks © All Rights Reserved, 2009.