Obama Attacks America Again Ahead of Muslim Apology Tour June 2, 2009 Listen To It! WMP | RealPlayer Audio clips available for Rush 24/7 members only -- Join Now!



BEGIN TRANSCRIPT blah, blah, in order.) Here is an excerpt from the interview, a series of excerpts from the interview. And yes, Obama does find a way to apologize for America by saying he will close the mistake known as Guantanamo Bay. Despite the fact that Americans, two to one, don't want it closed. Okay. In the BBC interview -- and they said, "Why did you give the interview to BBC?" "Well, I wanted to reach out. I wanted to reach out beyond our media." The state-run media is only good for so much, I guess. You gotta reach out beyond the state-run media at some point, I suppose.



But the BBC may as well be state run for all intents and purposes. "US President Barack Obama said Monday that the United States cannot impose its values on other countries, but argued that principles such as democracy and the rule of law were universal." Would somebody tell me, when did we impose our values on anybody? (interruption) Well, no, but he said that democracy and the rule of law were universal, so Iraq doesn't count. You see, this is the straw man. Some of you probably say, "Japan, Mr. Limbaugh! Japan! We imposed our will on Japan." Ah, ah, ah! Yes, we did that's after we kicked their butt in a war. They lost. The winner sets the rules. That's how you get peace is you beat the enemy. We beat the Germans. We beat the Japanese.



I don't think any Japanese citizen alive today is upset that they have a form of democracy and freedom and a wildly successful capitalist economy. By the way, would somebody explain to me how freedom is an imposition anyway? How is that an imposition? Isn't freedom the result of liberation? So here is a typical Obama straw-man argument. "The United States can't impose its values on other countries, but democracy and rule of law are universal." They're not universal in China. They're not universal in North Korea. They're not universal in parts of Africa. They're not anywhere in the Middle East except Iraq. When did we do it anyway? (interruption) Okay, Hugo Chavez says we imposed our will on them. It's the same old argument. The CIA went down there and lopped the heads off of a bunch of dictators. Yip yip yip yip yahoo.



I'll tell you what's "imposed" on people is communism, tyranny, socialism. That's the imposition. The imposition is dictatorial statism! All right. "In an interview with the BBC ahead of a visit first to Saudi Arabia and Egypt and then Europe, Obama said the United States must lead by example -- which firstly meant closing the Guantanamo Bay detention camp on Cuba." Now, I find this interesting, because Club Gitmo is a state-of-the-art resort for captured terrorists. I have a thriving merchandise business down there. Should we shutter Guantanamo and open dungeons? Closing Gitmo is a formal apology? For what? I mean, if we're holding people down there unjustly, why won't the rest of the world take them off our hands?



This is Obama: "The danger I think is when the United States or any country thinks that we can simply impose these values on another country with a different history and a different culture," that's not good. When did we do this? I'm going to answer that question in just a second because there is an answer. As far as Obama's talking about, when did we do this? What are we talking about? Did we impose our values when we rebuilt Europe after World War II? Remember, "We can't impose democracy and freedom," he said, "because those are universal." This is the story: We can't impose you're values. Our values are rooted in freedom and democracy! This guy is a slick son of a gun, but I'm telling you, he contradicts himself in every sentence he utters. Did we impose our values on Kuwait, Afghanistan, Iraq? RUSH: Okay, folks, time for a straw-man alert. It's a straw-man alert. Whenever Barack Obama gives an interview like he did with the BBC, it's straw man after straw man after straw man. For example... (By the way, Mr. Broadcast engineer, stand by, audio sound bite three, four, five, and blah,blah, blah, in order.) Here is an excerpt from the interview, a series of excerpts from the interview. And yes, Obama does find a way to apologize for America by saying he will close the mistake known as Guantanamo Bay. Despite the fact that Americans, two to one, don't want it closed. Okay. In the BBC interview -- and they said, "Why did you give the interview to BBC?" "Well, I wanted to reach out. I wanted to reach out beyond our media." The state-run media is only good for so much, I guess. You gotta reach out beyond the state-run media at some point, I suppose.But the BBC may as well be state run for all intents and purposes. "US President Barack Obama said Monday that the United States cannot impose its values on other countries, but argued that principles such as democracy and the rule of law were universal." Would somebody tell me, when did we impose our values on anybody? (interruption) Well, no, but he said that democracy and the rule of law were universal, so Iraq doesn't count. You see, this is the straw man. Some of you probably say, "Japan, Mr. Limbaugh! Japan! We imposed our will on Japan." Ah, ah, ah! Yes, we did that's after we kicked their butt in a war. They lost. The winner sets the rules. That's how you get peace is you beat the enemy. We beat the Germans. We beat the Japanese.I don't think any Japanese citizen alive today is upset that they have a form of democracy and freedom and a wildly successful capitalist economy. By the way, would somebody explain to me how freedom is an imposition anyway? How is that an imposition? Isn't freedom the result of liberation? So here is a typical Obama straw-man argument. "The United States can't impose its values on other countries, but democracy and rule of law are universal." They're not universal in China. They're not universal in North Korea. They're not universal in parts of Africa. They're not anywhere in the Middle East except Iraq. When did we do it anyway? (interruption) Okay, Hugo Chavez says we imposed our will on them. It's the same old argument. The CIA went down there and lopped the heads off of a bunch of dictators. Yip yip yip yip yahoo.I'll tell you what's "imposed" on people is communism, tyranny, socialism. That's the imposition. The imposition is dictatorial statism! All right. "In an interview with the BBC ahead of a visit first to Saudi Arabia and Egypt and then Europe, Obama said the United States must lead by example -- which firstly meant closing the Guantanamo Bay detention camp on Cuba." Now, I find this interesting, because Club Gitmo is a state-of-the-art resort for captured terrorists. I have a thriving merchandise business down there. Should we shutter Guantanamo and open dungeons? Closing Gitmo is a formal apology? For what? I mean, if we're holding people down there unjustly, why won't the rest of the world take them off our hands?This is Obama: "The danger I think is when the United States or any country thinks that we can simply impose these values on another country with a different history and a different culture," that's not good. When did we do this? I'm going to answer that question in just a second because there is an answer. As far as Obama's talking about, when did we do this? What are we talking about? Did we impose our values when we rebuilt Europe after World War II? Remember, "We can't impose democracy and freedom," he said, "because those are universal." This is the story: We can't impose you're values. Our values are rooted in freedom and democracy! This guy is a slick son of a gun, but I'm telling you, he contradicts himself in every sentence he utters. Did we impose our values on Kuwait, Afghanistan, Iraq?



I will guaran-damn-tee you Barack Obama is imposing his will and his values on Israel. He is the straw man. He is his own default straw-man argument. But after all this "he stressed: 'Democracy, rule of law, freedom of speech, freedom of religion -- those are not simply principles of the West to be hoisted (sic) on these countries, but rather what I believe to be universal principles that they can embrace and affirm as part of their national identity.'" Really? Democracy, rule of law, freedom of speech, freedom of religion? You're going to the Middle East, bud! They have that there? Anywhere besides Iraq, do they have it? Freedom of speech, freedom of religion, democracy, rule of law? "Obama said he would be 'encouraging' countries on his trip to promote these values, but added: 'I think the thing that we can do most importantly is serve as a good role model."



Oh! Okay. So we're going to serve as a good role model for the people of the world by kneecapping the private sector, seizing private property, seizing private sector businesses, and turning it over to political contributors. Is that the thing we want to encourage? Is that the image we want to promote? We want to encourage voter intimidation? Is that...? We want to take the example of his group, ACORN? Community organizers and vote fraud experts extraordinaire. Export those values? Encouraging countries to serve as a good role model? Obama as a role model is vote fraud, voter intimidation, community organizing, seizing private sector property, kneecapping the private sector and giving it to political contributors. What's he talking about here, good role model? "And that's why closing Guantanamo," he said, "from my perspective, as difficult as it is, is important."



Yeeeees, we know. Remaking America is as difficult as it is important.



It's very hard work imposing socialism and fascism on a free-market economy -- and, as a good role model, we take on more debt than we can ever repay. As a good role model, we begin worldwide trade war, by imposing protectionism on General Motors. Nothing about what this guy wants to do is worth following. That is why I said, and stand by: "I hope Obama fails." Now, I assume all of the Republicans that disagreed with me hope Obama succeeds running General Motors, and they hope he succeeds running banks and running Wall Street. They hope he succeeds with Sonia Sotomayor and others like her on the US Supreme Court. I mean, if you say that you want Obama to succeed, that must be what you are for. And now, another phase of the BBC interview, North American editor Justin Webb talking to President Obama. He says, "You're making a speech in Cairo. Amnesty International says that there are thousands of political prisoners in Egypt. How do you address that issue?"



OBAMA: Democrats, rule of law, freedom of speech, freedom of religion, those are not simply principles of the West to be hoisted (sic) on, uh, these countries but rather what I believe to be universal principles that they can embrace and affirm, uh, as part of their national identity. The danger, I think, is --



RUSH: Yeah?



OBAMA: -- when the United States or any country thinks that we can simply impose these values on, uh, another country with a different country and a different culture.



RUSH: Stop the tape a second. Freedom is not an imposition. All right. Keep going.



OBAMA: The thing that we can do most importantly is serve as a good role model and that's why, for example, closing Guantanamo from my perspective as difficult as it is --



RUSH: Stop the tape. Screw Guantanamo! How do we serve as a good role model? We kneecap General Motors. We kneecap Chrysler. We close 4,000 dealers. We take over the government take over private sector businesses. We raise taxes. We take away wealth from people who have earned it and redistribute it to losers. Yes. Let's serve as a role model for the rest of the world! In fact, it's the rest of the failed world that's serving as a role model for Barack Obama! Socialism has failed. Fascism has failed. He's emulating it! If anybody is falling prey to role models, it's Obama -- and his role models are Alinsky and whatever socialist leaders and dictators around the world that he has been made to idolize. None of what Barack Obama is doing or wants to do to this country is anything the rest of the world hasn't seen before and already failed at.



OBAMA: -- important because part of what we want to affirm to the world is that these are values that are important --



RUSH: Take it to the break. I can't handle any more of this. I thought the people of those countries created their own constitutions. See, Obama is the authoritarian here. If anybody knows about imposing values, it's Barack Obama. He is the default straw man in every argument. Who is imposing his values on General Motors? Who is imposing his values on Wall Street? Barack Obama. Who is soon going to impose his values on the Supreme Court? Barack Obama. And I think that you would all have to agree with me that Barack Obama is sure as hell imposing of his values on Israel. He's telling them to shut down their settlements, to stop building new ones. He's getting ready to tell 'em we gotta have a two-state solution. He might say... I've heard this; I don't know if it's true. He might say in his speech on the 4th of June in Egypt, that he supports dividing Israel.I will guaran-damn-tee you Barack Obama is imposing his will and his values on Israel. He is the straw man. He is his own default straw-man argument. But after all this "he stressed: 'Democracy, rule of law, freedom of speech, freedom of religion -- those are not simply principles of the West to be hoisted (sic) on these countries, but rather what I believe to be universal principles that they can embrace and affirm as part of their national identity.'" Really? Democracy, rule of law, freedom of speech, freedom of religion? You're going to the Middle East, bud! They have that there? Anywhere besides Iraq, do they have it? Freedom of speech, freedom of religion, democracy, rule of law? "Obama said he would be 'encouraging' countries on his trip to promote these values, but added: 'I think the thing that we can do most importantly is serve as a good role model."Oh! Okay. So we're going to serve as a good role model for the people of the world by kneecapping the private sector, seizing private property, seizing private sector businesses, and turning it over to political contributors. Is that the thing we want to encourage? Is that the image we want to promote? We want to encourage voter intimidation? Is that...? We want to take the example of his group, ACORN? Community organizers and vote fraud experts extraordinaire. Export those values? Encouraging countries to serve as a good role model? Obama as a role model is vote fraud, voter intimidation, community organizing, seizing private sector property, kneecapping the private sector and giving it to political contributors. What's he talking about here, good role model? "And that's why closing Guantanamo," he said, "from my perspective, as difficult as it is, is important."Yeeeees, we know. Remaking America is as difficult as it is important.It's very hard work imposing socialism and fascism on a free-market economy -- and, as a good role model, we take on more debt than we can ever repay. As a good role model, we begin worldwide trade war, by imposing protectionism on General Motors. Nothing about what this guy wants to do is worth following. That is why I said, and stand by: "I hope Obama fails." Now, I assume all of the Republicans that disagreed with me hope Obama succeeds running General Motors, and they hope he succeeds running banks and running Wall Street. They hope he succeeds with Sonia Sotomayor and others like her on the US Supreme Court. I mean, if you say that you want Obama to succeed, that must be what you are for. And now, another phase of the BBC interview, North American editor Justin Webb talking to President Obama. He says, "You're making a speech in Cairo. Amnesty International says that there are thousands of political prisoners in Egypt. How do you address that issue?"OBAMA: Democrats, rule of law, freedom of speech, freedom of religion, those are not simply principles of the West to be hoisted (sic) on, uh, these countries but rather what I believe to be universal principles that they can embrace and affirm, uh, as part of their national identity. The danger, I think, is --RUSH: Yeah?OBAMA: -- when the United States or any country thinks that we can simply impose these values on, uh, another country with a different country and a different culture.RUSH: Stop the tape a second. Freedom is not an imposition. All right. Keep going.OBAMA: The thing that we can do most importantly is serve as a good role model and that's why, for example, closing Guantanamo from my perspective as difficult as it is --RUSH: Stop the tape. Screw Guantanamo! How do we serve as a good role model? We kneecap General Motors. We kneecap Chrysler. We close 4,000 dealers. We take over the government take over private sector businesses. We raise taxes. We take away wealth from people who have earned it and redistribute it to losers. Yes. Let's serve as a role model for the rest of the world! In fact, it's the rest of the failed world that's serving as a role model for Barack Obama! Socialism has failed. Fascism has failed. He's emulating it! If anybody is falling prey to role models, it's Obama -- and his role models are Alinsky and whatever socialist leaders and dictators around the world that he has been made to idolize. None of what Barack Obama is doing or wants to do to this country is anything the rest of the world hasn't seen before and already failed at.OBAMA: -- important because part of what we want to affirm to the world is that these are values that are important --RUSH: Take it to the break. I can't handle any more of this.



RUSH: All right. We can't impose our values on the rest of the world, right? That's what President Obama said. Sure as hell sounds like the rest of the world can impose their values on us. They don't like Gitmo, we have to shut it down. They don't like what we've done, fine, Obama will run around and apologize. I'm telling you, folks, it is not the United States of America that serves as Barack Obama's role model. It's other socialist nations that have failed and the concept of socialism that is his role model. I'll tell you what, stupid little community organizer, organize this. These values he talks about, universal, freedom, democracy. Why are they universal? Answer me that, Snerdley. Why are freedom and democracy, representative republicanism, why are those universal? Exactly right. It's because we have fought with blood, sweat, and tears to make 'em so, and many Americans have given their lives for those enduring universal principles that are not worth imposing on anybody, of course. Our values of freedom just didn't bloom on their own. Now, freedom is the natural state, I think, of the human as created. But tyrants, other men as leaders are the ones that curtail and lasso and constrain that freedom. Universal community organizer -- I tell you.



BREAK TRANSCRIPT



RUSH: Here's Obama on Iran. I thought the sound bite I played was about Iran. My mistake, I goofed up -- here are these two sound bites. Here's the BBC interview.



OBAMA: What I do believe is that Iran has legitimate energy concerns --



RUSH: Yeah, yeah.



OBAMA: -- legitimate aspirations.



RUSH: Yeah, yeah, yeah.



OBAMA: On the other hand, the international community has a very real interest in preventing a nuclear arms race --



RUSH: International community's done diddly-squat to stop it. But, hey, they have a legitimate aspiration to go nuclear. Again, we don't. The ChiComs can build Hummers; we can't. The mullahs can go nuclear; we can't. We gotta go windmill. We gotta go solar. We gotta go junk. Community organizer crap. Here's the next bite.



OBAMA: We need to reinvigorate a much broader agenda for nuclear nonproliferation, including the United States and Russia and drawing down our stockpiles in very significant ways.



RUSH: Oh, no!



OBAMA: To the extent that Iran feels that they are treated differently than everybody else that makes them embattled.



RUSH: Oh.



OBAMA: To the extent that we're having a broader conversation --



RUSH: Oh.



OBAMA: -- about how all --



RUSH: Stop it!



OBAMA: -- countries --



RUSH: Stop it! So we're back to role model stuff. If we get rid of our nukes maybe Mahmoud Ahmadinejad will say, "You know what, we don't need nukes, the US and Russia are getting rid of theirs." If we decide to get rid of our nukes, we'll be the only one getting rid of our nukes. Yeah, we gotta be a good role model. This is dangerous. This guy is dangerous. Everybody else can nuke up, everybody else can build big cars, we can't big build cars and we can't go nuke in terms of power. By the way, if you go nuke power, only make a deal with us to go nuke power only, you end up with a nuke bomb, I give you Kim Jong-il. BREAK TRANSCRIPTRUSH: All right. We can't impose our values on the rest of the world, right? That's what President Obama said. Sure as hell sounds like the rest of the world can impose their values on us. They don't like Gitmo, we have to shut it down. They don't like what we've done, fine, Obama will run around and apologize. I'm telling you, folks, it is not the United States of America that serves as Barack Obama's role model. It's other socialist nations that have failed and the concept of socialism that is his role model. I'll tell you what, stupid little community organizer, organize this. These values he talks about, universal, freedom, democracy. Why are they universal? Answer me that, Snerdley. Why are freedom and democracy, representative republicanism, why are those universal? Exactly right. It's because we have fought with blood, sweat, and tears to make 'em so, and many Americans have given their lives for those enduring universal principles that are not worth imposing on anybody, of course. Our values of freedom just didn't bloom on their own. Now, freedom is the natural state, I think, of the human as created. But tyrants, other men as leaders are the ones that curtail and lasso and constrain that freedom. Universal community organizer -- I tell you.BREAK TRANSCRIPTRUSH: Here's Obama on Iran. I thought the sound bite I played was about Iran. My mistake, I goofed up -- here are these two sound bites. Here's the BBC interview.OBAMA: What I do believe is that Iran has legitimate energy concerns --RUSH: Yeah, yeah.OBAMA: -- legitimate aspirations.RUSH: Yeah, yeah, yeah.OBAMA: On the other hand, the international community has a very real interest in preventing a nuclear arms race --RUSH: International community's done diddly-squat to stop it. But, hey, they have a legitimate aspiration to go nuclear. Again, we don't. The ChiComs can build Hummers; we can't. The mullahs can go nuclear; we can't. We gotta go windmill. We gotta go solar. We gotta go junk. Community organizer crap. Here's the next bite.OBAMA: We need to reinvigorate a much broader agenda for nuclear nonproliferation, including the United States and Russia and drawing down our stockpiles in very significant ways.RUSH: Oh, no!OBAMA: To the extent that Iran feels that they are treated differently than everybody else that makes them embattled.RUSH: Oh.OBAMA: To the extent that we're having a broader conversation --RUSH: Oh.OBAMA: -- about how all --RUSH: Stop it!OBAMA: -- countries --RUSH: Stop it! So we're back to role model stuff. If we get rid of our nukes maybe Mahmoud Ahmadinejad will say, "You know what, we don't need nukes, the US and Russia are getting rid of theirs." If we decide to get rid of our nukes, we'll be the only one getting rid of our nukes. Yeah, we gotta be a good role model. This is dangerous. This guy is dangerous. Everybody else can nuke up, everybody else can build big cars, we can't big build cars and we can't go nuke in terms of power. By the way, if you go nuke power, only make a deal with us to go nuke power only, you end up with a nuke bomb, I give you Kim Jong-il. END TRANSCRIPT Read the Background Material... • BBC: Obama Hopeful on Mid-East Peace

• USAToday: Poll: Most Americans Oppose Gitmo Shutdown

*Note: Links to content outside RushLimbaugh.com usually become inactive over time. OBSCENE PROFIT CENTER

Become an EIB Advertiser!

Click for more Information Terms of Use | Privacy Statement | Copyright & Trademark Notice | The Rush Limbaugh Show® Premiere Radio Networks © All Rights Reserved, 2010.