War is Too "Expensive" for Obama November 10, 2009 Listen To It! WMP | RealPlayer Audio clips available for Rush 24/7 members only -- Join Now!



BEGIN TRANSCRIPT



OBAMA: These are not only eh, enormous burdens that we're placing on our y-young men and women -- and that's the thing I think most about.



RUSH: Mmm-hmm.



OBAMA: It's also expensive.



RUSH: Ohhhh!



OBAMA: Every thousand troops we spend that's costing us a billion dollars. Uhh, i-if you send 40,000 troops you're looking at maybe $50 billion per year above and beyond the costs that we're already spending.



RUSH: Suddenly Obama is worried about money? He's worried about 50 measly billion dollars to win a war? After $750 billion this TARP money, after a $1 trillion stimulus bill that's bombing out, on top of $1.2 trillion to $2 trillion for his health care plan and he says it's expensive to send more troops over there? It's a billion dollars for every thousand troops, and that's expensive? All of a sudden this guy is worried about the "expense" of something? Let me tell you what this means. They get all this stuff -- health care, another stimulus, all this stuff -- we're going to be in such debt that the pressure is going to be made to cut the budget. Now, you can't cut entitlement spending because that's mandated spending. Some might even say that's unconstitutional.



And this health care bill is going to be mandated spending. You can't cut it, regardless of the budget circumstances, regardless. You can't cut it. You watch. These guys are going to go to the military budget, and they're going to slash it -- and we see it in the lack of concern in Afghanistan, the lack of concern in Iraq, the lack of concern over Major Hasan. These guys that run this country are going to pare the military down to the bare minimum size they think we can get away with, which will be too small. RUSH: To Obama now and his interview with the World News Tonight last night with Jake Tapper. Now, this next question and answer, this is just unreal, and it's highly offensive to me. Jake Tapper says, "You are about to make a final decision about the new strategy in Afghanistan and Pakistan. What variables play into your decision making that would cause you to not just take General McChrystal's recommendation and implement it?"OBAMA: These are not only eh, enormous burdens that we're placing on our y-young men and women -- and that's the thing I think most about.RUSH: Mmm-hmm.OBAMA: It's also expensive.RUSH: Ohhhh!OBAMA: Every thousand troops we spend that's costing us a billion dollars. Uhh, i-if you send 40,000 troops you're looking at maybe $50 billion per year above and beyond the costs that we're already spending.RUSH: Suddenly Obama is worried about money? He's worried about 50 measly billion dollars to win a war? After $750 billion this TARP money, after a $1 trillion stimulus bill that's bombing out, on top of $1.2 trillion to $2 trillion for his health care plan and he says it's expensive to send more troops over there? It's a billion dollars for every thousand troops, and that's expensive? All of a sudden this guy is worried about the "expense" of something? Let me tell you what this means. They get all this stuff -- health care, another stimulus, all this stuff -- we're going to be in such debt that the pressure is going to be made to cut the budget. Now, you can't cut entitlement spending because that's mandated spending. Some might even say that's unconstitutional.And this health care bill is going to be mandated spending. You can't cut it, regardless of the budget circumstances, regardless. You can't cut it. You watch. These guys are going to go to the military budget, and they're going to slash it -- and we see it in the lack of concern in Afghanistan, the lack of concern in Iraq, the lack of concern over Major Hasan. These guys that run this country are going to pare the military down to the bare minimum size they think we can get away with, which will be too small. BREAK TRANSCRIPT



RUSH: David in New Orleans, it's great to have you on the EIB Network, sir. Hello.



CALLER: Yes. Thanks for letting me speak on your show. I heard you speak earlier about President Obama's consideration of the amount of spending when he said about a billion dollars for every thousand troops, or $40 billion and you kind of made it sound like that was nothing to worry about.



RUSH: No, no, no. What I said was, "I don't believe Obama cares a whit about the spending or the expense of it. If he did, he wouldn't be doing any of his other agenda."



CALLER: Well --



RUSH: This is a phony excuse to not fulfill the commitment over there or to give some out for it -- and to placate his left-wing base, by the way, which hates the military, hates these wars, doesn't want to go there.



CALLER: Well, that's not true. I mean, the fact that the military is there and that he is supporting them and not done anything to remove it I think there's a lot of people who disagree with him as to what he has done so far.



RUSH: No, he's not supporting them. No, no, no. He's not supporting it. He's dithering on whether or not to send troops over there. He hasn't decided yet. It's been three months! END TRANSCRIPT Read the Background Material... • Reuters: Obama Weighs Four Options in Afghanistan-WHouse

*Note: Links to content outside RushLimbaugh.com usually become inactive over time. OBSCENE PROFIT CENTER

Become an EIB Advertiser!

Click for more Information Terms of Use | Privacy Statement | Copyright & Trademark Notice | The Rush Limbaugh Show® Premiere Radio Networks © All Rights Reserved, 2010.