Immigration grabs stage in GOP race for governor
WHERE THEY STAND Steve Poizner and Meg Whitman on illegal immigration: Agreement: Crack down on employers who hire workers in the country illegally. Deploy California National Guard to help patrol the border. Deny illegal immigrants access to most public services. Disagreement: Poizner favors and Whitman opposes the Arizona law allowing law enforcement officers to inquire about the legal status of people suspected of being in the country illegally.

It’s like 1994 all over again.

Just as it did 16 years ago, illegal immigration has become a white-hot public issue, even if the protests and counterprotests are less intense.

And just as it did then, illegal immigration has come to dominate the campaign for governor of California.

It’s a turn of events that has surprised analysts who figured that with double-digit unemployment and a $20 billion state budget deficit, other issues would be crowded off the agenda.

“I thought this cycle, because of the economic problems, that we’d have candidates who would ignore immigration and concentrate on jobs, jobs, jobs,” said Allan Hoffenblum, publisher of the California Target Book that analyzes state political campaigns.

The issue has so taken over the debate in recent weeks as to leave the Republican candidates for governor arguing about another state’s law — the Arizona law authorizing law enforcement officers to demand proof of legal status if they suspect someone to be in the country illegally.

When former eBay CEO Meg Whitman met with about 75 University City residents last week, the first question she received was about the Arizona law that ignited a nationwide furor.

Her opponent in the June 8 primary election, Insurance Commissioner Steve Poizner, on Monday held a news conference at the San Ysidro border crossing where he assailed Whitman for opposing the Arizona law — which he himself had opposed until recently. Poizner said some late changes in the law aimed at avoiding racial profiling won him over.

Also on Monday, the campaigns launched an exchange of advertisements attacking each other on illegal immigration.

The Poizner ad: “Who has the courage and values to stand up to illegal immigration? Not liberal Meg Whitman. She supports Obama’s amnesty plan. And like Obama, Whitman opposes Arizona’s immigration law.”

The Whitman ad: “Don’t be fooled by misleading ads. My position on immigration is crystal clear. Illegal immigrants are just that, illegal. I am 100 percent against amnesty for illegal immigrants. Period.”

Republican political consultant Mike Madrid, who specializes in Latino outreach, said he understands why candidates would seize on the immigration issue, but questioned its effectiveness.

“It’s visceral because it’s got everything,” Madrid said. “It’s class ... It’s legality. It blends all the emotional issues of everything.”

But he said the issue, while powerful with core Republicans, is not decisive in an election.

“I’ve been watching how this issue plays in general elections and Republican primaries. There’s no correlation between how hard you are on the immigration issue and your chances of winning the race,” he said. “You’re not moving voters with this issue.”

In 1994, Republican Gov. Pete Wilson rode Proposition 187, which sought to cut off public services to illegal immigrants, to a convincing re-election victory. (Wilson, who supports Whitman, calls her “tough as nails on illegal immigration” in the campaign’s latest ad).

Madrid said he believes the issue has lost some of its punch over time.

“The issue is playing a lot differently than it was in the mid ’90s,” he said. “In the mid ’90s, the immigration issue was the tip of the spear. It was the issue that every other issue was viewed from, whether it was education or budget problems.”

Niels Frenzen, director of the Immigration Law Clinic at the University of Southern California, questioned both candidates’ throwing around the word “amnesty.” He said no proposal for a blanket legalization for people in the country illegally has gained any traction in Congress since President Ronald Reagan signed the 1986 immigration reform law.

“I know that any type of immigration reform is immediately characterized by opponents of immigration reform as having an amnesty component,” Frenzen said. “If the definition of amnesty is forgiving without penalty, there has not been any amnesty that’s been proposed in recent years.”

Recent immigration reform proposals, such as those supported by President Barack Obama and former President George W. Bush require people who entered the U.S. illegally to pay a steep fine, get in line behind those who followed the rules and in some cases return to their native countries for a period of time.

“It’s not just pay your $200 and get your green card,” Frenzen said. “It’s more cumbersome. The proposals are more difficult to qualify for and are more punitive than what Ronald Reagan signed into law in 1986.”

Although Whitman stresses her opposition to “amnesty” in almost every speech, Poizner on Monday defended his characterization of Whitman’s stand.

“Here in San Diego, she said she supports a program where you can get to the end of the line and pay a fine,” he said, “The fact is that’s a form of amnesty, providing a shortcut to citizenship.”

Actually, the two Republican candidates for governor are closer together on immigration issues than the campaign rhetoric would suggest.

Both would redeploy the California National Guard to help patrol the border. Both say they would crack down on employers who hire workers who are in the country illegally. Both say they would not allow illegal immigrants to pay lower, in-state tuition to attend public colleges and universities, as is currently the case under certain conditions for students living in California.

Both say they favor cutting off most public benefits to illegal immigrants as 1994’s Proposition 187 sought to do until courts invalidated major portions of it.

At the border, Poizner said he would sponsor a bill to “turn off the magnets” of public benefits and employment and sponsor an initiative similar to Proposition 187 if the Democratic-controlled Legislature does not act.