No, California isn't banning kids from drinking soda at restaurants
No, California is not on the verge of becoming “the land of milk and water” only for children eating at restaurants despite some news media outlets suggesting otherwise.

Showing just how easily false information can spread on social media “Fox & Friends,” The Hill and Drudge Report all incorrectly summarized legislation successfully moving through the state legislature which would require restaurants to offer water, sparkling water, flavored water or unflavored milk or a nondairy milk alternative as the “default beverage.”

“Default beverage,” as defined in the bill, refers to a beverage automatically included or offered as part of a children’s meal unless a costumer asks for an alternative. Other options are not outright banned, as it says right in the text of the legislation.

“The bill would not prohibit a restaurant’s ability to sell, or a customer’s ability to purchase, an alternative beverage if the purchaser requests one,” it says.

And yet several news media outlets tweeted, wrote or said on television that the state of California is either only offering milk or water or outright blocking or banning other options.

“There’s a bill that’s been proposed in the state of California to only give children two options at restaurants: either milk or water,” one host of “Fox & Friends” said on Sunday.

“California bill blocks restaurants from serving kids anything to drink but water and milk,” tweeted The Hill.

“New CA bill to mandate only milk and water with kids’ meals,” tweeted Drudge Report to its more than 1 million followers, despite the headline of the article in the tweet saying the state is aiming “to curb” kids’ soda drinking.

Assemblywoman Lorena Gonzalez Fletcher, D-San Diego — who voted in support of the bill in a committee and on the Assembly floor — was one of several people to point out the discrepancy.

You can see from the tweets below how people responded as if the false information was true.

The bill cites a rising obesity rate in the state, especially among children, as its chief concern.

“The purpose of this chapter is to support children’s health by setting nutritional standards for a restaurant’s children’s meals,” it says.

It was passed 46-26 on the Assembly floor on Thursday. It now returns to the Senate — which originally passed the bill with a 32-7 on Sept. 21 — for a final vote before heading to Gov. Jerry Brown’s to be vetoed or signed into law.

Email: abby.hamblin@sduniontribune.com

Twitter: @abbyhamblin