Amid attacks by Rep. Hunter, Campa-Najjar and pro-Israeli group say there’s no problem with American-Muslim donors
Congressional candidate Ammar Campa-Najjar has received $17,300 in contributions from board members of the Council on American-Islamic Relations — contributions that the candidate says show support from hard-working Americans and his critics on the right wing are portraying as money tied to terrorism.

Rep. Duncan Hunter, R-Alpine, has run ads criticizing Campa-Najjar’s support from CAIR, suggesting it’s part of a “well-orchestrated plan to infiltrate Congress.”

The ads have been criticized by Campa-Najjar and many in the media as a racist attack on the candidate’s Palestinian heritage. A pro-Israel organization that has contributed more money to Campa-Najjar than the CAIR board members also decries the ads as a smear.

CAIR describes itself as a civil rights group dedicated to promoting dialogue, justice and mutual understanding. It is not included on the U.S. list of designated terrorist groups and maintains its status as a tax-exempt charity. But the Washington D.C.-based nonprofit also has had some attention from federal agents investigating possible links to terrorist groups.

CAIR was found to have ties to Hamas, the Palestinian-Islamic resistance organization, during a long-running criminal trial against former leaders of the Holy Land Foundation for Relief and Development.

“The evidence at trial linked CAIR leaders to Hamas, a specially designated terrorist organization, and CAIR was named as an unindicted co-conspirator in the case,” according to a 2013 report from the U.S. Department of Justice.

CAIR was among more than 300 unindicted co-conspirators named in the 2007 prosecution of the foundation, at the time one of the biggest Islamic charities in the United States, on charges related to a conspiracy to support Hamas. CAIR denies allegations that it supports Islamic extremism and said its inclusion in the list of co-conspirators was the result of overzealous prosecutors.

The San Diego Union-Tribune reviewed Campa-Najjar’s campaign finance reports and found no contributions from CAIR itself. The charity’s tax-exempt status does not allow the organization to advocate for individual political candidates. There were also no contributions from political action committees for any of its chapters. The California chapter of CAIR has a political action committee, but the Union-Tribune could find no record of any contribution from the PAC to Campa-Najjar’s campaign.

There were 18 personal contributions totaling $17,300 from seven people who were members of the staff or board of directors for CAIR or its chapters at the time they donated to Campa-Najjar’s campaign. None of the seven donors held paid positions with CAIR, according to public tax reports. Donors listed their primary employers and occupations -- their day jobs -- to identify themselves to the campaign as required by the FEC. The Union-Tribune found their roles at CAIR by reviewing publicly available tax filings for the nonprofit group and its local chapters, documents that list board members.

There were also seven contributions totaling $900 from two people who worked for the Islamic Center of San Diego. One of the contributors served as a board member for a CAIR chapter in the past, but had left the position before she contributed to Campa-Najjar’s campaign.

The right-wing news website Breitbart has reported that Campa-Najjar refused to return the CAIR contributions — although it’s unclear who has asked him to do so. Campa-Najjar told the Union-Tribune on Thursday that the money came from individuals, not the organization.

“I reject the premise,” he said. “There is no CAIR money,” he said, adding that it comes from hard-working doctors and lawyers and others.

“Why would I give back American money that’s legal?”

Campa-Najjar’s campaign noted that he has received more money from Jewish groups.

A spokesman for J Street, which is among the United State’s largest pro-Israel groups and considers Hamas a serious threat to Israel’s safety, said J Street “strongly rejects the notion that CAIR is supportive of Islamic extremism” and condemned Hunter’s attacks on Campa-Najjar. The group has endorsed Campa-Najjar.

More than 360 individuals supporters of J Street contributed a total $48,736 to Campa-Najjar’s campaign using J Street’s political action committee as a conduit.

“Partly why we exist is to help ensure that people can’t get away with these kinds of smears,” Logan Bayroff, a spokesman for J Street, told the Union-Tribune this week. “The facts are that pro-Israel, pro-peace voters in his district and across the country support Campa-Najjar because of his values and positions, and they are appalled by these kinds of attacks.”

Hunter is a five-term congressman in the deeply Republican 50th District. He was elected to the seat he after his father, a 14-term congressman also named Duncan Hunter, retired after an unsuccessful run for president in 2008. The younger Duncan Hunter is running for re-election next month while he and his wife and former campaign manager, Margaret, are under federal indictment for allegedly stealing more than $250,000 from Hunter’s campaign to use for personal purposes including oral surgery and airfare for a pet rabbit.

The couple has pleaded not guilty to charges laid out in the 60-count indictment, which Hunter has described as a politically-motivated attack by the U.S. Department of Justice.

The indictment took center stage in the campaign in August and September, but Hunter’s attacks on Campa-Najjar’s Palestinian heritage have gained more attention in October.

Hunter’s campaign has criticized a $650 expenditure made by the Campa-Najjar campaign to CAIR on Oct. 25, 2017, for the purpose of “civic donation.”

“My opponent Ammar Yasser Campa-Najjar donated $650 from his campaign to CAIR, a group with a pro-Islamist agenda which the F.B.I. said has connections to terror groups,” Hunter’s campaign Facebook page posted on Oct. 10. “Help me defeat this known security risk. Donate.”

In a statement responding to the Union-Tribune’s question about the contribution, the Campa-Najjar campaign said the payment was for 10 people -- all of whom happened to identify their faith as Catholic or Christian -- to attend a banquet to learn about CAIR’s work. Though Campa-Najjar did not attend the banquet, the campaign said, attendees included elected officials from both parties and people who work in law enforcement.

“Mr. Hunter’s attacks have gone from desperate to delusional,” said Nick Singer, director of communications for Campa-Najjar. “Does he really think voters care about a $650 legal donation made by us when he illegally spent $250,000 in donations to fund his lavish lifestyle?”

To put Campa-Najjar’s funding from CAIR in perspective, his campaign had raised about $2.5 million as of the reporting period ending Sept. 30.

David Chami, an attorney who lives in Arizona and is on the board of directors for the CAIR chapter there, said by phone on Thursday that he is not paid by CAIR and that his contribution was independent and based solely on Campa-Najjar’s position on consumer advocacy laws.

“My decision to help a particular candidate is based on their political positions and issues they support,” Chami said. “It has nothing to do with religion and if it did, I’m Muslim and he is a Christian,” Chami said.

Chami said that he is a third generation American and a civil rights lawyer and he in no way supports terrorism.

Bayroff, the J Street spokesman, said on Thursday that J Street “has zero concern about the handful of contributions from people associated with CAIR.”

“We never support a Congressional candidate unless we are confident that they care about Israel and its future, support a productive U.S.-Israel relationship and want to promote peace and security in the region,” he said. “That is vitally important to J Street’s mission. We support Campa-Najjar precisely because his positions and views on this issue are pro-Israel, pro-peace and pro-diplomacy -- good for the U.S. and our allies.”

Staff writers Jeff McDonald and Ricky Young contributed to this report.

morgan.cook@sduniontribune.com