U.S. SBA Office of Advocacy
This website provides data and links to data on businesses with and without employees. These are referred to as “employer firms” and “nonemployer firms.” Employer firms have the lion’s share of receipts and payroll, while nonemployer firms are far more numerous.

Data on employers and associated business characteristics are available from the Statistics of U.S. Businesses (SUSB), Business Dynamics Statistics (BDS), and Business Employment Dynamics (BED) programs and data on nonemployers is available from the Nonemployer Statistics (NE) program. The programs are annual and from the U.S. Census Bureau, except the Business Employment Dynamics which is quarterly and from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. SUSB, NE and BED have detailed industry data while BDS is available at the major industry level. SUSB and NE are available at the county level while BDS and BED are available at the state level. BED is available with only about a 9 month lag while the other datasources are available with a lag of a few years. BED's timeliness does come at a cost in terms of accuracy of firm size compared to the other datasources. BDS is unique in that it has a firm age component. (Note that BDS data has not been updated since its inception, but it is planned to update the data in the future).

Detailed data on owner and business characteristics is available from the U.S. Census Bureau's Survey of Business Owners in years ending in 2 or 7 which is part of their Economic Census.

The PDF files present quick views on high level figures and are available in MS Excel files for ease of use. The tab delimited text files contain more data detail and can easily be copied and pasted into spreadsheet software (depending on the software, pasting as text instead of html will parse the data into cells).

Public and federal agencies are encouraged to use the data for economic research and regulatory analyses. The Office of Advocacy defines a small business for research purposes as an independent business having fewer than 500 employees however, the SBA's Office of Size Standards has industry definitions of small businesses for government purposes.