Planned Parenthood Annual Report: Fresh Evidence of Abortion-Centered, Profit Driven Business Model
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: December 31, 2014

Contact: Mallory Quigley, mquigley@sba-list.org, 202-223-8073

America’s #1 Abortion Provider Performed 327,000+ Abortions, Most Other Services Drop

WASHINGTON, D.C. – Today Planned Parenthood Federation of America (PPFA) released its 2013-2014 annual report. In response, the national pro-life group Susan B. Anthony List (SBA List) released a fact sheet on the information, revealing a drop in most services except for abortion.

The fact sheet details the decline in Planned Parenthood’s non-abortion services:

In 2013, Planned Parenthood performed 327,653 abortions . Over the past three reported years, Planned Parenthood has performed nearly one million abortions.

. Over the past three reported years, Planned Parenthood has performed nearly one million abortions. In 2013, abortions made up 94% of Planned Parenthood’s pregnancy services .

. For every adoption referral, Planned Parenthood performed 174 abortions.

While abortions rose, Planned Parenthood adoption referrals dropped 14% in one year , and prenatal care services dropped 4%.

, and Planned Parenthood’s cancer prevention services are down 17% over one year, andcontraceptive services dropped by 4%.

Details on Planned Parenthood’s finances:

During fiscal year 2013-2014, Planned Parenthood received more than $528 million in taxpayer funding, or more than $1.4 million per day, in the form of government grants, contracts, and Medicaid reimbursements.

in the form of government grants, contracts, and Medicaid reimbursements. Taxpayer funding accounts for 41% of Planned Parenthood’s overall revenue.

of Planned Parenthood’s overall revenue. Planned Parenthood reported more than $127 million in excess revenue, and more than $1.4 billion in net assets.

After reviewing the report, SBA List President Marjorie Dannenfelser made the following comments:

“The abortion rate may be declining across America, but not in Planned Parenthood clinics. Their latest annual report is fresh evidence that Planned Parenthood remains an abortion-centered, profit-driven business. In 2013, Planned Parenthood upped the number of abortions they performed to 327,653. Meanwhile, their already limited cancer screenings, prenatal services, adoption referrals – and even contraception services – continue to drop. Planned Parenthood claims to be an altruistic health care provider for women and girls but their bottom line is all about abortion.”

The Susan B. Anthony List and its Political Action Committees, the SBA List Candidate Fund and Women Speak Out PAC, spent $15.25 million in the 2014 election cycle to defeat pro-abortion incumbents and elect pro-life candidates to federal and statewide office. The SBA List is dedicated to pursuing policies and electing candidates who will reduce and ultimately end abortion. To that end, the SBA List emphasizes the education, promotion, mobilization, and election of pro-life women. The SBA List is a network of more than 365,000 pro-life Americans nationwide.

###