Hundreds Petition Congressman Dold to Take Action on Gun Safety

Last chance for Dold to add name to discharge petition that would bring gun safety legislation to a vote

NORTHBROOK, IL— Today, the Schneider for Congress campaign delivered more than 600 petition signatures to Republican Congressman Bob Dold’s office urging the Congressman to back up his words with action to bring commonsense gun safety legislation for a vote.

As Republican leadership continues to prevent a vote on the “No Fly, No Buy” bill that would keep those on the terrorist watch list from purchasing firearms, Dold has taken no action to overcome his party’s stonewalling of any and all gun safety measures.

Dold still refuses to add his name to the petition more than 180 of his congressional colleagues have signed, that would, with the support of a majority of members, bring gun safety legislation to the floor for a vote.

“We’ve waited too long for commonsense gun safety legislation, but in Congress, Republicans won’t even allow a vote” said Judy Arvey, a Northbrook resident who helped deliver the petition. “If Bob Dold really supports the No Fly, No Buy bill, he should sign the discharge petition to help move this bill forward.”

Image caption: Volunteer delivers petition to Congressman Dold's office urging the Congressman to sign the discharge petition to secure a vote on the No Fly, No Buy bill.

“Republican Bob Dold said after the massacre in Orlando that ‘thoughts and prayers are not enough’ to reduce gun violence, but apparently standing up to his party is too much to ask,” said Steven Kirsch, spokesman for Schneider for Congress. “Until Dold shows he is willing to take action by adding his name alongside those fighting to a get a vote on this critical legislation, his words of support remain just that – words.”

Dold has previously signed and gathered support for a discharge petition that secured a vote over the objections of House leadership, and trumpeted the success of the “Dold-Backed Strategy” in a press release.

Despite this previous experience, Dold offers no explanation for his refusal to sign or help gather support for the discharge petition on the No Fly, No Buy bill.

Congress is expected to go on vacation this week until the November election, making this the last opportunity for Dold to take action to reduce gun violence.

The petition text is available on the Schneider for Congress website: http://act. schneiderforcongress.com/page/ s/tell-bob-dold

###