Fox News' Sean Hannity Feeds Donald Trump Fake Syrian Refugee Claim From Hoax Website
PolitiFact: Sean Hannity Falls For Hoax Website's Claim That U.S. Is Taking In 250,000 Syrian Refugees. An October 26 fact check by PolitiFact analyzed Sean Hannity's repeated claims that, "The president said he's going to bring in 250,000 refugees into this country." PolitiFact's Jon Greenberg ultimately awarded Hannity's claim a "Pants-on-Fire" rating, after concluding that, "in plain fact, President Barack Obama never said that, nor as far as anyone can tell has any member of his administration." Additionally, PolitiFact noted that Hannity's only potential source for this claim appeared on the hoax site, "realnewsrightnow.com," which cites the non-existent "State Department spokeswoman Cathy Pieper." From PolitiFact:

"You see the backlash emerging now in Europe over the refugee problem for Syria and Iraq," Hannity said. "The president said he's going to bring in 250,000 refugees into this country."

[...]

In plain fact, President Barack Obama never said that, nor as far as anyone can tell has any member of his administration. In September, White House press secretary Josh Earnest told reporters Obama "informed his team that he would like them to accept -- at least make preparations to accept -- at least 10,000 Syrian refugees in the next fiscal year."

[...]

We reached out to Hannity's program and did not hear back.

The figure he used seems to have emerged in early September on a website called realnewsrightnow.com. The website reported that State Department spokeswoman Cathy Pieper announced that 250,000 Syrian refugees would be resettled on tribal reservation lands in Arizona and North Dakota.

We could find no Cathy Pieper working for the State Department.

Other articles on realnewsrightnow.com claim that "Obama will exercise his presidential powers" ending term limits and that Pope Francis claimed that "God Has Instructed Me to Revise the Ten Commandments." [PolitiFact, 10/26/15]