Meet Scott Walker
Scott Walker grew up in a small Wisconsin town called Delavan. The son of a pastor, Scott had the spirit of service instilled in him at an early age. He was involved in sports, band, church, and achieved the rank of Eagle Scout.

While in high school, Scott was selected to attend the American Legion's Badger Boys State program. There, he was picked as one of two representatives from Wisconsin toBoys Nation in Washington, D.C. Both of these programs teach young men about the virtues of the American form of government and the protection of freedom. The experience opened Scott's eyes to public service.

In 1986, Scott moved to Milwaukee to attend Marquette University. While still in school, he worked for IBM before leaving school in his senior year to work full-time in development for the American Red Cross.

Scott was elected to the State Assembly in 1993. While there, he chaired several committees and authored important pieces of legislation that include: Truth-in-Sentencing, photo identification requirements to vote, and the elimination of the statute of limitations in sexual assault cases.

In 2002, Scott was elected Milwaukee County Executive to reform the scandal-ridden county government. The scandal rocked Milwaukee County to its core and left taxpayers on the hook for millions in pension obligations.

For eight years as County Executive, Scott faithfully kept his promise to spend taxpayer money as if it were his own. He cut the county's debt by 30%, reduced the county workforce by more than 25%, and authored nine consecutive budgets without increasing the property tax levy from the previous year. Despite failing national and state economies, Milwaukee County recorded a budget surplus.

On January 3, 2011, Scott Walker was inaugurated as Wisconsin's 45th Governor.

Since that day, he has proposed bold reforms that have eliminated the state's $3.6 billion budget deficit without raising taxes and gave school districts and local governments the tools to balance their budgets without the massive layoffs seen in other states. To date,

these profound changes have saved Wisconsin taxpayers more than $1 billion which lead to property taxes on a median valued home to go down for the first time in 12 years.

Governor Walker remains committed to helping Wisconsin's private sector create 250,000 jobs by 2015. After years of record job loss, Wisconsin gained jobs during the Walker administration. And in the annual survey of job creators, 94% said Wisconsin is headed in the right direction (compared to just 10% who said the same thing in 2010).

On June 5, 2012, Scott Walker became the first governor in American history to win a recall election. He won the election with more votes and by a higher percentage than he had won in 2010.

Governor Walker is married to Tonette and they have two sons – Matt who is a freshman in college and Alex who is a senior at the local public high school. They are active members of their church in Wauwatosa and remain active with numerous charitable programs.