Scott Walker Unveils Plan to Bring 250,000 Jobs and 10,000 New Businesses to Wisconsin by 2015
Tells Business Leaders “People Create Jobs, Not Government”

Madison – Scott Walker, Milwaukee County executive and candidate for governor, announced today at the Wisconsin Manufacturers and Commerce (WMC) Gubernatorial Candidate Forum his ambitious plan to bring 250,000 jobs and 10,000 new businesses to Wisconsin by 2015.

“If you elect me as your next Governor, I’ll get government out of the way and lower the tax burden so Wisconsin business owners and factories can create 250,000 jobs and 10,000 businesses in our state by 2015,” said Walker to the group of over 800 business owners and community leaders.

Walker outlined his six-step plan to help Wisconsin businesses create 250,000 new jobs and 10,000 new businesses by 2015:

1 – Lower Taxes “I want to lower the tax on employers, lower the tax on income, freeze property taxes and phase out retirement income taxes. States that have a lower tax burden have more jobs and better budgets, and its time Wisconsin was a better state to do business.”

2 – Less Regulations “State agencies should be more responsive to the customer and standards must be science-based and predictable.”

3 – End Frivolous Lawsuits “Luckily, we stopped the Governor’s changes in joint and several liability, but we need to do more to block frivolous lawsuits, and we need true tort reform to help lower health care costs.”

4 – Better Education “We need a strong education system with more accountability and more tools to prepare our future workforce. And it means giving our UW System the tools to operate more like a business to pursue economic development.”

5 – Improve Healthcare “We need help for employers to be able to afford the costs of providing health care without government taking total control. That means eliminating the state tax on Health Savings Accounts. It means full disclosure on medical procedures. And it means helping employers tap into larger purchasing pools to share the risk. Most importantly, it means finding new ways for everyone to get some skin in the game so we work on improving our health which will ultimately lead to lower costs.”

6 – Strong Infrastructure “Reliable energy sources and dependable transportation links are the final piece to our plan.”

“Unlike my opponents, I believe that people create jobs, not government,” Walker concluded. “By enacting my plan, we will be able to get government out of the way of employers big and small who will then help Wisconsin create 250,000 jobs by 2015, and as we create those new jobs, we will be able to add 10,000 new businesses.”

Scott Walker serves as Milwaukee County executive and approaches his county budget the same way he approaches his family budget - cutting out waste and doing more with less. Walker has cut the county debt by 10%, reducing the workforce by more than 20%, and has authored eight consecutive budgets without increasing the property tax levy from the previous year. And when he and his wife Tonette realized the county executive made more money than the governor, they thought that wasn’t right, so dating back to his election in 2002, they have given back over $370,000 of his salary back to the county.

This week, Walker kicked off his brown bag lunch tour that outlines his Brown Bag Guide to Government that follows three basic principles:

Don’t spend more than you have.

Smaller government is better government.

People create jobs, not government.

Scott Walker packs his own brown bag lunch each day before heading to the office (two ham and cheese sandwiches on wheat), and drives a 1998 Saturn with 100,000 miles to cut back on costs. Scott and Tonette Walker live in Wauwatosa with their two high school aged sons, Matt and Alex.