Terry McAuliffe Can’t Explain How He Will Fund His “Shoot For The Moon” Plans
2

McAuliffe’s Educations Propo sals Alone Woul d Cost Nearly $1 Billion Per

Year

Unfunded Promise: Nearly $700 Million Per Year To Raise Teacher Pay

Terry McAuliffe has promis ed a number of new big -

spending items for Virginia’s education system.

Firstly, he has called for paying teachers the national average salary for public school teachers, a policy proposal that likely gained him the endorsement of the Virginia Education Association

xiii

:

Terry McAuliffe

: “You’ve gotta have an education system that is training o

ur students for the

future workforce. And th at’s what I focus on. We gotta sta rt paying our teac hers what they’re

worth. We gotta quit

demonizi ng teachers, which happens every day. And most of you’ve

heard me talk about this. In Virginia, if you take average Virginia pay to average teacher

pay, do you know where we rank among the fifty sta tes. We’re fiftieth, we’re dea d last. Now, I want to keep the best teachers, I want to recruit the best teachers. But we can’t be fiftieth out of fifty, we’re the eighth w

ealthiest state in United States of America. We take retirement

benefits away from our teachers, we don’t give them the pay that they deserve.

So as Governor, I want to make sure we pay our teachers the national average, in order for us to get the best possible teachers.

”

xiv

According to th e National Ed ucation Assoc iation (NEA), the lar gest national t eachers’ union , in the

2011-2012 school year, Virginia employed 103,908 public school teachers.

xv

The NEA also highlights that for the same school year Virginia experienced an average $6,715 pay gap from the national

average (Virginia’s average salary was $48,703, the national average was $55,418).

xvi

Based on these numbers, raising teacher pay to match the national average would lead to nearly $700 million in new spending each year. McAuliffe has no way to pay for it.

Unfunded Promise: Nearly $225 Million Per Year To Fund Community Colleges

When speak ing to a Google Hangout e ducation forum hos ted by Virginia 21, McAuliffe sa id, “

But I will

ensure as Governor, I promise ya, that we’re gonna have the necessary funds we need so that everybody can afford to go to college and it’s not such an exorbitant cost.”

xvii

In more specific terms, McAuliffe and his campaign have consistently highlighted what they call a funding gap for students attending communi ty college. McAuliffe has called for closing a $1,908 per student funding gap.

xviii

McAuliffe has claimed he will find new funding sources for this expense, without clarifying:

He added those program s need new funding.

“We have cut the community colleges,” he said. “From 2008, the commonwealth’s contribution was about $4,400 per student. It has dropped today to $2,500 per student.”

He acknowledged the p er-student figure decline d partly from budget cuts and par tly because more people enrolled in community colleges during those years.

But, “I have consisten tly said that education i s not an expense; i t is an investment,” Mc Auliffe said, adding he’d “pick up the phone” to find new funding sources in b

oth the state and federal governments.

xix