Providence Pension Value Report for year ending 30June2013
116 Huntington Ave. , 8th Floor Boston, M A 02116 T 617.424.7300 www.segalco .com

January 31, 2014 Retirement Board The Employee Retirement System of the City of Providence City Hall Providence, RI 02903 Dear Board Members: We are pleased to submit this Actuarial Valuation and Review as of July 1, 2013. It summarizes the actuarial data used in the valuation, establishes the funding requirements for fiscal 2014 and later years and analyzes the preceding two years’ experience. This report was prepared in accordance with generally accepted actuarial principles and practices at the request of the Board to assist in administering the Retirement System. The census information and financial informatio n on which our calculations were based was prepared by the staff of the System. That assistance is gratefully acknowledged. The measurements shown in this actuarial valuation may not be applicable for other purposes. Future actuarial measurements may differ significantly from the current measurements presented in this report due to such factors as the following: plan experience differing from that anticipated by the economic or demographic assumptions; changes in economic or demographic assumptions; increases or decreases expected as part of the natural operation of the methodology used for these measurements (such as the end of an amortization period); and changes in plan provisions or applicable law. The actuarial calculations were directed under the supervision of Kathleen A. Riley, FSA, MAAA, EA. She is a member of the American Academy of Actua ries and meets the Qual ification Stan dards of the Ameri can Academy of Actuari es to render the actuarial opinion herein. To the best of her knowledge, the information suppl ied in the actuarial valuation is complete and accurate. Further, in her opinion, the assumptions as approved by the Board are reasonably related to the experience of and the expectations for the Plan.