Read DoD report: 2014 Climate Change Adaptation Roadmap
The responsibilit y of the Department of Defense is the security of our country . That requires thinking ahead and planning for a

wide range of conngencies. Among the future trends that will impact our naonal security is climate change. Rising global temperatures, changing precipitaon paerns, climbing sea levels, and more extreme weather events will intensify the challenges of global instability, hunger, poverty, and conict. They will likely lead to food and water shortages, pandemic disease, disputes over refugees and resources, and destrucon by natural disasters in regions across the globe. In our defense strategy, we refer to climate change as a “threat mulplier” because it has the potenal to exacerbate many of the challenges we are dealing with today – from infecous disease to terrorism. We are already beginning to see some of these

impacts.

A changing climate will have real impacts on our military and the way it executes its missions. The military could be called upon more oen to support civil authories, and provide humanitarian assistance and disaster relief in the face of more frequent and more intense natural disasters. Our coastal installaons are vulnerable to rising sea levels and increased ooding, while droughts, wildres, and more extreme temperatures could threaten many of our training acvies. Our supply chains could be impacted, and we will need to ensure our crical equipment works under more extreme weather condions. Weather has always aected military operaons, and as the climate changes, the way we execute operaons may be altered or constrained. While sciensts are converging toward consensus on future climate projecons, uncertainty remains. But this cannot be an excuse for delaying acon. Every day, our military deals with global uncertainty. Our planners know that, as military strategist Carl von Clausewitz wrote, “all acon must, to a certain extent, be planned in a mere twilight.” It is in this context that DoD is releasing a Climate Change Adaptaon Roadmap. Climate change is a long-term trend, but with wise planning and risk migaon now, we can reduce adverse impacts downrange. Our rst step in planning for these challenges is to idenfy the eects of climate change on the Department with tangible and specic metrics, using the best available science. We are almost done with a baseline survey to assess the vulnerability of our military’s more than 7,000 bases, installaons, and other facilies. In places like the Hampton Roads region in Virginia, which houses the largest concentraon of US military sites in the world, we see recurrent ooding today, and we are beginning work to address a projected sea-level rise of 1.5 feet over the next 20 to 50 years. Drawing on these assessments, we are integrang climate change consideraons into our plans, operaons, and training across the Department so that we can manage associated risks. We are considering the impacts of climate change in our war games and defense planning scenarios, and are working with our Combatant Commands to address impacts in their areas of responsibility. At home, we are studying the implicaons of increased demand for our Naonal Guard in the aermath of extreme weather events. We are also assessing impacts on our global operaons – for instance, how climate change may factor into our rebalance to the Asia-Pacic. Last year, I released the Department of Defense’s Arcc Strategy, which addresses the potenal security implicaons of increased human acvity in the Arcc – a consequence of rapidly melng sea ice. We are also collaborang with relevant partners on climate change challenges. Domescally, this means working across our federal and local agencies and instuons to develop a comprehensive, whole-of-government approach to a challenge that reaches across tradional porolios and jurisdicons. Within the U.S. Government, DoD stands ready to support other agencies that will take the lead in preparing for these challenges – such as the State Department, US Agency for Internaonal Development, and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. We must also work with other naons to share tools for assessing and managing climate change impacts, and help build their capacity to respond. Climate change is a global problem. Its impacts do not respect naonal borders. No naon can deal with it alone. We must work together, building joint capabilies to deal with these emerging threats. Polics or ideology must not get in the way of sound planning. Our armed forces must prepare for a future with a wide spectrum of possible threats, weighing risks and probabilies to ensure that we will connue to keep our country secure. By taking a proacve, exible approach to assessment, analysis, and adaptaon, the Defense Department will keep pace with a changing climate, minimize its impacts on our missions, and connue to protect our naonal security.