Marco Rubio - Jorge Ramos Interview / Official Univision transcript
are working, who are studying, and I don’t think it would be fair to cancel it su

ddenly.

But I do think it is going to have to end. And, God willing, it’s going to end because immigration reform is going to pass. DAPA hasn’t yet taken effect, and I think it has

impeded progress on immigration, on immigration reform. And since that prog

ram hasn’t taken effect yet, I would cancel it. But DACA, I think it is important; it can’t be cancelled

suddenly because there are already people who are benefitting from it. But it is going to have to end. It cannot be the permanent policy of the United

States. And I don’t think that’s what they’re asking for, either. I think that everyone p refers immigration reform.

JR: But then, to clarify, you would end DACA once immigration reform is approved. But what happens, Senator, if there is no immigration reform? Would you cancel DACA anyway?

SMR:

At some point it’s going to have to end. That is, it cannot continue to be

the permanent policy of the United States. I do think that if I wind up being president, it will be possib

le to achieve new immigration reform. It won’t be possible for it to be

comprehensive; that is, they are not going to be able to do everything in one massive bill.

We already tried that a couple of years ago. We have seen that the political support isn’t

t

here, and I think we’ve spent a lot of time on this process when we could have started

moving forward through the three steps that I advocated. Unfortunately, a lot of time has been wasted on that. It has become an even more controversial issue; harder to move

forward on that issue. But I still say that it’s important to modernize our system, and that

means improving the way we enforce it in the future, to modernize the immigration

system so that it’s not so costly and bureaucratic. And we have to deal with

12 million human beings who are already here. And nobody, nobody is advocating a plan to deport 12 million human beings. So that issue has to be dealt with, as well.

JR: When you announced your candidacy, outside of the building where you announced it, there were a lot of Dreamers, protesting. And then there are some

immigrant organizations that have criticized your candidacy. America’s Voice says that

you have anti-immigrant positions. I would like to ask you, you were in favor of an immigration reform bill in the Senate, and you voted for it. But today, would you vote in favor of a path to legalization for 11 million undocumented people?

SMR:

Well, that can’t be done today for the following reason. I don’t think we

can. I have been very clear. I, through that two-

year experience, it’s very clear to me. We’re not going to have the votes or the necessary political support in Congress. Today,

in some sectors of the American public, in order to move forward on this issue, unless we

first prove to the American people that in the future there’s not going to be another

immigration crisis. If we do that, I think that undoubtedly the political support is going to exist to do legalization as you have said. It has to be a process similar to what we

advocated in the legislation that I sponsored, and it’s the law that says that, first, the things we’re all familiar with must be present: a background check, pay a fine, begin to

pay taxes, get a work permit, and after 10 years, they can apply for their residency. That