Republican Governors Ask President Obama To Suspend Syrian Refugee Resettlement Efforts
November 20, 2015

The Honorable Barack Obama

President of the United States

The White House

Washington, DC 20500





Dear Mr. President:



Our country has long served as a welcoming beacon to individuals and families who seek safety

and refugee status within the borders of the United States. For years we have been proud to

welcome refugees into our communities in their pursuit of a better life and future.



However, we are deeply concerned that the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria may have exploited

the generosity of the refugee system to carry out Friday’s terrorist attack in Paris. While the

tragic event was a direct assault on the European Union’s refugee system, the potential for this

situation to arise in the United States is escalated by information revealed by the Director of the

Federal Bureau of Investigation, James Comey. In testimony before Congress, he admitted to

certain inadequacies in the system that would prevent the thorough vetting of the 10,000 refugees

your administration has pledged to admit into the United States.



As governors, we are charged with ensuring the safety and wellbeing of our citizens. In order to

adequately fulfill this duty, we request that you immediately review the process by which you

conduct background checks on all individuals applying for refugee status and address the gaps

acknowledged by your director of the FBI.



In the wake of this recent tragedy, and until we can ensure the citizens of our states that an

exhaustive review of all security measures has been completed and the necessary changes have





been implemented, we respectfully request that you suspend all plans to resettle additional Syrian

refugees.



Sincerely,





































































Governor Asa Hutchinson

Arkansas

Governor Rick Scott

Florida



Governor Sam Brownback

Kansas



Governor Bobby Jindal

Louisiana

Governor Robert Bentley

Alabama

Governor Paul R. LePage

Maine



Governor Terry E. Branstad

Iowa



Governor C.L. “Butch” Otter

Idaho



Governor Douglas A. Ducey

Arizona



Governor Bruce Rauner

Illinois



Governor Nathan Deal

Georgia











Governor Pete Ricketts

Nebraska

Governor Brian Sandoval

Nevada



Governor Jack Dalrymple

North Dakota



Governor Nikki Haley

South Carolina



Governor Greg Abbott

Texas



Governor Scott Walker

Wisconsin



Governor Dennis Daugaard

South Dakota



Governor John R. Kasich

Ohio



Governor Pat McCrory

North Carolina



Governor Mary Fallin

Oklahoma



Governor Susana Martinez

New Mexico

Governor Matthew H. Mead

Wyoming



Governor Bill Haslam

Tennessee

Governor Gary R. Herbert

Utah



Governor Chris Christie

New Jersey