Riley challenges incumbent Golumb for Police Commission

PORTSMOUTH — Jerry Howe has been a Portsmouth police commissioner for a decade and said his tenure has taught him the commissioners are always "between a rock and a hard place."

"The City Council thinks you're Santa Claus and the union thinks you're the Grinch," Howe said of ongoing union contract negotiations.

Despite that perceived unpopularity, two candidates are vying for one seat on the commission. One is newly retired corrections officer Richard Riley. The other is incumbent John Golumb.

Riley, 48, just retired from law enforcement, is the father of two children and a 21-year resident of Portsmouth, where he owns two businesses. His great-grandparents hail from Strawbery Banke, and his in-laws originate from Newington.

"Politics runs in my family," he said.

That includes Sen. Scott Brown, R-Mass., brother of Riley's wife, Leeann. His father-in-law, C. Bruce Brown, served for 18 years as a city councilor in Newburyport, Mass.

Riley said he helped run Brown's Senate campaign and described it as "quite an experience." But, he added, he's running for a seat on the Police Commission because "I think I can help."

He said his experience includes 15 years as a corrections officer, managing a police bicycle patrol, working as a K-9 officer and dealing with union grievances and budgets. He's also been a K-9 instructor and served for six years on the board of the Working Dog Foundation.

"I've done it all," he said. As such, he said he believes he can trim Portsmouth's police budget. "I think I can find ways to save money," he said. "I'd look at line items for things like training, staffing levels, overtime — and try to figure out what to give up, because it's time."

Riley retired in March from the Essex County (Mass.) Sheriff's Department with the rank of sergeant, and most recently worked as a K-9 officer for the Essex County Drug Task Force. He started his corrections career at the Salem, Mass., jail in 1990, which at the time was known for deplorable conditions, including the use of buckets as inmate toilets.

He and his wife moved to Portsmouth in 1991, he said, to take advantage of a housing market more favorable than in Massachusetts.

"And we haven't left," he said. "I enjoy it here."

Riley is the father of two, and he's active in youth sports, including his fund-raising efforts for the USA Mavericks youth baseball league. He owns and operates Interstate Embroidery, an embroidery and screen-printing business, as a well as Eagle Atlantic, a private security business.

The incumbent

John Golumb, 58, is a 20-year city resident who, with his wife, Marlisa Geroulo, owns and operate Poco's Bow Street Cantina and Two Ceres Street.

He said he's running for re-election to the Police Commission "because I believe citizen oversight of the Police Department is important."

Also, he said, as chairman of the committee, which spearheaded an independent audit of Police Department operations, he's "looking forward to being part of the process to implement the study's" findings.

A report is due to be released this week.

Golumb's public service record includes 14 years on the Historic District Commission, one as vice chairman. He's served on the Police Commission for the past four years, and if he's re-elected, he said one of his goals will be "to bring a depth of experience as a result of the complex issues police services and the city have faced over the last four years."

Another goal, he said, is to get more public input at Police Commission hearings.

"It's a great forum for the public to get the facts on the budgets and also the contracts," he said.

Golumb said he'll also aim to present a budget that provides safety for the public and the police force, while offering the "most value for tax dollars." And he vowed to "take an objective look at police contracts that will be up for renewal and see how they affect the city in five years."

Reader Reaction We reserve the right to remove any content at any time from this Community, including without limitation if it violates the Community Rules . We ask that you report content that you in good faith believe violates the above rules by clicking the Flag link next to the offending comment. New comments are only accepted for two weeks from the date of publication.