U.S. Senate: A History of Notable Senate Investigations
The authority of Congress to investigate is an implied constitutional power. James Madison anticipated the significance of congressional inquiry in Federalist 51 when he urged: "In framing a government which is to be administered by men over men. . .you must first enable the government to control the governed; and in the next place oblige it to control itself." Congress has exercised its investigative responsibility since the earliest days of the republic. Today congressional oversight enables House and Senate members to serve as the eyes and ears of the American public.

Congressional investigations date back to 1792 when the House passed a resolution to examine the disastrous St. Clair expedition. Since then Congress has conducted hundreds of investigations. Noteworthy inquiries have required a combination of persistence, thoroughness, expert staff, sharp questioning, good publicity, and some luck. Successful investigators diligently conduct background research and have been shrewd in evaluating evidence and in questioning witnesses. The very best have managed to achieve a level of bipartisanship to maintain credibility. Particularly during the second half of the 20th century, senators and their committee staff have honed their public relations skills to attract press coverage and hold public attention. Historically significant Senate investigations have uncovered wrongdoing, have punished transgressors, and have produced legislation aimed at prohibiting similar abuse in the future.

Congressional investigations have not been confined to oversight of the executive or judicial branches though that has often been the focus of past inquiries. Congress may investigate anything related to the development of public policy. Since its earliest investigations, Congress has availed itself of the power of inquiry in order to inform the public and to write good legislation. Over the past two centuries the Senate has probed issues such as interstate commerce, Ku Klux Klan activities, the sinking of the R.M.S. Titanic, Wall Street banking practices, organized crime, antiunion activity, the sale of cotton, and the Vietnam War. Perhaps the Senate’s best-known investigatory committee, the Select Committee on Presidential Campaign Activities (commonly known as the Watergate Committee), investigated alleged malfeasance in the executive branch and was instrumental in bringing about the resignation of President Richard Nixon.