Letters to the Editor, Jan. 8
President Obama’s executive order on the registration of gun sellers and background checks for gun purchasers simply clarifies laws that already exist. His executive order now definitively states who is considered a gun seller to include those at gun shows and individuals who sell guns from their cars and other places not considered a gun shop.

The problem with background checks is that the FBI and the the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives, those organizations charged with carrying out the background checks, need more personnel to do the job within the time-framework of the law. The Republican Congress has consistently refused to increase the budget of these organizations to fund the increase in personnel needed. The Congress, under threat from the National Rifle Association (NRA) and against the will of the American people according to several national polls, has defeated all attempts to strengthen gun control laws. Even attempts to pass obviously sensible laws that prohibit sale of guns to persons on the no-fly list or on terrorism-watch lists have been blocked by Congress. This Congress and the GOP presidential candidates are determined to undermine or nullify if elected all executive orders of President Obama, no matter how sensible or imperative they are.

Melvin Cheitlin, San Francisco

Blame the Yorks

Jed York’s pathetic press conference didn’t come close to fulfilling his “Hold me accountable” promise.

Firing your mistake of a coaching choice is not being accountable. Aside from himself, the only person that can hold Jed accountable and fire him is his mother, and unfortunately for the San Francisco 49ers’ faithful, given the incompetence and greed of the Yorks, that ain’t going to happen. Someone (Larry Ellison?), please rescue us fans from this family!

Edward Chmelewski, San Francisco

Visa waiver risk

Regarding “New visa waiver law infringes on rights, betrays our values” (Open Forum, Jan. 5): Dr. Kourosh Kolahi is right to be outraged at the idea of discrimination based on one’s national heritage. A provision in last year’s government funding bill intended to make the Visa Waiver Program more secure would deny a visa waiver to any foreign national who is a dual citizen of both the visa waiver country and Syria, Iraq, Iran or Sudan. The risk is that visa waiver countries, 38 in all, and most in Europe will apply the same restriction to U.S. citizens based solely on their heritage. The language I introduced, which was also included, would require travelers who have visited Syria and Iraq in the past five years to acquire a traditional visa, which includes an in-person interview with a U.S. official.

I believe that approach is sufficient to prevent the estimated 5,000 foreign fighters from Europe who have trained in the Middle East from using the program to enter the country. Restricting the use of the program based on nationality in addition to where an individual has traveled is not the correct path. I was disappointed the provision was included over the strong objection of many members, and will work with my colleagues to quickly repeal it.

Sen. Dianne Feinstein,

Washington, D.C.

Threatening order

I strongly urge Congress to continue to pursue the legality/constitutionality of these so called “executive orders” handed down by this administration. The subject matter is irrelevant, it’s the idea of them that threatens the very definition of democracy. It is one person making decisions that should be made by our elected legislative bodies. If the American people wanted to be run by one person, we would have stayed an English colony.

Lucretia Marcus, Alamo

Gun hypocrisy

The gun nuts who claim that the availability of firepower has no effect on the level of civil mayhem apparently can’t see beyond the end of their barrels. Since many of them are also knee-jerk supporters of Israel, they should look to recent experience in that model society. In dozens of attacks over the past several months, Palestinians armed mostly with knives and cars have killed a total of 21 Israelis — fewer than the number of kids slain in a single hot-lead incident in an American school. No doubt the NRA and its puppets will join fair-minded folks everywhere in calling for sanctions against Israel until it grants Palestinians their God-given right to military weaponry.

Paul Rude, Berkeley

State will deal

Regarding “Will homeless get a budget bonanza?” (Jan. 7): The homeless will not “get a budget bonanza” as trumpeted in your lead. The people of San Francisco can hope to get more assistance from the state to deal with an ongoing health, quality of life, income inequality, and the mental health/addiction crisis that has challenged our city since its founding. Those of us who do not have housing are not getting some government giveaway like Pacific Gas and Electric Co. How you say what you say has meaning.

Dianne Terp, San Francisco

Life of the city

San Francisco’s great paradox is that the more housing it builds, the fewer places there are to live in the city. By “live” I don’t mean the place where people sleep, eat or bathe. I mean those places where one lives one’s inner life. San Francisco had an abundance of small idiosyncratic places that appealed to the human spirit and soul. Then came the developers and speculators. And a City Hall eager to sell the city’s soul to cultural strip miners. Has San Francisco’s economic growth truly made it a more interesting place to live? Or just a place with more shiny but soulless places to spend money?

Riley VanDyke, San Francisco

Send in Groucho

In this ugly campaign season of “Trump vitriol” America needs Groucho Marx more than ever. Picture Groucho Marx at the next Republican debate, and watch how fast Donald Trump morphs into Margaret Dumont. ... You’re welcome America.

Nicole Bilotti, San Francisco