Repeal California’s gas tax increase, says GOP candidate
Recently, a group of special interests threatened those daring to propose repeal of the California Democrats’ $5.2 billion-a-year gas-and-car tax increases. Members of the California Republican congressional delegation and taxpayer protection advocates, including the Howard Jarvis Taxpayers Association, the National Tax Limitation Committee and taxfighter Carl DeMaio, are refusing to back down. They have pledged to take the gas tax repeal to the ballot.

I, for one, commend their courage in taking on crony capitalism and the corruption that it breeds.

For too long, we have permitted the Democrats to masquerade as the defenders of the poor. They are anything but. This enormous tax at the gas pump, along with the special-interest-driven cap-and-trade tax and huge increase in the vehicle license fee, together constitute an enormous, regressive tax increase. These taxes hit the working poor particularly hard, forcing families to choose between gas in the tank to get to work, or rent, or food on the table.

The California Democratic leadership has been at war not only with working families but with small businesses, as well. Through overregulation and the world’s second-highest capital gains tax, California politicians have killed tens of thousands of good-paying jobs, and driven employers out of state. But worst of all, their socialist policies have created the worst poverty rate in the nation, penalizing the very people they pretend to protect.

The money robbed from California families will be wasted by the California Department of Transportation, one of the worst-run bureaucracies in the country. In awarding Caltrans its 2016 Golden Fleece Award, the Independent Institute called Caltrans “irresponsible” for wasting “billions of taxpayer dollars” and said it “even lied to lawmakers to cover its tracks.”

California spends 4.7 times the national average for every mile of roadway we build and maintain, according to the Competitive Enterprise Institute. Texas, for example, has far better roads on which it spends about $1 for every $5.80 spent by California taxpayers. In Arizona, 80 percent of that work goes out to competitive bidding, but in California, the figure is only 10 percent. Is it any wonder when a government monopoly does the job, it costs more and takes longer?

We also routinely discriminate against small business and nonunion workers, which explains why unions and big business joined together to finance an extensive radio-and-newspaper campaign to promote the gas and car tax increase.

The corrupting influence of the special interests is hurting all of us, including taxpayers and especially the working poor. It has made California unaffordable for most working families and given us one of the worst small-business climates in the country.

By putting crony capitalism on notice, our Republican congressional delegation is showing what real leadership is all about, and in so doing, laying the groundwork for the resurgence of a Republican Party that takes its principles seriously.

John Cox of San Diego is a businessman and Republican candidate for governor. He is the chairman of Give Voters a Voice, the gas-tax repeal effort.