New ordinance not quite everybody's bag S.F. LAW

The first day of the plastic bag ban in San Francisco went relatively smoothly on Monday, October 1st. The first day of the plastic bag ban in San Francisco went relatively smoothly on Monday, October 1st. Photo: Sarah Rice, Special To The Chronicle Photo: Sarah Rice, Special To The Chronicle Image 1 of / 7 Caption Close New ordinance not quite everybody's bag 1 / 7 Back to Gallery

The "paper or plastic?" question is officially passe for San Francisco retailers.

On Monday, store patrons adjusted to the reality of a plastic-free shopping experience and paying 10 cents per paper bag if they didn't bring their own, as the checkout bag ordinance signed into law in February took effect.

At Papenhausen Hardware in West Portal, store manager Karl Aguilar said customers didn't seem to be bothered by the policy change.

"We got a few complaints when we first put up the sign, but 99 percent are understanding," he said, noting that more people than usual decided to skip bags altogether. "I think it's good that the city's doing something."

Across the street at the Eezy Freezy market, owner Al Khalidi is not so pleased about the city's actions. He said he's the kind of guy who can't stand to see someone throw a recyclable into the trash, but believes the city's law goes too far.

"Do you want a free bag or a 10-cent bag?" he playfully asked a customer, before putting his beer can and soda bottle into a small black plastic bag. Khalidi said he was told by a city worker that he can use plastic bags until he runs out.

Guillermo Rodriguez, a spokesman for the San Francisco Department of the Environment, said the first day went as smoothly as planned, even if some retailers aren't cooperating yet.

"There's always early adopters and others who require a little more engagement," he said.

The city plans to distribute 17,000 reusable bags as part of a campaign to educate shoppers. On Monday, hundreds of bags were handed out in Chinatown, where the sight of pink plastic bags from the area's many food markets was common.

"Changing behavior is difficult, but not insurmountable," Rodriguez said.

Outside the Safeway at Market and Church streets, Monica Keane pushed a cart full of groceries in paper bags and said she hoped the ordinance would cause her to stop forgetting her reusable bags.

"If you add it all together, it's less than a dollar," the UC Davis graduate student said, referring to her extra charge. "I'm fine with it."

At first glance, Denise Snyder seems like someone who would also be supportive of the change. She had three heavy reusable bags strapped on both arms while she waited for the N-Judah near Safeway. But she said people are tired of being nickeled-and-dimed by the city.

"I think it hurts people that can't afford it," she said. "I know it's an ordinance, but there are just too many penalties and fines and fees already."

Those who receive WIC benefits and food stamps will not be charged extra for paper bags, Rodriguez noted.

Back inside the Eezy Freezy, regular customer Michael Donk, a limo driver, said he is a strong supporter of the new ordinance.

"I do think it's a good thing. It's not about control," he said. "It's about reminding us what's good for us."

Khalidi hasn't started charging for paper bags just yet. He wonders how people would feel about the ban if they see an old woman's paper bag break open onto the street on a rainy day.

"It's not a big deal really," he said. "But when a plastic bag is a must, I hope I can provide one and not have it turn into a big thing."