Tom Steyer, divesting in oil firm, prods GOP senator

Democratic billionaire environmental activist Tom Steyer said Monday he will divest his portfolio of Kinder Morgan oil pipeline company funds - and issued a challenge to do likewise to a Republican senator from Louisiana who has questioned his investments.

The San Francisco hedge fund manager issued a letter Monday challenging Sen. David Vitter to donate $1.1 million in campaign contributions he has received from fossil fuel interests.

Vitter, the ranking member of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, raised the question last month of whether Steyer's portfolio would continue to include Kinder Morgan, a major U.S. oil pipeline and transportation company.

LATEST BUSINESS VIDEOS Now Playing: Now Playing AT&T; Set to Launch 5G Network in 2018 Wibbitz

White House Staffers Banned From Using Cell Phones Wibbitz

Watch How This CEO Is Taking a 123-Year Old Company in a New Direction FortuneTime

How Nature’s Smallest Rainbows Created By Spiders Could Help Humans GeoBeats

It's Girl Scout Cookie Season and This is the Most Popular Cookie Buzz60

Dow Jones Closes at Record 25,000-Point Mark Wibbitz

Mike Tyson to Grow Marijuana on 40-Acre Plot in SoCal Buzz60

Weight Watchers Pegs DJ Khaled as New Social Media Ambassador Wibbitz

Mike Tyson to Grow Marijuana on 40-Acre Plot in SoCal Veuer

This is Why Millennials Quit Their Jobs Buzz60

Kinder Morgan is not involved in the Keystone XL pipeline from Canada, though the company owns interests in or operates 80,000 miles of pipeline and 180 terminals in North America, according to its website.

Steyer's office said the divestment of Kinder Morgan investments should be complete by the end of 2013. The Democratic activist also pledged Monday to donate all of his profits from those investments to victims of the wildfires in the Southwest.

But in his letter challenging Vitter to donate the campaign contributions he's gained from fossil fuel sources, Steyer said: "Let us both advocate for our beliefs free of any charge that we are doing so for financial gain."

E-mails to Vitter's office for comment were not returned Monday.

Steyer, who is increasingly mentioned as a potential future California gubernatorial candidate, has initiated a social media campaign called "We Love Our Land," geared toward highlighting efforts on what he has called serious potential environmental damage from projects such as the Keystone XL pipeline.