THE HP-COMPAQ MERGER / Those who lost their HP jobs aren't celebrating merger anniversary

Collin Park, a 26 year employee of HP was laid off after the merger. Collin seen here with his family, wife Carol and daughters Sheri,12, (pink shirt) and Jenny,14, (blue shirt). He is also photographed with a letter of appreciation he was given written by HP founder David Packard in 1990. 4/30/03 in Redwood City. GINA GAYLE / The Chronicle less Collin Park, a 26 year employee of HP was laid off after the merger. Collin seen here with his family, wife Carol and daughters Sheri,12, (pink shirt) and Jenny,14, (blue shirt). He is also photographed with a ... more Photo: GINA GAYLE Photo: GINA GAYLE Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close THE HP-COMPAQ MERGER / Those who lost their HP jobs aren't celebrating merger anniversary 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Hewlett-Packard plans to hold employee celebrations worldwide this week to mark the first anniversary of the Compaq merger.

Janet Stashak won't be going to the party.

She lost her job two weeks ago, joining the ranks of thousands of HP and former Compaq employees who were axed as part of the $19 billion deal.

"It's like going to war where your comrades are falling to the left, in front and behind you," said Stashak, a former HP communications manager based in Cupertino.

Behind the early success of the biggest computer merger in history is the grim reality of the thousands of employees who have lost their jobs in the middle of a severe downturn.

"There's been so much focus on management and Carly (Fiorina, CEO) -- nothing on the people who are paying the price," said Mike Angles, a 21-year HP veteran who was fired in September.

HP said 15,000 jobs would be lost as part of the merger. During the proxy battle, Fiorina warned that even more people could lose their jobs -- as many as 36,000 -- if the deal fell through.

But during the past 12 months, the number of jobs HP says it must cut to make the merger work has crept up from 16,800 to 17,900 by the end of this year.

To be sure, HP is not alone in large job cuts. Since the tech bubble burst in 2000, Silicon Valley companies have sliced tens of thousands of jobs. But the number of positions HP eliminated as a part of its merger is one of the largest in recent memory.

Many of those who got laid off had worked for HP for many years. Collin Park of Redwood City worked for HP for 26 years before being let go in July.

"I haven't been out there in 26 years," he said. "Certainly, it was kind of depressing."

Peggy Ruse, a 14-year HP veteran, lost her job in October.

"I lost my job as a direct result of the acquisition of Compaq," she said. "I think it's ironic because I was so opposed to the merger. My fear came alive."

Henry Guillen, who worked for Compaq's handheld group in Houston, had supported the merger. After the firm decided to keep Compaq's iPaq product and drop HP's Jornada line, he thought his job was safe, but he got his pink slip in September.

"I'm not resentful," he said. "I understand why they did it. It's just the way things are nowadays."

Joe Podolsky, an HP manager in Cupertino, was among the lucky ones who kept their jobs. He's happy about the company's progress, but he found the layoffs painful.

"We're letting good people go and people who have been here a long time," he said. "It hurts like hell to see them go."

Many HP workers were also stunned to learn of the $14.4 million severance package that former HP President Michael Capellas got when he left the company six months after the merger. HP says the Capellas package was negotiated with the Compaq board before the merger was finalized.

But Ruse said she's "completely shocked at what Capellas got when he walked out the door." Podolsky said he "would have liked to use chunks of that money to save some people's jobs."

The company also cut jobs faster than originally planned: 12,500 positions were cut in the first six months of the merger, 2,500 more than the initial projection.

HP says it is on track to cut $3.1 billion in costs at the end of this fiscal year, exceeding its original target of $2.5 billion.

Ruse countered that the company is making the numbers "on our backs, on the backs of people who got laid off."

Park echoed that sentiment, saying, "The point of the merger was to save $2. 5 billion by laying off 15,000 people. As it turned out, sales have not checked out, so they now have 17,900 people. There's a significant hole in the bucket."

Jeff Clarke, HP's executive vice president for global operations, said the company cut more jobs because it found more areas where it could save money.

"The rigorous planning and rapid implementation of the merger has led us to find more cost-cutting opportunities," he said.

But Clarke said only $1.5 billion of the savings came from layoffs, and the rest came from streamlining operations. Some HP businesses have also continued to hire, particularly services and imaging and printing, he added.

In addition, many laid-off HP workers say the company offered generous severance packages and gave them nine weeks to look for another job within the firm.

Despite the bleak labor market, some of them have landed on their feet.

Park immediately found a job with another tech company. Angles is now an independent IT consultant and is training to be a real estate appraiser. Guillen of Houston has started his own carpentry business.

But many others are worried about their future.

"I did not want to get laid off," said Ruse, who is still looking for work. "It's a terrible economy. I thought it was absolutely the worst time to lose your job."

With all the uncertainty facing current and former HP employees, Stashak didn't see a point in the merger festivities.

"It's obvious they (HP management) don't understand that employees don't feel like celebrating," she said. "We've been through hell. Maybe the top three levels of management enjoyed the ride, but we didn't."