'Conservation on a staggering scale' at Tejon More than 240,000 acres near Grapevine will be saved from development forever









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-5', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 5', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});









window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-10', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 10', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});













Photo: HO Image 1 of / 10 Caption Close Image 1 of 10 The Golden Hills region of the Tejon Ranch in Southern California is shown in this undated publicity photo released to Reuters May 8, 2008. Environmentalists and a California real estate company on Thursday reached a long-fought deal to conserve and protect an area eight times the size of San Francisco from land developers. REUTERS/Tejon Ranch/ Handout (UNITED STATES). NO SALES. NO ARCHIVES. FOR EDITORIAL USE ONLY. NOT FOR SALE FOR MARKETING OR ADVERTISING CAMPAIGNS. less The Golden Hills region of the Tejon Ranch in Southern California is shown in this undated publicity photo released to Reuters May 8, 2008. Environmentalists and a California real estate company on Thursday ... more Photo: HO Image 2 of 10 The Catskin region of the Tejon Ranch in Southern California is shown in this undated publicity photo released to Reuters May 8, 2008. Environmentalists and a California real estate company on Thursday reached a long-fought deal to conserve and protect an area eight times the size of San Francisco from land developers. REUTERS/Tejon Ranch/ Handout (UNITED STATES). NO SALES. NO ARCHIVES. FOR EDITORIAL USE ONLY. NOT FOR SALE FOR MARKETING OR ADVERTISING CAMPAIGNS. less The Catskin region of the Tejon Ranch in Southern California is shown in this undated publicity photo released to Reuters May 8, 2008. Environmentalists and a California real estate company on Thursday reached ... more Photo: HO Image 3 of 10 RUSTLING2.jpg John Lacey (cq), a partner of Centennial Livestock, checks on range cattle on part of the Tejon Ranch near Arvin, California on Thursday, December 6, 2007. RUSTLING story. By DAN OCAMPO/DAN OCAMPO PHOTOGRAPHY/SPECIAL TO THE CHRONICLE Ran on: 12-16-2007 John Lacey, a partner of Centennial Livestock, checks on cattle on part of the Tejon Ranch near Arvin (Kern County). After gradually decreasing until 2002, rustling has been going up. Ran on: 12-15-2007 Ran on: 05-09-2008 The Golden Hills region of the Tejon Ranch is shown in this photo. The ranch is eight times the area of San Francisco. less RUSTLING2.jpg John Lacey (cq), a partner of Centennial Livestock, checks on range cattle on part of the Tejon Ranch near Arvin, California on Thursday, December 6, 2007. RUSTLING story. By DAN OCAMPO/DAN ... more Photo: Dan Ocampo/Dan OcampoPhotography Image 4 of 10 The Scissor Ridge region of the Tejon Ranch in Southern California is shown in this undated publicity photo released to Reuters May 8, 2008. Environmentalists and a California real estate company on Thursday reached a long-fought deal to conserve and protect an area eight times the size of San Francisco from land developers. REUTERS/Tejon Ranch/ Handout (UNITED STATES). NO SALES. NO ARCHIVES. FOR EDITORIAL USE ONLY. NOT FOR SALE FOR MARKETING OR ADVERTISING CAMPAIGNS. less The Scissor Ridge region of the Tejon Ranch in Southern California is shown in this undated publicity photo released to Reuters May 8, 2008. Environmentalists and a California real estate company on Thursday ... more Photo: HO Image 5 of 10 Image 6 of 10 Wildflowers on the Tejon Ranch in Southern California is shown in this undated publicity photo released to Reuters May 8, 2008. Environmentalists and a California real estate company on Thursday reached a long-fought deal to conserve and protect an area eight times the size of San Francisco from land developers. REUTERS/Tejon Ranch/ Handout (UNITED STATES). NO SALES. NO ARCHIVES. FOR EDITORIAL USE ONLY. NOT FOR SALE FOR MARKETING OR ADVERTISING CAMPAIGNS. less Wildflowers on the Tejon Ranch in Southern California is shown in this undated publicity photo released to Reuters May 8, 2008. Environmentalists and a California real estate company on Thursday reached a ... more Photo: HO Image 7 of 10 MOUNTAIN DEER MOUNTAIN DEER Photo: CASEY CHRISTIE Image 8 of 10 Bob Stine, right, CEO of the Tejon Ranch Co., examines a mockup of a vast nature preserve with California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger Thursday, May 8, 2008, in Lebec, Calif. A group of environmentalists and the owners of the largest expanse of wild lands in Southern California announced Thursday they have reached a deal that would set aside the largest parcel of land for conservation in the state's history. (AP Photo/Ric Francis) less Bob Stine, right, CEO of the Tejon Ranch Co., examines a mockup of a vast nature preserve with California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger Thursday, May 8, 2008, in Lebec, Calif. A group of environmentalists and ... more Photo: Ric Francis Image 9 of 10 - - Image 10 of 10 'Conservation on a staggering scale' at Tejon 1 / 10 Back to Gallery

A vast mountainous region glimpsed by generations of Californians mainly through bug-pocked windshields on Interstate 5 was preserved Thursday in what conservationists say is the largest, most ecologically crucial acquisition of public land in state history.

The deal saves from development more than 240,000 acres of the Tejon Ranch - a ruggedly diverse stretch of grassland, forest and oak woodland just north of Los Angeles that is known to motorists simply as the Grapevine.

It is, in reality, a unique ecosystem eight times the size of San Francisco. The 375-square-mile expanse of open land combines desert, mountain and valley habitat, a multi-layered wildlife corridor that is home to a wide variety of birds and animals, including the endangered California condor and the kit fox.

The plan is to reroute a 37-mile segment of the Pacific Coast Trail that now meanders through the Mojave Desert so that it goes through the ranch. It would open vast tracts of wilderness to the public and create a natural corridor that would give wildlife room to migrate and adapt in the event environmental changes caused by global warming disrupt their current habitat.

LATEST SFGATE VIDEOS Now Playing: Now Playing See First: Take control of your Facebook News Feed sfgate

Bay Area reunited with her dog after it was stolen sfgate

James Franco's two (very public) sides sfgate

Buster Posey, the 'Canine Operating Officer' at Hotel Nikko sfgate

Surprise snowfall at Kirkwood Ski Resort sfgate

SFFD fights fire in Mission District SFGate

Damage at Montecito church from mudflow sfgate

Prius swept away in mudslide sfgate

The science of wind sfgate

Four Barrel Coffee scrapes name off window as it rebrands sfgate

"It is one of the great conservation achievements in California history," said Joel Reynolds, an attorney for the Natural Resources Defense Council, one of a coalition of conservation groups, including the Sierra Club and Audubon California, that spent the past two years negotiating the deal.

"It has been the number one conservation priority because it is the largest private landholding in the state," he said. "It is an opportunity for us to conserve contiguous land on a scale that is unprecedented."

Preserve in perpetuity

The agreement, announced on a sunny day amid rolling grassy hills at the ranch, is for the owner, Tejon Ranch Co., to place 178,000 acres under a series of conservation easements that will be phased in over time. The easements will preserve the land in perpetuity as open space but allow existing buildings and historic uses, like cattle grazing and moviemaking, to continue.

Gravel mining and oil and gas extraction activities also will be allowed within existing areas and defined expansion areas, according to the agreement.

Conservation easements will be available for a price still to be determined on 62,000 more acres over the next two years, according to the deal. Reynolds said state bond money is available for that acquisition.

In the end, 90 percent of the Tejon Ranch property will be preserved for public recreation and, in the future, the creation of a state park, Reynolds said. In return, the owner will be allowed to develop 10 percent of the land, including high end ridge-side homes, a 23,000-unit development in Los Angeles County and expansion of a commercial-industrial center where an IKEA distribution center is at the base of the mountains.

Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger told the celebratory crowd at Tejon Ranch that the landmark deal is an example of how the sometimes conflicting goals of protecting the environment and boosting the economy can be bridged.

"When forward-thinking people are willing to sit down and make something positive happen, those old battle lines can be terminated," Schwarzenegger said. "The Tejon Ranch is a vast California treasure."

The area was named El Tejon, or "the badger," after Spanish soldiers under Lt. Francisco Ruiz discovered the species in a canyon during an 1805 expedition. Ruiz named an adjacent canyon Cañada de las Uvas, or "Grapevine Canyon," because of all the wild fruit growing there.

A Mexican land grant established Rancho El Tejon in 1843. Edward Fitzgerald Beale purchased the ranch in segments starting in 1855 and began a cattle ranching operation. His brand, the cross and crescent, was the first recorded in Kern County in 1868 and can be traced back to the year 997 and later to Spanish conquistadors.

Beale's son sold the land to a group of Southern California businessmen in 1912. Interstate 5 was later carved through the ranch.

Green outrage

Proposals for commercial development and housing were first pushed forward in 1999, causing outrage among environmentalists, who decided the land should not fall prey to the kind of sprawl that has plagued the rest of Southern California.

Tensions continued for several years as the development plans progressed until the two sides began negotiating ways to preserve open space while allowing some development.

"The risk to Tejon Ranch was that over several decades a number of developments may have gone forward," said Bill Corcoran, the senior regional representative for the Sierra Club. "Without this agreement, the ecological integrity of the ranch would have been lost as development occurred over time."

Corcoran and others see the land as the key to linking the Sierra Nevada with undeveloped properties on the Pacific Coast.

Four distinct regions

It is the only place in California where four distinct ecological regions - the Sierra Nevada, the Mojave Desert, the San Joaquin Valley and the Coastal Range - come together. It supports the last remaining stretch of native grassland in the southern San Joaquin Valley, most of which is now covered by crops.

Ancient blue oak woodlands, conifer forests and Joshua trees exist on the land, as well as wetlands, brilliant fields of wildflowers and a host of endangered and threatened lizards, squirrels, beetles and salamanders.

Of the birds, including the golden eagle, the California condor is the most significant species for which the Tejon Ranch provides habitat.

"This is arguably the most significant property for the California condor," said Graham Chisholm, director of conservation for Audubon California. "Condors nest just west of the property in the Los Padres National Forest. Historically, it was the condor steppingstone up into the Sierra Nevada, but for several decades condors haven't been in the Sierra."

Plans are in the works to set up condor feeding stations on the property, Chisholm said.

The property will be governed by the newly created Tejon Ranch Conservancy, which negotiators said will require users, including hunters and gravel miners, to do their best to use only environmentally friendly techniques.

"It's big," Chisholm said. "This is conservation on a staggering scale."