Economist details health care system's waste Health care

WASHINGTON - JUNE 2: Christina Romer (C), chair of the Council of Economic Advisers, speaks as Senator Max Baucus (D-MT) (L) and Senator Christopher Dodd (D-CT) (R) listen during a briefing in the Eisenhower Executive Office Building June 2, 2009 in Washington, DC. Senate Banking Chairman Christopher Dodd (D-CT), Senate Finance Chairman Max Baucus (D-MT), and Christina Romer, chair of the Council of Economic Advisers (CEA) were joined by others to introduce a new CEA report titled "The Economic Case for Health Care Reform." (Photo by Brendan Smialowski/Getty Images) less WASHINGTON - JUNE 2: Christina Romer (C), chair of the Council of Economic Advisers, speaks as Senator Max Baucus (D-MT) (L) and Senator Christopher Dodd (D-CT) (R) listen during a briefing in the Eisenhower ... more Photo: Brendan Smialowski, Getty Images Photo: Brendan Smialowski, Getty Images Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Economist details health care system's waste 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

White House chief economist Christina Romer kicked off President Obama's push to reform the nation's health care system Tuesday, saying there are "billion-dollar bills lying on the sidewalk" if the nation can find a way to make the system more efficient.

The UC Berkeley economist, who chairs the president's Council of Economic Advisers, said in a 51-page report that the broken U.S. health care system is ruinous to workers' wages, living standards and the federal budget, and the payoff from fixing it could be huge. At the White House, she called health care reform a potential "game changer" for the U.S. economy, if it is done right.

But that's a big if, given the increasingly vexing budget, logistical and political problems standing in the way of the president's top domestic campaign promise.

Congressional Democrats hope to have legislation ready by August, and key leaders have been meeting privately to hash out issues. Obama met with Democratic senators at the White House Tuesday before leaving for the Middle East, warning that the period between now and August is "make or break" for reform. Echoing Romer's findings, he said it is critical to control costs before piling more people into a broken system. Romer also signaled that the White House is open to the idea of taxing health care benefits, even though Obama clobbered Republican presidential candidate John McCain for broaching that idea during the campaign.

No quick fix expected

While there is a remarkable bipartisan consensus on the problem, fixing it is another matter. Even California Democratic Sen. Dianne Feinstein urged a slower approach in a recent interview.

"There is no specific plan, bill language or virtually anything," Feinstein said. "I am a bit of an incrementalist when it comes to this kind of huge thing, rather than just turning everything over topsy-turvy and reinventing a system. More than anything else, with health care the devil is in the details."

The cost of expanding coverage to the nation's 46 million uninsured is the biggest hurdle. Romer's 51-page report focuses on making the stupendous price tag - an estimated $1.5 trillion over 10 years - look more affordable by highlighting the enormous waste in the current system.

Slowing cost increases

By slowing the rate of cost increases in the current system by 1.5 percentage points a year, a typical family of four would gain $2,600 a year in income by 2020, she found. Such cost containment also would prevent a "devastating and frankly unsustainable rise" in the federal budget deficit, she said. Federal, state and local governments already pay for nearly half of all health care in the United States.

"I don't want to sugar-coat the situation," Romer said. Slowing the rise in health spending "will take an incredible degree of resolve and cooperation among policymakers, consumers and providers."

Republican leaders rejected the report as "smoke and mirrors." But Douglas Holtz-Eakin, an economist who worked for McCain and the Congressional Budget Office, agreed with her that health care reform provides "an economic growth opportunity ... that we should not squander."

Romer laid out essential problems of the current health care system, including:

-- Workers' wages are stagnating because a rising portion of their compensation goes to health insurance.

-- Small businesses find coverage increasingly unaffordable and are eliminating insurance or buying less-comprehensive policies; workers with health insurance are often reluctant to change jobs for fear of losing it. In California, the average annual premium for employer-sponsored family coverage rose from $6,375 in 1996 to $12,059 in 2006.

-- The United States spends upward of one-third more on health care per person than most nations in Europe, and has lower life expectancy and higher infant mortality.

-- The "fee for service" compensation system used by most doctors and hospitals gives providers a powerful incentive to increase the volume of care with little regard for its quality, price or effectiveness. Providers are even rewarded for failure. The system provides little or no reward for preventing costly chronic diseases by educating patients about such things as obesity or smoking.

-- Patients have little financial incentive to shop for care, and little information about the effectiveness of doctors, hospitals or treatment regimens that would allow them to make informed choices.

-- The health care industry is among the most inefficient in the nation, antiquated in its lack of information technology and quality measurements.

Plenty of waste

Harvard economist David Cutler, who praised Romer's report for its academic integrity, said the health care industry employs more people simply to pull patient records than it does nurses.

Romer said such phenomenal waste makes it incumbent that officials reform the system. She said many of the savings will not show up right away but should be done anyway for their long-run savings.

But changing the behavior of providers and patients alike is fraught with political minefields. Major industry groups and the Service Employees International Union have said they could cut $2 trillion over a decade, but remained vague on how they would do that, promising, for example, to reduce medical errors.

At the White House meeting Tuesday, Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus of Montana pressed Obama to reduce the exclusion of employer-provided health care benefits from taxation.

First used by employers to evade wage and price controls in World War II, the exclusion is responsible for many distortions and inefficiencies that now plague the system. Last year it cost the government $226 billion, offering the only large fund to pay for expanding coverage to the uninsured.