Few ever charged or convicted of treason in U.S. history / Many Americans fought for other religious, political, cultural beliefs

In grainy video footage, John Walker proclaimed himself a jihadi, or holy warrior, who quickly become mesmerized by the Taliban's vision of a pure Islamic state while studying religion in Pakistan.

Then the 20-year-old Marin County man fell into silence, leaving his parents and a nation to judge him by his remarks: brainwashed or a traitor?

Treason is the only crime defined in the U.S. Constitution. Specifically, the charge is adhering to or giving comfort to the enemies of the United States. It can be proven if the accused admits to it in open court or on the testimony of two eyewitnesses.

"I suppose we know treason when we see it, but the legalities are very arcane," said Eugene R. Fidell, a Washington lawyer with expertise in military law.

But what of the fate of Walker, who emerged filthy, wounded and calling himself Abdul Hamid after he was flooded out from the basement barracks of an Afghan prison at Qala-i-Jangy?

Details of what occurred behind the mud walls of Qala-i-Jangy could determine Walker's future. A videotape has emerged that shows CIA agent Mike Spann, 32, interrogating an unresponsive Walker shortly before the prison uprising during which Spann was killed and Walker injured.

Government investigators undoubtedly will examine whether Walker played a role in the revolt or in Spann's death as they decide whether to charge the young man with a crime.

Yesterday the Pentagon indicated Walker was being held at Camp Rhino, a U.S.

Marine base in Afghanistan, and had reportedly provided some useful intelligence information.

FEWER THAN 30 CASES

If Walker is charged with treason, it would be extremely rare. In U.S. history, treason charges have been brought fewer than 30 times.

The earliest records mention the Whiskey Rebellion, a 1794 protest over excise taxes in Pennsylvania, where two men were convicted of treason and eventually pardoned by President George Washington. After World War II, poet Ezra Pound was arrested for treason, and subsequently hospitalized as insane, for his belligerent, pro-fascist propaganda. And Tokyo Rose and Axis Sally, the Americans who broadcast propaganda for Japan and Germany, spent years in prison on treason convictions.

Since then, outcries of treason were aimed at Hollywood actress Jane Fonda after her visit to Hanoi in 1972 -- but legal experts say the United States has not charged an American with treason since the end of World War II.

Nor, they say, is Walker unique in fighting for religious, political or cultural reasons on foreign soil.

Americans fought in the French Revolution, were lionized by Ernest Hemingway for joining the republican forces against Gen. Francisco Franco in the Spanish Civil War and have had monuments erected to them outside of modern- day Mexico City for their battles in the Mexican War.

"It is certainly not unprecedented to see Americans join foreign units based on religious, versus political, allegiances," said Jonathan Turley, professor at George Washington University Law School. "Walker has simply selected a cause that strikes many Americans as unappealing, if not repulsive."

In the 19th century, as America was defining its borders, Irish Americans and other U.S. Army enlistees of the Catholic faith crossed the Mexican border to attend Masses. Some of these men formed the San Patricio battalions, estimated at 500 strong, who fought against U.S. soldiers from 1846 to 1847 during the Mexican War.

"These men are looked on as heroes in Mexican history," said Mill Valley's Patrick Goggins of the Irish-Mexican Association.

AARON BURR ACCUSED

Aaron Burr figured in America's first major treason trial. The former vice president wrote to Britain for money and warships, saying he could coax the frontier territories west of the Mississippi to secede from the union. Burr was acquitted after a long trial in 1807, with the government's case failing for lack of direct proof and witness statements.

Just a handful of treason cases have reached the U.S. Supreme Court in modern times. The first, and the only one reversed by the high court, involved Anthony Cramer, who was convicted of treason resulting from a close relationship with two convicted Nazi saboteurs. The 1945 reversal hinged on Cramer's lack of an overt act of treason, despite his sympathies with the enemy.

Five cases involved broadcasters during World War II, including the case of Mildred Gellars, or Axis Sally, who broadcast anti-American propaganda from Germany. She was convicted of treason in Washington, D.C., in 1949 and served 12 years in prison.

A similar fate befell Iva Ikuko Toguri D'Aquino, or Tokyo Rose, who was convicted of treason and sentenced to 10 years. She served six years at a U.S. prison and was later pardoned by President Gerald Ford.

Pound, who made frequent broadcasts from Rome praising Mussolini and Hitler from 1941 to 1943, was arrested in 1945 for treason. The poet was evaluated by a team of psychiatrists who had him hospitalized for 12 years in Washington, D. C. After the efforts of poet Robert Frost and others, Pound was eventually released and spent his final years in Italy.

Fidell, the Washington lawyer, said there is some historical evidence pointing to a "pattern of executive clemency" in treason cases. Walker's case could fit that pattern unless evidence emerges that he played a role in the prison uprising or in Spann's death.

"All we know is that he was among a group of Taliban who was taken as prisoners," Fidell said. "We know that he was a young man on a spiritual journey."

NO CHARGES FOR FONDA

Henry Mark Holzer, professor emeritus at Brooklyn Law School, has just finished writing "Aid and Comfort: Jane Fonda in North Vietnam." He said that despite Fonda's activities, the Nixon administration didn't charge her with treason because they didn't want a circus interfering with efforts to end military operations in Vietnam.

Holzer doesn't believe that the Bush administration will charge Walker with treason -- mainly out of sympathy. President Bush made statements last week describing Walker as a "poor boy" who had been "misled, it appears to me."