California high-speed rail dealt blow by Newsom's about-face



less his undated file image provided by the California High Speed Rail Authority shows an artist's rendering of a high-speed train speeding along the California coast. A House committee meets in Washington Wednesday Jan. 15, 2014, to investigate California's beleaguered high-speed rail project, which has been plagued by legal setbacks and has yet to start construction. his undated file image provided by the California High Speed Rail Authority shows an artist's rendering of a high-speed train speeding along the California coast. A House committee meets in Washington Wednesday ... more Photo: Anonymous / Associated Press Photo: Anonymous / Associated Press Image 1 of / 8 Caption Close California high-speed rail dealt blow by Newsom's about-face 1 / 8 Back to Gallery

(02-19) 16:21 PST SAN FRANCISCO --

In California, where Democrats and Republicans don't agree on much, the emergence of Lt. Gov. Gavin Newsom as the state's highest-ranking Democrat to pull his support for Gov. Jerry Brown's high-speed rail project is being closely watched as the possible harbinger of political change.

Newsom has a knack for getting out in front on issues - most famously in his 2004 backing of same-sex marriage, and more recently in endorsing legalized marijuana. Although he was an early and ardent supporter of the bullet train, Newsom said in a phone interview Tuesday that "it's not the same system that was being promoted" when it first came before voters in 2008.

"We were selling a $32 billion project then, and we were going to get roughly one-third from the federal government and the private sector," he said. "We're not even close to the timeline (for the project), we're not close to the total cost estimates, and the private sector money and the federal dollars are questionable."

Water a bigger issue

Newsom said the state has more pressing problems, such as "the issue that will define our time" - water.

Instead of focusing on high-speed rail, the drought underscores that the ability to store and transport enough water to go around is "not a 'nice to have' - it's a must-have," Newsom said.

The lieutenant governor first disclosed his opposition to the high-speed rail project in an interview with a Seattle radio station last week. "I am not the only Democrat that feels this way. I am one of the few that just said it publicly," he said. "Most are now saying it privately."

High-speed rail was once a popular idea - in 2008, the state's voters approved a $10 billion bond measure to help pay for it. But costs have since more than doubled to $68 billion, other funding sources are iffy at best, and Republicans are starting to use the project to score points against Brown in his expected re-election bid.

"You've got to wonder if this could this be the start of a domino effect among Democrats," said Jessica Ng, spokeswoman for Republican gubernatorial candidate Neel Kashkari, who calls high-speed rail "the crazy train."

Kashkari argues that Brown is more interested in a "vanity project" than pressing problems like California's high unemployment and poverty rates.

"It's great that (Newsom) had the courage to come out - and he's going to give cover to more Democrats" to do the same, Kashkari said in an interview Tuesday, in which he again called on Brown to cancel the project.

Polls turn sour

Environmental advocates and Brown argue that a high-speed rail line linking the Bay Area and Los Angeles would put California transportation on par with Europe and Japan, while taking thousands of cars off the road and creating thousands of jobs.

But public polling has long shown that the rail plan is "not a popular project" among Republican or Democratic voters, said Mark DiCamillo, director of the statewide Field Poll.

A 2011 Field Poll showed that two-thirds of Californians would overwhelmingly support another vote on the project, DiCamillo said.

A USC/Los Angeles Times poll taken late last year showed that a majority of voters now want the project scrapped.

Newsom said this week that his comments have been unfairly interpreted as "a shot across the bow" aimed at Brown.

"To Jerry's credit, he's done his best to reconstitute the (High Speed Rail) Authority ... and he's doing his best under the circumstances," which include legal hurdles to disbursing state bond money, Newsom said.

Flip-flop

Ron Nehring, a former state Republican Party chairman who announced his candidacy for lieutenant governor Tuesday, said Newsom was "for it before he was against it."

Nehring said high-speed rail has become a symbol for ""state government woefully out of touch. ... This rail project does nothing to improve the state's economic competitiveness, and it's a giant sinkhole for tax dollars."

Newsom isn't the first Democrat to voice his concerns. State Sen. Mark DeSaulnier, D-Concord, who chairs the Senate's Transportation Committee and is running for the East Bay congressional seat being vacated by Democratic Rep. George Miller, voted against proceeding with the project in 2012. He said recently that no one in state government has addressed the issue of who will pay for it.

"That's the bottom line: Show me the money," DeSaulnier said.

No confidence

Patrick Dorinson, a Sacramento blogger and political analyst, said high-speed rail is a victim of growing, bipartisan skepticism of huge infrastructure projects.

Citing the stream of revelations about construction problems on the new, $6.4 billion Bay Bridge eastern span, Dorinson said, "If you think a bridge between two points is complicated, what about a railroad?

"People don't have faith that the government has the capability of doing these kinds of big projects anymore," Dorinson said. "They're saying, 'These politicians would screw up a one-car funeral.' "