Stay out of film editing, politicians
Opinion

Stay out of film editing, politicians ON THE 'ZERO DARK THIRTY' CONTROVERSY





window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-3', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 3', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});

Photo: Jonathan Olley, Columbia Pictures Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Seen through the greenish glow of night vision goggles, Navy SEALs prepare to breach a locked door in Osama Bin Laden's compound in Columbia Pictures' hyper-realistic new action thriller from director Kathryn Bigelow, ZERO DARK THIRTY. less Seen through the greenish glow of night vision goggles, Navy SEALs prepare to breach a locked door in Osama Bin Laden's compound in Columbia Pictures' hyper-realistic new action thriller from director Kathryn ... more Photo: Jonathan Olley, Columbia Pictures Image 2 of 3 FILE - This undated publicity film image provided by Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc. shows elite Navy SEAL's raiding Osama Bin Laden's compound in the dark night in Columbia Pictures' gripping new thriller directed by Kathryn Bigelow, "Zero Dark Thirty." Steven Spielberg has extended his domination at the Directors Guild of America Awards, earning his 11th film nomination Tuesday, Jan. 8, 2013, for his Civil War epic "Lincoln." Also nominated were past winners Kathryn Bigelow for her Osama bin Laden thriller "Zero Dark Thirty"; Tom Hooper for his musical "Les Miserables"; and Ang Lee for his lost-at-sea story "Life of Pi." Rounding out the lineup is first-time nominee Ben Affleck for his Iran hostage crisis tale "Argo." (AP Photo/Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc., Jonathan Olley, File) less FILE - This undated publicity film image provided by Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc. shows elite Navy SEAL's raiding Osama Bin Laden's compound in the dark night in Columbia Pictures' gripping new thriller ... more Photo: Jonathan Olley, Associated Press Image 3 of 3 Stay out of film editing, politicians 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

United States senators should stay out of the film-editing business. It's equally dangerous whether it comes from the right or the left, or whether the objective is to shield the public from grim reality or to spare a fiction in a Hollywood film from being perceived as truth.

Hollywood is Hollywood, where "based on a true story" is a signal to all but the most gullible moviegoer that artistic license is at work.

Yet that did not stop Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., and colleagues - including Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz. - from trying to pressure Sony Pictures to add a disclaimer to "Zero Dark Thirty" that its portrayal of torture in the hunt for Osama bin Laden is "not based on the facts."

Their concern is that viewers of this Oscar-nominated thriller, which opened widely this weekend, might come away with the opinion that torture is effective and justified. Feinstein and two colleagues on the Senate Intelligence Committee cited its recently approved 6,000-page classified report, based on a three-year investigation, that concluded that waterboarding and other methods of torture have produced no actionable intelligence.

"The film ... has the potential to shape American public opinion in a disturbing and misleading way," they wrote.

Indeed, acting CIA Director Michael Morell has criticized the "artistic license" in "Zero Dark Thirty," including the notion that detainee torture was central to finding bin Laden.

While there is nothing wrong with the senators pounding the podium at news conferences or running to the nearest cable news studio to offer their opinions and expertise, they crossed the line by insisting that filmmakers add a disclaimer to their work. I fully share their repulsion at the inhumanity of torture and am well aware of the serious doubts about its efficacy in gleaning meaningful intelligence.

But if the danger of shaping public opinion in a "disturbing and misleading way" were to become the standard for Hollywood to bow to a Washington demand for a disclaimer, just imagine the potential for mischief from right and left. One person's greater truth can be another person's false caricature.

And, yes, Hollywood films have shaped perceptions of myriad real-life figures and events, for better and for worse, with blends of verifiable anecdotes and fabrications that fit neatly into a narrative. Think about the people who have invoked a Hollywood scene to speak with certitude about worlds they've never entered (the Vietnam War, South Central Los Angeles, the Mafia, the Normandy invasion, corporate boardrooms) or people they've never met (Abraham Lincoln, Sarah Palin, Gen. George Patton, Richard Nixon, Harvey Milk). Hollywood vilifies, it deifies, it simplifies - sometimes with profound insight, sometimes in disturbing and misleading ways.

It's Hollywood. Most of all, it dramatizes, even when it opens with the words "based on first-hand accounts of actual events," as did "Zero Dark Thirty."

It's worthwhile to note that the original screenplay was finished months before the Navy SEALs mission that killed bin Laden. It was to be a film about the long, tedious, obsessive - and frustratingly futile - search for the mastermind of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Imagine how different those scenes of torture would have seemed in the context of an ambiguous ending.

It's also amusing to recall that some conservatives were complaining that an anticipated September release would serve as a Hollywood gift to President Obama's re-election campaign.

Feinstein and her colleagues are right to question the CIA about its cooperation with "Zero Dark Thirty," and whether its creators were given classified information that was not available to journalists and others who were seeking it. The CIA's handling of state secrets is a legitimate issue for senators; the editing of a Hollywood film is not.

There is nothing new about government agencies cooperating with Hollywood to try to enhance their image or influence a narrative. The Pentagon is particularly adept at supplying its expertise and resources for films that provide soft propaganda for recruiting; the FBI created its entertainment office in the 1930s, embellishing an aura of invincibility and moral rectitude that was aggressively challenged (without bureau help) in the 2011 film "J. Edgar."

Director Kathryn Bigelow recently echoed CIA Chief Morell in reminding that "Zero Dark Thirty" is "not a documentary." It is, however, 157 minutes of gripping suspense and splendid cinematography that gives a you-are-there feel to a decade of tedious pursuit and a heart-thumping night of conclusion.

It has an illusion of reality. That's what Hollywood does so well, and moviegoers expect, even if politicians don't give us the credit to make the distinction.