Assistant Professor Christopher Tienken, Ed.D.
Christopher Tienken, Ed.D.

Assistant Professor

Department of Education Leadership, Management and Policy

A wise man knows he knows nothing at all. --Socrates

Profile

Christopher Tienken, Ed.D. is an assistant professor of Education Administration at Seton Hall University. He has public school administration experience as a PK-12 assistant superintendent, middle school principal, and elementary school assistant principal. He began his career in education as an elementary school teacher. Dr Tienken's research interests include the effect and influence of professional development on teacher practice and student achievement, the construct validity of high-stakes standardized tests as decision-making tools about student achievement and school effectiveness, and curricular interventions used in schools to improve achievement. His research about the effects of professional development on student achievement has been recognized by the Institute of Education Sciences and the National Staff Development Council awarded him the Best Research Award in 2008.



Dr. Tienken has authored a book, book chapters, and articles on his research interests and presents papers regularly at state, national, and international venues. His new book with Donald Orlich is The School Reform Landscape: Fraud, Myth, and Lies. He has ongoing research collaborations with colleagues at the University of Rome, Italy, the University of Catania, Sicily, and he has been an invited lecturer there as part of a European Union masters degree program. Dr. Tienken is the editor of the American Association of School Administrators Journal of Scholarship and Practice and the Kappa Delta Pi Record. Dr. Tienken was also named as a Visiting Scholar at the Universita` degli Studi Roma Tre, in Rome, Italy for the 2009-2010 academic year as part of their masters degree program: Master Pedagogia per la Persona, L'Organizzazione, La Societa`.





Watch a video about my book The School Reform Landscape on YouTube »





Education

Ed.D., Seton Hall University, 2003

M.A. Rutgers University, 1997

B.S. Kutztown University, 1994

Academic Distinctions

University Research Council Award, Seton Hall University, 2010

National Staff Development Council, Best Research Award: 2008

Kutztown University Early Career Excellence Award: 2005

New Jersey Department of Education, MATRIX Grant: 2004

Web Site