Job of keeping thousands of miles of gas lines safe
Click the image to enlarge

Age isn’t really a determinant factor. As long as you maintain it, we may get another 50 years out of these pipelines. Bret Lane - SDG&E; vice president of field services

San Diego Gas & Electric Co. says it is constantly working to prevent a tragedy like the one that occurred in San Bruno, where a pipeline burst last week, killing at least four people and destroying nearly 40 houses.

It says it regularly inspects its pipelines, which include 250 miles of transmission lines and 8,300 miles of neighborhood lines crisscrossing San Diego County.

The county’s network is operated in conjunction with that of Southern California Gas Co. Together, the two represent the largest natural gas distribution network in the country.

In addition to inspections, the company says it reacts quickly to any reports of possible gas leaks, shutting supplies to neighborhoods until it knows for sure that it’s figured out what’s wrong.

In fact, that’s the No. 1 complaint about SDG&E;’s gas operation among callers to UCAN, the Utility Consumers’ Action Network. Some customers accuse the company of overreacting, said Michael Shames, who heads UCAN.

He says his organization regularly reviews SDG&E;’s reports on how it operates its pipelines when the utility requests rate increases and has suspected in the past that it does more maintenance than is necessary — in effect “gold-plating” its system.

“Our experience is SDG&E; spends too much money on their gas system,” Shames said.

Bret Lane, SDG&E;’s vice president of field services, denies that’s the case, but laid out a variety of ways the company works to ensure its system is safe.

Are all these steps working?

While the region has never experienced a disaster on the scale of San Bruno’s, there are occasional breaks, most of them caused when someone digs into its lines.

What is being done

Preventing intrusions

Most natural gas leaks are the result of someone digging into a pipeline during construction or other earth moving, Lane said.

The company wants anyone with plans to dig to call 811 to find out whether it’s safe.

It will send out workers to mark its lines — typically with spray-painted markings on streets and sidewalks.

SDG&E; has also marked its major pipelines with aboveground markers that show the general location to warn people of what’s below ground. Smaller distribution pipes that carry natural gas to neighborhoods are not so marked.

The company has also designed its system to withstand earthquakes.

The first step is to avoid crossing fault lines. Where that’s not possible, special pipes are installed that are engineered to deal with shifting ground without breaking.

Inspections

Pipelines in urban areas are patrolled twice a year. In rural regions, they are patrolled once a year.

The patrols can be by aircraft, by off-road vehicle or, in most cases, by crews simply walking the route of the line.

In addition to using sniffers, they look for dead vegetation or other signs that gas is escaping, and also take note of nearby construction that could affect the pipeline, Lane said.

In addition, the company will send devices it calls “smart pigs” through the pipelines to measure the walls and how straight they are to find if there’s something causing problems, like roots trying to come through or an unexpected kink.

Maintaining durability

Most of the big pipelines in San Diego were installed in the 1950s and 1960s, said Bret Lane, SDG&E;’s vice president of field services.

They are faring much better than the water lines from that era, which regularly burst.

That’s in large part to the corrosive nature of water, as opposed to natural gas.

The gas lines are also coated to prevent piercing and corrosion from outside forces like groundwater, Lane said.

“Age isn’t really a determinant factor,” he said. “As long as you maintain it, we may get another 50 years out of these pipelines.”

Reacting to warnings

The company takes complaints of possible gas leaks through a toll-free number, (800) 611-SDGE.

Workers shut service if they suspect a leak and use sniffing devices to try to find where the problem is.

Signs of natural gas leaks include not only the rotten-egg sulfur smell that is added to the gas, but also dying plants or the sound of rushing or hissing, the company said.

It also monitors pressures inside its pipelines in a control center in the Los Angeles area, where workers can remotely shut valves if they suspect there’s a problem. Loud warnings will go off as sensors on lines indicate pressures have changed significantly.

The bigger lines have automatic valves that instantly shut the flow of gas if there’s a sudden change in pressure indicating a blowout, the company said.