'Grand bargain' vote fizzles again in Illinois Senate
Another attempt at passing the “grand bargain” fell short in the Illinois Senate Wednesday, leaving Republicans and Democrats again blaming each other for the latest failure.

With little Republican support, the Senate did approve several components of the plan, including a revamped school funding formula, gambling expansion, changes to state purchasing rules and pension reform. The chamber also passed legislation to borrow $7 billion to pay down the state’s bill backlog that is nearly twice that.

The Senate OK'd a $36.5 billion spending plan, but failed to approve a key bill needed to implement cuts contained in it. The Senate also did not vote on a controversial bill to raise taxes needed to balance the spending plan.

Senate President John Cullerton, D-Chicago, said it will up to the Republicans to decide when they’re ready to vote for the budget bills.

“I was under the impression we had reached an agreement on the budget,” Cullerton said after the votes. “The issue is, why did the Republicans not vote for the budget?”

Republican senators, though, again said that negotiators from both parties are getting close to agreement on the remaining outstanding issues and more time is needed. They accused Cullerton of staging a “political show” with the votes Wednesday.

“What happened today was a political show orchestrated by the Democrats, who are trying to portray agreements that do not yet exist,” said Sen. Jason Barickman, R-Bloomington.

Cullerton said the Senate has now approved most of the reform measures that the Republicans, including Gov. Bruce Rauner, insist have to be part of any budget proposal that includes tax hikes. He said the two sides have nearly reached agreement on workers' compensation changes and that the bill could be approved yet this week. He also said Democrats are willing to freeze property taxes for two years, but do not want to go longer than that at this time.

“That’s a very difficult thing to pass,” Cullerton said. “We don’t have anybody in our caucus who really wants to jeopardize schools for more than two years.”

Republicans have said there has to be at least a four-year freeze if income taxes are going to be raised and sales taxes charged on some services. Both are parts of the revenue bill that did not come up for a vote Wednesday.

The spending plan approved Wednesday contained $3.8 billion in spending cuts, according to Democrats, including $400 million in Medicaid reductions.

However, a bill that would have given Rauner the power to determine how the Medicaid cuts were made failed in the Senate after Republicans didn’t support it and a number of Democrats voted against it.

“Cuts and revenue cannot pass without Republican votes,” Cullerton said. “They’ve never voted for a budget in 15 years. I know it’s hard. What do they want us to do? They keep on (saying) we’re real close.”

And the Republicans did again shortly after Cullerton’s news conference.

“We continue to be very close,” said Sen. Karen McConnaughay, R-St. Charles. “They (Democrats) know as well as we do that we’re very close.”

Sen. Bill Brady, R-Bloomington, said the spending plan approved Wednesday wasn’t balanced and wasn’t agreed to in negotiations. He said further budget talks were already scheduled.

“The defeat of some of these bills today will not defeat our goal of reaching an agreement,” Brady said. “There’s always theater here in the Capitol. We’re optimistic that today’s theater will bring us together.”

Republican senators did show strong support for pension reform and purchasing reform bills that passed Wednesday. On others, though, there was little to no GOP support.

A school funding reform bill passed, but Republicans said it favored Chicago at the expense of downstate schools. Republican senators also complained that the State Board of Education still hadn’t completed a computer analysis to show how the bill would affect individual school districts.

Rauner’s office issued a statement on the school funding bill calling it a bailout for Chicago. The office did not issue statements on any of the other "grand bargain" bills.

Cullerton responded that the GOP either didn’t read the school funding bill or didn’t understand it.

-- Contact Doug Finke: doug.finke@sj-r.com, 788-1527, twitter.com/dougfinkesjr.