Pritzker says state needs progressive tax structure
J.B. Pritzker, a Democratic candidate for governor from Chicago, said in Springfield Monday that a progressive tax system is ultimately needed to pay for state services in Illinois.

“You’ve got to ask yourself this question: How are we going to pay for the things that we really want?” Pritzker told reporters at Pilgrim Rest Missionary Baptist Church. “And if you ask me, we’ve got to start by saying, before we ever get to raising taxes on the middle class, we’ve got to ask millionaires and billionaires, people who can afford to pay it, and that includes corporations, to step up to the plate.”

To get a progressive income tax in Illinois, with higher rates for people who earn more, would take a constitutional amendment, because the Illinois Constitution requires that all individuals be taxed at a flat rate. That rate fell from 5 percent to 3.75 percent at the beginning 2015, after a temporary tax increase expired, and that has added billions to the state deficit.

Republican Gov. Bruce Rauner has said he is willing to raise taxes, but only if the General Assembly, dominated by Democrats, agrees to parts of what he has called his turnaround agenda. He often refers to agenda items as structural reforms to improve the state’s business and political climate. While he says he doesn’t need them all, among items he promotes are a property tax freeze, term limits on state officeholders, a new way to draw political maps, pension reform and changes in workers’ compensation regulations.

House Democrats in early April passed a stopgap, or “lifeline” spending plan that provides $800 million to human-service programs and higher education. The money would come from special funds that get a small part of income taxes, but an appropriation is needed. The Senate has not yet acted on the plan, and Rauner has said he opposes any more stopgap spending without a permanent property tax freeze. The legislature returns next week.

Pritzker said Monday that while he would “focus on getting a fair tax system that’s progressive” as governor, as for this year, “We’re left with this stopgap, lifeline proposal” and “I don’t know what social services (agencies) and universities are going to do if we don’t get that in place, because it doesn’t appear to me like we’re gonna get a full-on budget.”

Pritzker said Rauner is holding up the budget for “an agenda that has nothing to do with a budget,” and telling lawmakers, “If you give me this agenda, I’ll let you figure out how to get a budget. That’s not leadership.”

Pritzker was at the church because it is where the Illinois Coalition for Community Services has a summer lunch program for children. While the food is federally funded, a reduction in the coalition’s staff during the state budget impasse has dropped locations for that program from 70 across the state to seven, said Jason Gyure, executive director.

Rauner has lamented pain caused by the budget impasse as he seeks structural change. But, said Pritzker, “When you’re a child who’s not able to get that meal ... that short-term pain is more painful than the governor is describing. So if you ask me, there’s a kind of a focus on spreadsheets and not people by this governor.”

Gyure said his organization is nonpartisan, works with the administration and is also willing to meet with “any and all candidates, Democrats and Republicans.”

Pritzker, a businessman who Forbes has said is worth more than $3 billion, put $7 million into his campaign fund last week. The state GOP Monday put out a video linking Pritzker and three other Democratic candidates for governor – Chicago Ald. Ameya Pawar, Kenilworth businessman Chris Kennedy and state Sen. Daniel Biss of Evanston – to House Speaker Michael Madigan, D-Chicago.

“It’s clear J.B. Pritzker is running for governor to serve as the financial muscle for Mike Madigan’s Chicago machine,” said Aaron DeGroot, spokesman for the party, on Monday.

The GOP earlier released an audio tape of Pritzker telling a group that returning the income tax to 5 percent “doesn’t get you everything you need, but it’s a good way toward getting real revenue in the state.”

Other Democrats running for governor are Bob Daiber, a regional superintendent of schools from Madison County, and Alex Paterakis, a business owner from Vernon Hills.

— Contact Bernard Schoenburg: bernard.schoenburg@sj-r.com, 788-1540, twitter.com/bschoenburg.