Bernard Schoenburg: Tax swap? Rauner open, but not pushing
A ghost of Springfield battles past emerged this week when Gov. BRUCE RAUNER was at a school in Wilmette.

A reporter in that Chicago suburb asked Rauner if he would be open to a tax swap for elementary and secondary education funding. That’s the long-discussed idea of increasing income taxes and lowering property taxes to pay for schools.

“That’s a possibility that I’d be open to considering,” Rauner said. “I don’t want to advocate any one particular plan. We should change our school funding formula. I’ve said that repeatedly. The critical thing, though, is we don’t hold up our school funding, hold our schools hostage for that process. ... It’s clear we don’t give enough money to our schools. And even though our school funding formula may have flaws, and I believe it does, we should put more money into the schools, no matter what. And the schools should open on time in August, September, no matter what.”

So, when he appeared at a news conference in Springfield about state government technology changes on Wednesday, I asked about it.

He said that while he’s open to “any ideas that people have for reform,” he is not advocating a tax swap.

“That’s been tried in the past,” he said. “It’s failed in the past.”

What he does want, he said, is “local control of local government costs,” which he has described in the past as letting local governments, including school districts, decide if they want to pay prevailing wage on projects. He also wants it to be optional for those local governments to decide if they don’t want to collectively bargain with their workers on certain issues.

The tax-swap idea famously was part of a platform plank of late state Sen. DAWN CLARK NETSCH, the 1994 Democratic candidate for governor. Because a call for an income tax increase was part of the plan, it was savaged in ads run by incumbent Republican Gov. JIM EDGAR, who went on to win re-election.

That year, 1994, was a GOP landslide year nationwide, and ushered in two years of a Republican majority in the Illinois House. During that time, legislation designed to reform Chicago public schools passed. After that, Edgar pushed his own formula that involved a tax swap. It passed the House that year — back under Democratic control — but was blocked in the Senate, under the GOP.

However, the basis of the current school aid formula was then passed in 1997, setting the first foundation level of per-pupil spending in the state, then $4,225. Changes over the years have led that number to rise to $6,119, which Rauner says is a level he wants to fully fund.

But, of course, Rauner and the General Assembly controlled by Democrats are nearly 10 months into fiscal 2016 without a budget — except the K-12 education budget that was signed by Rauner, allowing grade schools and high schools to operate. State Sen. ANDY MANAR, D-Bunker Hill, has been pushing a change in the state’s funding formula that would direct more funds to poorer districts, including those downstate. Rauner says he wants more money for education, and “we should not hold our schools hostage” for a “new funding allocation plan.”

Manar says that Rauner is “proposing more money being funneled into a broken formula” that he said would have “some of the poorest districts in the state losing money.”

And so it goes.

Communicate, please

In past years, budget agreements have generally come after meetings of the governor and legislative leaders. And since the March 15 primaries came and went, Rauner has repeatedly said that his staff reached out to the staff of House Speaker MICHAEL MADIGAN, D-Chicago, to offer a one-one-one meeting.

“I’m eager to meet with the speaker,” Rauner said Wednesday. “I told him I’ll meet in Springfield, Chicago, any time, any day of the week. I hope we can get together soon.”

Rauner did put that in the context of not actually having made the call himself — “Our office reached out to the speaker’s office after the primary,” he said.

But as in some past instances that Rauner has spoken of communication, something got lost in translation.

Madigan spokesman STEVE BROWN said his understanding is that “a member of the governor’s staff talked to a member of the speaker’s staff” about a having a dinner meeting, and “one of the items to be discussed at that dinner meeting would be this meeting between the governor and the speaker.

“I’m not aware that that dinner meeting has occurred, so the whole thing has not advanced any further,” Brown said.

I asked Rauner Wednesday why he just doesn’t call Madigan, or otherwise get a meeting.

“It’s game-playing on their side,” Rauner said. “They’re trying to force a tax hike."

Brown said Rauner's the one who vetoed higher-education funding, causing the current crisis at some colleges.

During his 2014 campaign for governor, Rauner told a business group in Springfield that he had been meeting with legislators to get to know them and said he had “spent time with the speaker and the president” as part of that effort. But I checked at the time, and spokespeople for Madigan and Senate President JOHN CULLERTON said neither had met with Rauner for two or three years. The meetings were about school reform, and both were before Rauner was a candidate for governor.

The night he was elected in November 2014, Rauner spoke and said, “Just a few minutes ago, I placed two very important phone calls.” He said they were to Madigan and Cullerton, and “I said to them this is an opportunity for us to work together.”

But a Cullerton spokesperson said a Rauner staffer had called a Cullerton staffer. And Brown said Madigan got no call from Rauner. A Rauner spokesman at the time said the governor left a voicemail for Madigan and called the Senate president.

Remembering Pumpkin

Condolences to Gov. Rauner and his family, by the way, on the loss of one of their two Labrador retrievers. The Rauners had 16-year-old PUMPKIN since she was a puppy. She died Sunday.

The other dog, STELLA, is still part of the family.

Senate staffer to speak

A graduate of the University of Illinois Springfield who is now a staffer for a member of the U.S. Senate will present a program at UIS Wednesday discussing his work on anti-violence legislation.

KYLE SIMPSON works as an aide to U.S. Sen. CLAIRE McCASKILL, D-Mo. His talk will be about his role working on legislation to address and reduce violence against women and to fight college sexual violence.

The free, public program, part of the UIS Engaged Citizenship Common Experience speaker series, will be at 6 p.m. Wednesday at Brookens Auditorium, on the lower level of Brookens Library on the Springfield campus.

Simpson graduated from the UIS Capital Scholars honors program in 2007, and also worked for then-U.S. Rep. PHIL HARE, D-Rock Island, and U.S. Rep. BILL FOSTER, D-Naperville.

The event is sponsored by the UIS Women’s Center and co-sponsored by the Capital Scholars program and the Student Government Association.

— Contact Bernard Schoenburg: bernard.schoenburg@sj-r.com, 788-1540, twitter.com/bschoenburg.