Lawrence M Noble
Lawrence M. Noble is a nationally recognized authority on campaign finance, ethics and lobbying issues. He advises Skadden, Arps clients on matters relating to the regulation of political activity. He served as the general counsel of the Federal Election Commission (FEC) from 1987 through 2000, and he has argued before the Supreme Court of the United States and testified before Congress.

Mr. Noble was president of the Council on Governmental Ethics Laws (COGEL) from 1997 to 1998. COGEL is an international organization of government agencies that implement and enforce campaign finance, ethics and lobby laws throughout the United States and Canada. In 2000, Mr. Noble received the COGEL Award, the organization’s highest honor for his outstanding contribution to the field of campaign finance and ethics. Mr. Noble has been repeatedly selected for inclusion in Chambers USA: America’s Leading Lawyers for Business and he was named by Washingtonian Magazine as one of the leading lawyers in the field of election and ethics laws.

Mr. Noble has authored and co-authored a number of articles on the regulation of political activity, including “Current Issues In Enforcing The Federal Election Campaign Laws,” (Federal Bar News and Journal), “Looking at New Campaign Finance Landscape,” (The Hill), “Regulation of Federal Campaign Finance from Rum Punch to the Internet,” (Public Integrity) and “Campaign Finance Reform in the United States,” (Transparency International Quarterly). In addition, he has contributed chapters to publications from the Practising Law Institute and Glasser Legal Works and has authored or co-authored opinion pieces for such publications as the New York Times and Los Angeles Times. Mr. Noble also has been a member of the Editorial Advisory Committee for the Transparency International Global Corruption Report.

Mr. Noble is a frequent speaker before a wide variety of national and international business, press and civic groups, including the American Corporate Counsel Association, National Federation of Independent Business, American Bar Association, Campaign Finance Institute, National Press Foundation, Net Impact, Practising Law Institute, Transparency International, state bar associations, trade associations and corporations. He is an adjunct professor at the George Washington University Law School, where he teaches campaign finance law, and has guest lectured at a number of universities and law schools, including Harvard and Yale.

Mr. Noble served on the Committee on Judicial Review of the Administrative Conference of the United States and as vice-chair of the Election Law Committee of the Administrative Law Section of the American Bar Association. He serves as an adviser to the American Law Institute’s Principles of Government Ethics project. He has been an official observer and political law consultant with respect to elections in the former Soviet Union, Benin, Senegal, Macedonia, Mexico, the Dominican Republic, Cambodia, Trinidad and Tobago, Bangladesh and Jamaica.

Mr. Noble is frequently interviewed by the press on campaign finance, lobbying and ethics issues and has appeared on a variety of television and radio news and public affairs programs, including ABC, CBS and NBC network nightly news, ABC’s Nightline, PBS’ The News Hour, CNN, CNBC, MSNBC, Fox News Channel, National Public Radio, C-SPAN’s Washington Journal and Comedy Central’s The Daily Show.

Immediately prior to joining Skadden, Mr. Noble was the executive director and general counsel of the Center for Responsive Politics, a non–partisan research organization.