Steklarna Rogaška - The elegance of glass
Processes

Steklarna Rogaška produces two types of glass: lead crystal glass, which is later sold as polished or cut glass, and crystalline glass, which is sold in painted, polished or cut form. Glass products are created from a special mixture of quartz sand, calcinated soda, red lead, ash and calcite or limestone. To this basis, colourants or decolourants are added (for colouring or removing unwanted colours). The mixture is melted in furnaces at 1,450°C. Individual products are shaped in moulds made on the basis of a drawing. The glassmaker takes a small quantity of molten glass on the end of a glass pipe and then, by blowing into it, blows a bulb, the shape of which depends on the kind of product he intends to make. The bulb is the basis for taking a new portion of molten glass, which the glassblower shapes in the mould and, by blowing, forms into the desired shape. When the product has been blown and the bottom made, the product, now at a temperature of 500°C, is ready for cooling. Cooling must take place slowly in order to avoid thermal stress which could cause cracking at later stages. Later, the cap of the product is cut off and the edges are cut and sealed. Lead crystal is decoratively cut by hand. Glasscutters used traditional (carborundum) cutting wheels of different degrees of fineness. Since 1972 diamond cutting wheels have also been used. Now all that remains is to polish the product, making it so clear as to refract light causing iridescent sparkles.

The trained hands of glassblowers and glasscutters give products a refinement that a machine cannot give them. Many shapes and patterns are the result of the creative and precise work of designers and all those who contribute to the final appearance and brilliance of the product during the various phases of production.

Many of the products of the Rogaška glassmakers achieve the level of works of art, and the effort of many skilled professionals is invested in them. Noble beverages are decanted into Rogaška products; gastronomic specialities are served in them; crystal candlesticks help create the atmosphere. For all moments and occasions.



In recent years Steklarna Rogaška has also produced precious crystal trophies for the winners of important sports competitions, notably winter sports such as skiing and ski jumping. They have also produced trophies for those chosen as sports personalities of the year. Recipients of trophies produced by the glassmakers of Rogaška include Michael Schumacher, Svetlana Khorkina, Björn Borg and many others.