St. Norbert College
Dave Wegge

Interim Dean of the Schneider School of Business & Economics

Professor Emeritus of Political Science



B.A., University of Minnesota

M.A., Midwestern State University

Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee



Programs: Political Science, American Studies, Leadership Studies, Donald J. Schneider School of Business & Economics, Master of Business Administration

Professor Wegge was a faculty member at St. Norbert College from 1979 to 2014. He taught courses on executive leadership and research methodology and statistics. He was the founder of the St. Norbert College Survey Center and served as its director for fifteen years from 1983 to 1998. He returned to lead the Survey Center from 2009 to 2016 and rebranded the center as the Strategic Research Institute. Dave was appointed the interim dean of the Schneider School of Business & Economics in April 2017.



He also has a private consulting firm, Wegge Strategic Research. His consulting clients include: Cellcom, Nicolet National Bank, Imaginasium, Utech Consulting, SM Advisors and Foth.



Wegge’s research has been used by The Wall Street Journal, London Financial Times, The Economist, The New York Times, PBS NewsHour, Newsweek, USA Today, CBS News, ABC News, CNN, as well as several news outlets in Wisconsin.



He is a member of the American Association of Public Opinion Research (AAPOR) the Market Research Association (MRA) and the World Future Society (WFS).



Wegge has been active in the Green Bay area community serving on the Boards of St. Mary’s Hospital, United Way of Brown County, Green Bay Visitor & Convention Bureau and the Bay Area Community Council.



He served as a member of the Board of Directors of the Lutheran School of Theology at Chicago (LSTC) for eleven years with the last three years serving as the chair of the board. He is currently the president of the Ascension Lutheran Church congregation in Allouez, a member of the Campaign Cabinet of the Birder Studio for Performing Arts in De Pere and serves on the Futuring Task Force of the Bay Area Community Council.



Wegge is married to Susan who is retired from the Brown County Library. They have two adult children Kristine, an orchestra director in De Pere School, and Jon, a professional jazz bass player in Dallas and Houston. Wegge and his wife also have two grandsons.



Courses

BUAD 510 Intro to Business Leadership