Professor's roots run deep with history Philip Silvia
By Jason Kenney

By Jason Kenney



Fall River Spirit Correspondent



With 40 years of dedicated service as a scholar, teacher, and contributor to the public good as a faculty member at Bridgewater State College, Fall River resident Dr. Philip Silvia, Jr. has always found the history of his hometown to be one of the most fascinating topics he has ever studied.

Dr. Silvia says his passion for the city began when he was a graduate student at Fordham University in the mid-1960s. After receiving his master's degree from Fordham, he enrolled in the school's doctoral program and wanted to choose a meaningful topic for his dissertation that would "stand out from the rest" of the pack. On the advice of one of his professors, he chose to write about the history of Fall River, leading to a lifetime of scholarly research.



"It was one of my professors who sparked my interest in researching the city," he says. "He thought Fall River was a model community to study and directed me into this area."



"I was fortunate that I took his advice because I have family roots in the city that go back to the Civil War," Dr. Silvia continues. "It made my research so much more interesting because I would look in old newspapers and see stuff about my family. I'm glad I took advantage of the advice he gave me."

After completing his dissertation, which was entitled "The Spindle City: Labor, Politics and Religion in Fall River," Dr. Silvia was hired at Bridgewater in 1968. Since joining the faculty, he has edited three books on the Victorian history of Fall River — all considered important sources not only of the history of the region, but of labor and immigration. He has also published numerous articles in journals such as "Spinner," "Labor History," "Catholic Historical Review," and a book titled, "Steeples and Smokestacks: The Franco-American Experience in New England."



This spring, Dr. Silvia was awarded the Lifetime Faculty Research Award at the school's annual Awards for Academic Excellence ceremony held on April 17.



Dr. Silvia said he was truly honored to receive the award, which was given for his four decades of research on the history of Fall River and his outreach to the community.

"I am thrilled to receive this award, especially as I near the end of my teaching career," he said. "It's a capstone to my 40 years of teaching at the college. It's nice to be recognized for your hard work and the love affair I've had with the city my entire life."



He has also served as a member of a local historical commission that was charged with researching the life of Fr. Patrick Peyton, who was affectionately known as the "Rosary Priest" for encouraging families to pray together, especially the rosary. Dr. Silvia says he spent four years working on this project, along with David Goodrich, the archivist of Holy Cross Family Ministries, and James Kenneally, professor emeritus of Stonehill College who once chaired the school's history department and ran the Martin Institute.



"We were asked to research and prepare a report on the life of Fr. Peyton who is a candidate for sainthood," said Dr. Silvia. "Our work was submitted to the Cardinal of Baltimore who will examine Fr. Peyton's sainthood cause. Since Fr. Peyton is buried in Easton, he's the first sainthood cause to be initiated in the Diocese of Fall River."

In addition to his exemplary academic research, Dr. Silvia's most telling achievements involve his outreach to the community, in which he has brought an understanding of the historical roots of the region to generations of residents. In fact, since 1970, he has spoken on at least 65 occasions in the Greater Fall River area and has given his knowledge and understanding through presentations at conferences in many colleges and universities in the region.



Furthermore, he has been active in local and regional history groups as well as historical boards and organizations for the past 25 years, including the Fall River Historical Society, the Fall River Historical Commission, the Fall River Public Library Foundation, and the New England Historical Association, at whose conference he presented a talk on "Progress in the Progressive Era: Helping to Heal the Wounds of Ethnic Division among the Economically Challenged Mill Population of Fall River."



Since he is well known, Dr. Silvia has also been active in public service at St. Anne's Hospital, serving on the Board of Directors for the past 30 years and providing valuable historical knowledge on its origin.

"My research has led me to numerous opportunities for civic involvement," said Dr. Silvia. "They have gone hand in hand for me."



While Dr. Silvia didn't say when he plans to retire from Bridgewater, he said he enjoys his job very much, especially working with committed students and a dedicated staff.



"I like the students first and foremost, but I am also privileged to work in the history department," he said. "I have the highest respect for my colleagues. We work in harmony with each other and that's not always the case at some colleges. It's really great to go to work everyday and be happy when you go there. I think the future looks bright for the school."