$10 Oil Tax
The promise: Back in 2008, President-elect Obama said putting a tax on gasoline would be a "mistake" because it would put "additional burdens on American families."

The proposal: In his State of the Union address this year, President Obama sought to cement his anti-energy legacy by proposing a $10 tax on every barrel of oil produced.

The kicker: After the president’s proposal was announced, White House economic advisor Jeff Zients admitted, "We recognize that oil companies would likely pass on some of the costs.” What are those costs? Independent analysts estimate this policy would raise gas prices by about 24 cents per gallon—effectively the same as that gas tax President-elect Obama thought was such a mistake.

Yikes: Who will bear the brunt of that cost? American consumers. Which consumers are hurt the most? Folks who live paycheck to paycheck, who really feel the pain of increased energy prices.

Flashback: "Somehow we have to figure out how to boost the price of gasoline to the levels in Europe." That was a quote from former Department of Energy Secretary Steven Chu before he was named head of the agency in Obama’s first term. And in case you didn’t know, gasoline in Europe is double or triple the price of gasoline in the U.S., thanks to massive taxes. After a lot of heat, he tried to walk back his radical view saying, “Of course we don’t want the price of gasoline to go up, we want it to go down.” Riiiiight.

Here’s the good news: The $10 tax on gasoline is dead on arrival in Congress. House Republicans will never let this policy—which hurts families and the poor above all else—become law.

There is a better way: House Republicans are committed to affordable American energy and a strong U.S. economy. Instead of radical policies from the Obama administration that drive up the cost of energy, House Republicans have proposed policies that release regulatory burdens and increase energy production—which help to drive down the cost of energy, giving all Americans access to the freedom and mobility that low-cost energy brings.