State: Bush names Florida's first female lieutenant governor
Bush names Florida's first female lieutenant governor

Former state Senate President Toni Jennings takes over as Gov. Jeb Bush's second-in-command.

By LUCY MORGAN, Times Tallahassee Bureau Chief

© St. Petersburg Times, published March 4, 2003

TALLAHASSEE -- Gov. Jeb Bush on Monday named former Senate President Toni Jennings to be Florida's first woman lieutenant governor.

Bush made the announcement just two hours after Frank Brogan gave up the job voters elected him to in November. He is the new president of Florida Atlantic University in Boca Raton.

Jennings, a 53-year-old moderate Republican, brings 24 years of legislative experience to the job, including four years running the Senate.

Although Jennings was widely thought to be on the short list to replace Brogan, her selection was a surprise because she and Bush often were at odds during her final two years as Senate president.

On Monday, they focused on the times they agreed.

"I didn't spend 24 years building the Republican Party of Florida to not be a supporter of our Republican governor," Jennings said. "If I disagree I'll discuss it with the governor and if I disagree I'll disagree inside the door, not outside."

Jennings, who runs a construction business in Orlando, has a reputation for getting along with Democrats and Republicans. Bush's announcement came on the eve of a legislative session in which the governor's budget is facing opposition in the Republican-led Senate.

Bush announced the appointment at a midafternoon news conference jammed with senators, lobbyists and others who knew Jennings from her years in the Legislature.

"I'm excited. I'm really excited," Bush said as he stood beside Jennings.

The job would give Jennings an edge in the jockeying for the 2006 governor's race, though she said she has not thought about it.

"Sunday morning I didn't know I would be lieutenant governor," Jennings said. "I'll be the best lieutenant governor since Frank Brogan. See me later. I've always thought the best recommendation for the next job is doing well with the one you have."

Bush said the 2006 governor's race did not factor into his decision. Instead, he looked for someone who could help him govern. He also said he welcomes dissent within his administration and expects some "lively debates."

Senate President Jim King, R-Jacksonville, and House Speaker Johnnie Byrd, R-Plant City, praised the appointment. King said he and other senators were proud to see one of their own rise to such heights.

"She's got a very good handle on the legislative aspects and she certainly understands the Senate, which may be one of the governor's biggest problems," King said.

While he considers Jennings a friend, King said she knows him well enough not to expect the Senate to do Bush's bidding.

"That relationship gets you access, not home cooking," King said.

The appointment could help the GOP in Jennings' hometown of Orlando, where Democrat Buddy Dyer was just elected mayor.

After weeks of considering myriad candidates, Bush's decision boiled down to Jennings and Jacksonville Mayor John Delaney. But Jacksonville is firmly in the GOP camp. Orlando is not: The governor's brother, President Bush, lost the county to Al Gore in 2000.

Bush's staff had advised Delaney on Sunday to be ready to travel to Tallahassee for a news conference Monday. But Bush called Delaney Sunday night and said he was naming Jennings instead.

Delaney's term ends in July. A lawyer, he has expressed interest in becoming president of the University of North Florida or joining a Jacksonville law firm.

Jennings' return to the Capitol after a two-year absence generated broad support.

Among those on hand to welcome her was former Largo state Rep. Sandy Mortham, a Republican who is now a lobbyist for the Florida Medical Association. Mortham was briefly Bush's running mate in 1998 but dropped out over questions about how she ran her office as secretary of state.

"I think it's wonderful," Mortham said Monday. "She's a proven leader and competent."

Senate Minority Leader Ron Klein agreed.

"She has a nice way about her," said Klein, D-Boca Raton. "She has teacher skills and tries to get people to work together. She calls it like it is when she sees it that way."

Rep. Eleanor Sobel, D-Hollywood, also praised the selection.

"It puts a woman in power and could smooth out the rough spots with the Senate. I think it's absolutely brilliant."

Bush said his staff had questioned past news reports suggesting that Oscar Juarez, a lobbyist and political consultant, often traded on his friendship with Jennings to get clients.

"She understands this office has high standards and she is totally comfortable adhering to that," Bush said. "I'm totally confident it is not going to be a problem."

Jennings will follow Bush's lead and put all of her assets in a trust. Although she officially assumed the job Monday, Jennings plans a formal swearing-in ceremony in Orlando on Friday.

Democrats once threatened to sue to force the new lieutenant governor to stand for election in 2004, but Florida Democratic Party chairman Scott Maddox merely issued a statement congratulating Bush on his choice. Maddox later said the party has not decided whether it will sue.

Bush has said it is unnecessary to put Jennings' appointment on the ballot because voters do not choose a lieutenant governor alone but as part of a pair with the governor.

Jennings said she would gladly put her name on the ballot beside a Bush in 2004.

-- Staff writers Steve Bousquet and Alisa Ulferts contributed to this report

Toni Jennings

PERSONAL: Born May 17, 1949, in Orlando. Unmarried. Lives in Orlando. Great-uncle Gen. Edward Martin was governor of Pennsylvania. Great grandfather Charles Jennings served in the Virginia Legislature.

EDUCATION: Bachelor's degree from Wesleyan College in Macon, Ga., in 1971.

PROFESSIONAL: President of Jack Jennings & Son Inc., general contractors. Elected to the Florida House in 1976, elected to the Senate in 1980. Served two terms as Senate president, 1996-1998, 1998-2000. Republican.