State: McBride's first negative TV ad targets Florida education
McBride's first negative TV ad targets Florida education

© St. Petersburg Times, published October 16, 2002

Democratic gubernatorial candidate Bill McBride launched his first TV ad criticizing Gov. Jeb Bush on Tuesday, pointing to Florida's poor showing in national education rankings.

"Under Jeb Bush , our schools have declined in nearly every category," an announcer says, based on a report by an independent research firm, Morgan Quitno, that issues state rankings widely used by researchers and government agencies.

The 30-second ad echoes what McBride has been saying for more than a year: Florida schools are suffering because Bush has not invested enough in them. Florida ranks 49th in high school graduation rates, 46th in SAT scores, 44th in elementary classroom size and 49th in high school class size, Morgan Quitno found.

Education dominates Florida's governor's race, with Bush touting his record of increased state funding for schools, rising test scores and greater accountability. Bush said Tuesday he was not surprised by the McBride ad, but scoffed at the notion that Florida ranks 47th in per capita school spending.

McBride "knows there are a whole lot of elderly people here, and we have a lower percentage of people who are school age. So those are gross distortions of our spending levels," Bush said, noting that a new congressional report found that Florida was one of only four states that increased education funding in the current tight budget year.

His campaign also questioned some of the Morgan Quitno findings, saying SAT comparisons can be misleading and that Florida's graduation rate was understated.

Bush often touts his spending record on schools. School spending has increased $3-billion during his administration, more than it did under former Democratic Gov. Lawton Chiles.

That figure does not account for inflation and rising student enrollment, however, and McBride and other critics say Bush squandered budget surpluses on corporate tax breaks when schools badly needed the money.

Much of the ad recycles images and assertions from a previous McBride ad. It shows empty desks as it ticks off Florida's national rankings and then moves to color images of McBride with school kids. It notes McBride's children attend public schools and that he wants to improve early childhood education.

McBride has proposed a plan to reduce class sizes from kindergarten through third grade, funded partly by a 50-cents-per-pack tax increase on cigarettes. He said he also supports a much more expensive ballot initiative to mandate smaller class sizes, but has not said how he would pay for it.