State: Bush, McBride didn't draw black voters
Bush, McBride didn't draw black voters

The majority of black voters stayed home Tuesday. Those who did vote overwhelmingly picked Democrats.

By WES ALLISON, Times Staff Writer

© St. Petersburg Times, published November 8, 2002

While he easily won re-election, Republican Gov. Jeb Bush drew little support in predominantly black neighborhoods, a new precinct analysis shows.

But voters in a sample of black precincts across Florida didn't flock to the polls Tuesday for Democrat Bill McBride , either.

Although McBride won 94 percent of the vote in those precincts, just 43 percent of the registered voters went to the polls. That's far off the huge turnout that McBride had hoped would propel him to victory. It's also significantly less than the overall statewide turnout of 54 percent.

Bush won 6 percent of the vote in the sample precincts. That's less than half of the percentage of black votes won by Bush statewide in 1998. Exit polls that year indicated Bush won 14 percent of the black vote statewide, which was considered a record for a Florida Republican.

Since then, many black voters have been angered by Bush's dismantling of affirmative action in college admissions and state contracts. The contested 2000 presidential election, involving the governor's brother, also upset many black voters, who believed they were disenfranchised.

Ultimately, the apathy among black voters in the sample precincts was only one factor that contributed to Bush's surprisingly easy win.

The governor' margin of victory, about 650,000 votes, was so large that even a much higher turnout among African-Americans would not have enabled McBride to make up all of the difference.

The poor showing among one of the Democrats' most loyal constituencies highlights the inability of McBride's campaign to energize the party's base.

"The idea that African-American voters in predominantly African-American areas would turn out in record numbers to oppose Jeb Bush was a political fantasy," said Rob Schroth of Schroth & Associates, a Washington firm that analyzed the voting data for the St. Petersburg Times and the Miami Herald. "African-American voters simply didn't get the chance to know Bill McBride ."

Schroth analyzed 29 precincts where at least 85 percent of registered voters are black. The precincts are spread over nine large counties: Miami-Dade and Broward in South Florida; Lee in Southwest Florida; Hillsborough, Orange and Brevard in Central Florida; and Escambia, Leon and Duval in North Florida. Precinct-by-precinct results in some other large counties, including Pinellas and Palm Beach, were unavailable.

Combined, the sample precincts include 51,460 registered voters. Just 22,138 voters in those precincts voted Tuesday.

Unlike recent Florida gubernatorial elections, there are no exit polls that characterize the race, gender or economic status of voters who cast ballots for Bush or McBride. The Voter News Service, created by a consortium of television networks and the Associated Press, gave up its effort to provide national or state exit polls Tuesday to its clients, including the St. Petersburg Times. VNS said it could not guarantee the accuracy of its analysis.

Schroth cautioned against drawing sweeping comparisons between previous exit polls and the precinct analysis. The precinct analysis did not include African-Americans in more integrated precincts or in majority-white precincts. Those areas would include black suburban residents who may have been more likely to vote for Bush.

Still, the precinct sample was large enough to suggest Bush probably did worse among blacks than in 1998, Schroth said.

But the McBride campaign and the Florida Democratic Party also had hoped for a much higher turnout among black voters.

In South Florida, home to a third of the Democrats in the state, local chapters of the Urban League held rallies. The NAACP and People for the American Way led "Arrive With Five," a campaign designed to boost turnout.

Former President Bill Clinton, whose popularity with African-Americans prompted author Toni Morrison to call him the nation's "first black president," campaigned among blacks Saturday evening and Sunday in South Florida. Former Vice President Al Gore campaigned Sunday and Monday. So did the Rev. Jesse Jackson.

Janet Reno, who also is popular among African-Americans, campaigned vigorously on McBride's behalf after losing to him in the Democratic primary. And last Friday, top-rated urban radio show host Tom Joyner broadcast live from Broward County with McBride, Reno and other elected officials.

During the primary, McBride all but ceded African-American voters, especially in South Florida, to Reno.

"I think the African-American community had anti-Bush sentiment, but they didn't know Bill McBride well enough to say, "This is the guy,' " said James Harris, who coordinated African-American outreach for Reno, then joined the McBride campaign.

"Reno has served the black community in South Florida and the state of Florida for years," he added. "You're not going to offset that by going to church for six Sundays. He had a lot of catching up to do."

Eric Brown, president of the Tampa Bay Black Republican Club, wasn't surprised by Bush's poor showing among urban African-Americans. He said Clinton and the other national celebrities who campaigned for McBride had an effect.

Brown said Republicans must work harder for support among black voters. "I wish they would," he said, "but at the same time I wish black folks would open their minds and consider an alternative."

Schroth and other strategists offer several reasons why black voters weren't enthusiastic about McBride. Not enough knew him. Not enough were angry enough about Bush. And many were disgusted with voting tangles that plagued the 2000 presidential election, when the U.S. Supreme Court stopped Florida's recount, and the Democratic primary, when Reno barely lost.

"That's what I was hearing in the neighborhood, why go?" said Deanna Williams, an African-American from St. Petersburg, who voted for McBride. "They felt like their vote doesn't count anymore."

The Rev. Willie J. Williams, pastor of Greater Mount Moriah Primitive Baptist Church in Tampa, blamed apathy.

"A lot of people sometimes feel like that even if they vote, it's a waste of time," he said.

State Rep. Chris Smith, a black Democrat from Fort Lauderdale, suggested the low turnout reflected the off-year election that traditionally draw fewer voters than presidential elections. He said he did not view Tuesday's turnout as an indication that black voters are no longer upset about the end of affirmative action or the 2000 election.

Smith endorsed Bush in 1998, but he became a staunch critic after the governor instituted One Florida, which replaced affirmative action for admission to state universities and state contracts.

In his precinct, just 3.5 percent of the voters cast ballots for Bush.

"In '98, we had an unknown who showed a lot of promise. Now that he's been in office we've seen what he's done and not done for the community," Smith said. "Those who gave him the benefit of the doubt weren't willing to do it again."

-- Times political editor Adam C. Smith contributed to this report.