State: Trump to give Charlie Crist fundraiser
Print Email story Comment Email editor Fill out this form to email this article to a friend Your name Your email Friend's name Friend's email Your message Trump to give Charlie Crist fundraiser The real estate mogul's June 14 Manhattan event comes less than a month after Crist raised $1.1-million for his governor's race at a Tampa luncheon. Associated Press

Published May 31, 2005 TALLAHASSEE - In what is quickly shaping up as the most expensive governor's race in Florida history, Attorney General Charlie Crist is looking to get a boost from a mid June Manhattan fundraiser hosted by real estate mogul Donald Trump. Although the 2006 primary election is 15 months away, fundraising was kicked into high gear last week when Crist raised more than $1.1-million at a Tampa lunch. Trump, known for casinos, skyscrapers and resorts that bear his name and for his TV show The Apprentice, never does anything on a small scale. "Getting someone like Mr. Trump in the primary is a huge boost," Crist political adviser Brian Ballard said Monday. "It makes the campaign exciting." Crist, who was introduced to Trump at a charity benefit in 1998, met with him in New York on May 20 and was encouraged by the developer's interest in his candidacy to succeed Gov. Jeb Bush. "He could not have been more gracious or more hospitable," Crist said Monday. "The guy cares about Florida. He has a residence in Florida and spends a lot of time in Florida." Trump owns a home in West Palm Beach. A guard at his New York city headquarters said Monday no one was available because of the Memorial Day holiday, and the phone numbers for Trump's publicists rang unanswered. The Crist fundraiser is scheduled at Trump Towers in Manhattan on June 14 - the developer's 59th birthday. Crist, 48, and Chief Financial Officer Tom Gallagher, 61, are seeking the GOP nomination. Both served in the Legislature before going on to win statewide Cabinet positions. The Legislature just made it easier for statewide candidates to raise massive amounts of cash, hiking the cap to $20-million for the governor's race. In 2002, candidates for governor who wanted public financing had to limit their overall spending to $6.34-million. Crist, who attended Memorial Day observances Monday in Jacksonville with Mayor John Peyton, was elected attorney general in 2002 after an abbreviated term as education commissioner. Gallagher, who made runs for governor in 1986 and 1994 - losing in the GOP primary both times - served as Florida's insurance commissioner and education commissioner before being elected chief financial officer in 2002. State Rep. Jim Davis of Tampa, state Sen. Rod Smith of Gainesville and former state Democratic Party chairman Scott Maddox of Tallahassee are the announced Democratic candidates. Smith raised about $349,000 for his gubernatorial campaign during the 36 days leading up to the legislative session. The candidates face a June 30 deadline to file their next fundraising reports. [Last modified May 31, 2005, 00:44:11]

Share your thoughts on this story Read our guidelines for comments First Name (only)



Location

Comment (May be published online and/or in print)



You have 250 characters left to comment.

[an error occurred while processing this directive]