State: Florida expands chastity program
Florida expands chastity program The state will dedicate a record sum, about $10-million, this year to abstinence-only sex education programs. By JULIE HAUSERMAN © St. Petersburg Times, published November 27, 1999 TALLAHASSEE -- For teenagers who want to have sex, the state of Florida is giving new vigor to an old message: Just say no. This year, Gov. Jeb Bush's administration will dedicate about $10-million -- more money than ever before -- to "abstinence-only" sex education programs that urge teens to stay virginal. The taxpayer-funded programs, including two run by Christian groups the in Tampa Bay area, teach kids that sex outside marriage is unhealthy. And teens are taught that even if they have already had sex, it's not too late to try "secondary virginity." It's part of a dramatic government rethinking that started in 1996, when Congress set aside $250-million to fund states' abstinence programs. The money was slipped into the federal budget with no debate. The new federal "abstinence only" sex education grants prohibit program leaders from talking about birth control at all. Kids still will get the "safe sex" programs traditionally taught in schools and health departments. But in new classroom and community programs called "Best Friends," "Sex Can Wait," "Everyone's Not Doing It," and "Fertility Appreciation for Families," they are hearing a government-funded message that they once heard only at home or in church. "Hopefully, we're priming kids to save something for the most important relationship of their lives," said Amy Stephens, a spokeswoman for Focus on the Family, a Christian group based in Colorado Springs, Colo. As states gobble up federal grant dollars to fund the new programs, people are asking: Can a 1950s-style chastity message compete with the sex-drenched MTV culture of the new millennium? Bush says he hopes so. "It's pretty clear," the governor said, "that sex education programs where you teach kids how to have sex don't work." Lots of people debate that point. "When we talk to teens, they tell us they want more information earlier," said Barbara Zdravecky, who heads Planned Parenthood in Southwest and Central Florida. Planned Parenthood runs clinics that provide abortions and family planning. In 1998, there were 14,469 babies born to unwed mothers ages 10 to 18 in Florida, part of a gradual increase over the past decade. Since pregnancy tests aren't public, it's impossible to say what the total teen pregnancy rate is. No one can say with certainty how the teen pregnancy rate has been affected by today's "safe sex" education programs, which preach the virtues of condoms as a way to prevent disease and pregnancy. The new abstinence education grants are being doled out to county health departments, church groups and community centers. Most of the money that Florida will spend this year -- about $8-million -- is coming from the federal government. A review of the Florida abstinence grants shows that about half the groups providing the programs around the state are Christian-based. But grant recipients are specifically prohibited from preaching religion in their abstinence message. "We can't teach them about Jesus. We can't teach them about God," said Althea McMillan, who runs the Abstinence Between Strong Teens program in Miami, which targets teenagers in public housing. "It's a fact that abstinence is the only safe sex. Condoms do not protect children. The money that the schools have put into the safe sex message has gone down the drain." Linda Daniels teaches an abstinence program to about 1,600 students in Pinellas County middle schools. Her work is funded with a three-year $300,000 grant that the state gave to the Pregnancy Center of Pinellas County, a non-profit group that counsels pregnant women and discourages abortion. "We start by asking the teenagers why they think teens are having sex. They'll say "Everybody's doing it.' or "It feels good,' " Daniels said. "We affirm that their bodies are changing and sex is a natural part of life, but you can have self-control. "We talk to them about the reality of sexually transmitted diseases -- that some of them are curable and some of them are not." "But when the kids leave, we don't want them thinking just about the diseases," Daniels said. "We want them thinking about abstinence as a good choice. Abstinence is positive. It's not some weird choice." Across the country, abstinence grants are paying for teen rallies, dances and sports events. Florida is among about a dozen states that made grants to pregnancy crisis centers, which discourage abortions. In some places, the programs have proven controversial. The Colorado Council of Black Nurses in Denver got a grant but then gave the money back, saying it was "crazy" and to tell kids to remain chaste if they couldn't also talk about birth control as a backup. In rural Georgia, federal grant money funded a religious program in which teens were taught to let "God control their minds." Planned Parenthood officials say abstinence-only education can actually harm teens. "They are sitting in a classroom and someone starts telling them how its bad to have sex," said Zdravecky, who heads Florida Planned Parenthood. "To a young person who has already had sex, abstinence education really shames them." Opponents of the abstinence-only programs say the government should stop spending big bucks on the just-say-no-to-sex message until there are some hard data to show it is working. But conservative activists are pushing for even more money. The Heritage Foundation, an early architect of the federal grant and a group which once had Jeb Bush on its board of directors, has suggested doubling the funding. Florida Health Secretary Bob Brooks is an avid supporter of spending on the program. Jeb Bush's brother, Texas Gov. George W. Bush, is vowing to step up federal funding for teen abstinence programs in the U.S. if he wins the presidency in 2000. -- Times researchers Kitty Bennett and Cathy Wos contributed to this report. Back to State news



© St. Petersburg Times. All rights reserved.



Headlines