State: Jeb Bush: Cut 25% of state workers
Jeb Bush: Cut 25% of state workers The governor mentions dropping or privatizing programs as one way to shrink the government in five years. ©Associated Press © St. Petersburg Times, published July 11, 2000 TALLAHASSEE -- Florida state government should come up with a plan to shrink by 25 percent over the next five years, Gov. Jeb Bush said Monday. "My hope is that we'll have a smaller government in terms of work force, but a better government," Bush told reporters. State government has more than 153,000 positions, not counting people who work for the Legislature, approved for the current fiscal year. The Tallahassee Democrat, which reported the proposed cuts Sunday, said Bush planned to send a directive to state agencies perhaps as early as next week. In the directive, the Democrat reported, Bush warns "across the board reductions are not the sole means" to meet his goal. He suggests the state could achieve the reductions he has in mind by dropping programs that are of lesser importance, shifting some programs to local governments or community organizations and privatizing some services. "I do believe that state government does too many things, and some things we don't do well," he told reporters. Meanwhile Monday, as Bush talked of future employee cuts, the state Corrections Department was preparing final plans to eliminate 1,569 positions at the agency in the next month. About 1,200 of the positions aren't filled, but 361 employees will be laid off. Corrections Secretary Michael Moore will be at meetings in Sarasota on Wednesday and Thursday, giving agency officials around the state an overview of where cuts may be made. A likely target will be seven "service centers" around the state that the Corrections Department set up to provide administrative support to prisons and probation officers. "Secretary Moore has stipulated that they will come from the administrative side of department, not from prison and probation officers," said agency spokesman C.J. Drake. "Our public safety mission, the most important mission we do, will not be jeopardized." The Corrections Department has about 28,000 employees and a $1.6-billion budget. The cuts represent about $62.5-million of the budget, Drake said, and were mandated by the Legislature. Bush's spokesman Justin Sayfie said the governor did not recommend an employee cut at the Corrections Department. In fact, the governor proposed an increase in corrections employees. The Republican governor is, however, looking ahead to statewide cutting in the next fiscal year. Bush wants the heads of executive agencies and the judicial branch to propose reducing the workforce by a quarter over the next five years, according to a memo by the top state Senate budget staffer. Agencies also should propose how to figure out how to reduce general revenue spending next year by 5 percent to 8 percent. That would produce a saving of about $1.6-billion. In the directive, he says "mission-critical services and activities" should be funded "to meet the optimum level of service" and that agencies should "prioritize" their activities and eliminate low priorities, the Tallahassee Democrat reported. For instance, Bush said, he thinks the state should spend more of its environmental dollars on lakes and rivers and less on trying to buy land that's not in danger of development. The governor acknowledged that he didn't know what 25 percent of his own office he could do without. Under state law, state agencies are supposed to submit their budget requests to the governor and the Legislature based on their independent judgment of what they need to do their jobs. But state law allows the governor and lawmakers to direct agencies to develop "target" budgets in addition to a budget request that reflects what they actually need.

-- Times staff writer Diane Rado contributed to this report. Back to State news



© St. Petersburg Times. All rights reserved.