Luzerne County has the fastest-growing Hispanic population in the nation
Article Tools Font size – + Share This

ELLEN O'CONNELL/Staff Photographer A group of boys play basketball at the Pine Street playground on Tuesday. Luzerne County boasts the fastest-growing Hispanic population in the country among counties with a population of 10,000 or more.

As America commemorates its 41st annual National Hispanic Heritage Month from Sept. 15 to Oct. 15, the U.S. Census Bureau said people of Hispanic origin are the largest ethnic minority in the nation.

And Luzerne County tops the nation in Hispanic population growth, according to the Census Bureau.

In the one-year period from July 1, 2007, to July 1, 2008 - the Census Bureau said Luzerne County experienced a 15-percent increase in its Hispanic population, which earns the county a first-place national rank in Hispanic population growth among counties with a population of 10,000 or more.

The U.S. Census Bureau's latest numbers in 2008 estimate there are 14,039 residents of Hispanic heritage in the county.

According to Dr. Linda Trompetter, director of the Luzerne County Diversity Commission, its the good schools, affordable housing, jobs that offer a decent wage, and the safety of smaller, close-knit communities that motivate many Hispanics to move to Luzerne County and Greater Hazleton.

Relocating to Luzerne County for those reasons makes the Hispanic population no different than that of any other people, Trompetter said.

"They come here for the same reasons any other people would move out of greater metropolitan areas like New York City: They want to live in a close-knit community, they want to own their own home, they want a good job and a good education for their children," Trompetter said.

According to the Census Bureau, the Hispanic population in the United States reached 46.9 million as of July 1, 2008. And that's not including the 4 million residents of Puerto Rico, which is a United States' territory.

America's commemoration of National Hispanic Heritage Month began in 1968 when Congress authorized President Lyndon B. Johnson to proclaim a week in September for America to recognize the contributions of Hispanic Americans to the United States and to celebrate Hispanic heritage, culture and the traditions of the U.S. residents who trace their roots to Spain, Mexico and the Spanish-speaking nations of Central America, South America and the Caribbean.

The observance was expanded by President Ronald Reagan in 1988 to cover a 30-day period from Sept. 15 to Oct. 15.

Sept. 15 was chosen as the starting point for the celebration because it is the anniversary of independence of five Latin American countries: Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua. They all declared their independence in 1821.

In addition, Mexico, Chile and Belize celebrate their independence days on Sept.16, Sept. 18 and Sept. 21 respectively.

Today, Pennsylvania is one of 16 states with at least one-half million Hispanic residents, in addition to Arizona, California, Colorado, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Massachusetts, Nevada, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Texas, Virginia and Washington.

The United States also has the second largest Hispanic population in the world, according to 2008 census numbers. Only Mexico - at 110 million - has a larger Hispanic population than the United States.

Trompetter sees the influx of Hispanic residents to Luzerne County as good news.

"Certainly the region is changing rapidly. But we see this as a great opportunity economically," Trompetter said. "You look at a place like Hazleton. Almost every home being bought has a Latino last name."

In addition to infusing the real estate market, the Census Bureau reports triple growth rates in Hispanic-owned businesses between 1997 and 2002 (31 percent) compared with the national average (10 percent) for all businesses. And revenue generated from Hispanic-owned businesses reached $222 billion nationally by 2002, up 19 percent from 1997.

Almost half (44.6 percent) of all Hispanic-owned firms in the United States are owned by people of Mexican origin (Mexican, Mexican-American or Chicano), and nearly 30,000 of those firms earned receipts of $1 million or more.

"We can only grow stronger because of this," Trompetter said.

While promoting the positive, Trompetter acknowledged the challenges that come with the rapid increase in a new minority population, such as increased educational needs, language barriers and civil acceptance.

"There are many people who say if they don't want to learn to speak English they should go back where they came from," Trompetter said. "To say they don't want to learn is not true. It is very difficult to learn a new language as an adult. The kids are certainly picking it up."

She also suggested broad benefits to familiarity with more than one language.

"When our grandparents came to America, they gave up their language. I'm not so sure that's a good thing, being mono-lingual. "What's so bad about speaking Spanish and English?" she said. "In Europe, all people speak more than one language. Certainly when you're speaking one-on-one you need a common language. But if I were in England shopping in a department store and I came upon two people conversing in German, I wouldn't give it a second thought."

Integrating children of various colors and languages into social and educational settings gives the children a healthy, realistic human experience, Trompetter said.

"When children are in school with children who are different, that's a really healthy thing because the whole world is different. Children who don't have this multi-cultural experience are at a tremendous disadvantage," she said.

On claims of higher crime, Trompetter said, "You can pull out a few who do drugs. But you will have just as many drug users or criminals in any other ethnic group."

From the first few Hispanic arrivals who told their families and friends that Luzerne County and Greater Hazleton is a great place to live, Trompetter said the population swell was inevitable. And the best course of action, she said, is to embrace it.

"Once you get a critical mass of flow, you can't stop it. You can stay in your own small corner of the world with people like you, or you can get out of your safety zone and make an effort to get to know our new residents. Learn the facts. Ask them about their cultures. Talk to people. Make them feel welcome," Trompetter said. "They want to tell their stories. They want to learn about your culture and tell you about theirs."

Trompetter suggested America's "melting pot" concept should be reconsidered as a "salad bowl."

"Each ingredient in a salad bowl is distinct and unique and that's what makes it delicious," she said.

Amilcar Arroyo, editor of El Mensajero, a local Spanish language newspaper, said National Hispanic Heritage Month is a low-key commemoration among local Latinos.

"We combine Hispanic Heritage Month with Columbus Day on the second Monday of October and attend a ceremony at the rotunda in the courthouse in Wilkes-Barre," Arroyo said.

Although he has often thought of organizing a more vibrant celebration for all people of the Hazleton area to enjoy, Arroyo said such an undertaking would require a lot more involvement from a lot more Hazleton area Latinos.

"We hear daily that Hispanic people only ask, ask, ask. They don't want to give. That is not true. We do want to give. We raised more than $1,000 for the United Way last year. We want to do more. We want to offer more. We need more people to get involved," he said.

mlight@standardspeaker.com