School districts grapple with delayed categorical payments
State Rep. Norine Hammond expects funds to be released soon

MACOMB — The state of Illinois has gone two years without a complete budget, but K-12 public education was supposed to be spared from the state’s fiscal crisis under a stopgap budget passed in July 2016.

The six-month budget gave K-12 education a full year of funding, leading to a public perception that school districts were fully funded. That’s not exactly the case, according to local school district superintendents.

Bushnell-Prairie City School District, Superintendent Kathy Dinger said in an interview on Friday, has not received more than $311,000 that was vouchered by the state in 2016 for the current fiscal year.

The backlogged funds yet to be processed and released by the state’s comptroller are categorical payments to reimburse the school district for special education, transportation, early childhood and the free breakfast and lunch program.

“It’s our neediest, basically,” Dinger said, “those programs that cover our neediest children.”

According to the Illinois State Board of Education’s Financial Reimbursement Information System (FRIS) as of Jan. 6, B-PC is still owed $100,486.24 for special education personnel.

Because the state hasn’t provided those funds, Dinger explained, the school district is picking up the tab.

“That’s over $100,000 that we haven’t been reimbursed, and those are actual payroll expenses that we’re expending as well,” Dinger said. “So none of the monies that we’re not receiving are going toward projects that we can offset or delay. They actually go toward operating expenses on a daily basis.”

Also included in the missing $311,670.21 is $59,118.61 in special education transportation reimbursements, $49,067.14 in funding for children requiring special education services, $11,340 for other special education services, $25,272.28 in general transportation reimbursement, $83,093 for an early childhood block grant, $2,502 for agriculture education, and a $553.78 reimbursement for the state’s free breakfast and lunch program.

According to Dinger, about 15 percent of the school district’s children require special education services.

Dinger said she is most concerned about what might happen by June 30, the end of the current fiscal year.

“Because the board has been really fiscally responsible the last several years, we have more cash on hand than we have in previous years,” Dinger said. “So I’m not concerned about us making it through the year. What I’m concerned about is getting to the end of the fiscal year and the state deciding they’re going to cut revenue that we anticipated receiving.”

Macomb and West Prairie school district are missing similar categorial state funds that were vouchered in 2016 and intended for the current fiscal year, the FRIS database shows.

As of Monday, West Prairie had not received categorial payments totaling $296,021.71 that were vouchered in 2016. Macomb School District is waiting on $751,418.63.

Carol Kilver, superintendent of West Prairie School District, said the missing categorial payments particularly impact the school district’s transportation. West Prairie, which is a consolidated district comprised of the old Northwestern and Colchester school districts, stretches 240 square miles.

“Our transportation department is really a lifeline for the school district,” Kilver said. “Special education is also a huge impact on us.”

About 20 percent of the school district’s students receive special education services, according to Kilver.

Kilver said she has emailed local state legislators, including State Rep. Norine Hammond, R-Macomb, and new state senator Jil Tracy, R-Quincy, who will be sworn in this week, to let them know how quickly the problem could compound into the next fiscal year.

The West Prairie Board of Education has been fiscally responsible, Kilver said, and has worked to prevent students from feeling the impact of the state’s fiscal crisis. As the categorical payments continue to be delayed, she said, that becomes more difficult.

In addition to the missing 2017 categorial funds, some school districts have not received a fourth quarter special education categorical payment from the 2016 fiscal year. B-PC, for example, hasn’t received $17,606 in special education transportation reimbursements.

Categorial payments are typically vouchered by the comptroller and processed and released within a few months. Some categorial payments, such and breakfast and lunch program reimbursements, a federal flow-through funds and released within days after being vouchered. With the exception of a special education transportation voucher dated Jan. 4, the missing 2017 categorical funds date from August to December 2016.

Patrick Twomey, superintendent of the Macomb School District, said the district typically receives about $1 million per year in categorical payments.

“Delayed” is a word Twomey said he prefers over “prorated,” which is what transportation and General State Aid payments have been over the past few years. This fiscal year marked a return to full GSA funding, but transportation payments are still being paid out at about 91 percent of what a school district is owed.

“When you see the word ‘delayed,’ that at least gives you comfort that you’ll get the money,” Twomey said, “versus when you see the word ‘prorated.’ When you see other language, you can be sure you won’t get it.”

Like at West Prairie and B-PC, the bulk of Macomb’s backlogged categorical payments, about $400,000, are for special education services. About 15 percent of Macomb School District students receive special education services, according to Twomey.

Twomey said Macomb, the largest school district in the county, has a more stable cash flow than smaller, more rural districts, and isn’t as immediately impacted by delayed categorical payments.

State legislators and Governor Bruce Rauner touted a full budget for K-12 education, he added, and school districts budgeted to receive categorical payments. The state has come through on its promise for full GSA, which is the bulk of state funding, and has released those funds on time.

“If you say ‘full funding’ and we budget for full (categorical) funding, at the end of the year, it doesn’t help you if you deficit spend by that much,” Twomey said. “That’s when you run into the difficult part. To say the least, it’s disappointing.”

State Rep. Hammond, in an interview on Monday, said she is aware of the delayed categorical payments and has communicated with the Illinois State Board of Education and the state comptroller’s office about the problem.

“If the most of the school districts have not received their payments through December in recent weeks or days, those should be coming,” Hammond said. “There is no intention of not paying the FY17 portion. They have been delayed because we had a serious cash flow (problem) in the state. But it is the intention that they will be paid in full.”

The state’s cash flow began to dry up at the end of 2016, which marked the end of the six-month stopgap budget.

Categorical payments remaining from 2016 should also arrive to school districts soon, Hammond added. On Monday, Twomey confirmed that the Macomb School District received its last 2016 categorical payment on Friday.

The transition to a new state comptroller, Susan Mendoza, might be part of the problem, too, according to Hammond. Mendoza, a Democrat, defeated Leslie Munger, a Republican, in the November 2016 election.

“I think that was part of it, kind of getting your feet wet and finding what drawer your pens are in,” Hammond said, “but a lot of the folks that do the day-to-day operations are there and the fact is, the vouchers have already been done to process those payments.”

Hammond said it remains the state’s intention to release categorical funds to school districts.

“It all depends on what our tax revenues are like, and we’ve got to quit losing taxpayers to other states,” Hammond said. “And as our tax payments come in, that is a priority in the payment schedule. As are many of the human services payments as well.”



Reach Lainie Steelman via email at lsteelman@McDonoughVoice.com, or follow her on Twitter@LainieSteelman.