Rapper Tay-K 47 reacts to removal from Spotify playlists
A Tarrant County judge expressed concerns in March that local rapper Taymor "Tay-K 47" McIntyre had been glorified for allegedly committing heinous acts.

Only 17, McIntyre has been charged in two capital murders — one in Mansfield and one in San Antonio — as well as in an aggravated robbery that left an Arlington man seriously injured.

Since his troubles with the law, though, his music's popularity seems to have only grown. He's landed a record deal, and his song "The Race" — about his well-publicized run from the law — even landed on the Billboards Top Music Chart.

"I don't know how many people are supposed to die and I don't know why we ... as a country seem to glorify bad acts by putting out records and videos and people are following in this," State District Judge Wayne Salvant said in announcing he would not grant McIntyre's request for bond.

SIGN UP

Be the first to know. No one covers what is happening in our community better than we do. And with a digital subscription, you'll never miss a local story. SIGN ME UP!

"It's my understanding that people throughout this country have 'Free Tay-K' signs up or 'goto' funds to fund his defense, and this court has a problem with that. I don't know what this country has become when people can go out and allegedly commit heinous crimes and be glorified for it."

Spotify seems to have gotten the message.

Today, the popular music streaming company announced a new policy aimed at removing — more like not promoting — hate content and hateful conduct.

In a statement to Billboard, Spotify singled out that listeners would no longer be able to find R. Kelly's music on any of the streaming service's editorial or algorithmic playlists.

But in an online article by Spin magazine, a comparison of several key playlists seemed to reveal that Tay-K had also been eliminated from multiple playlists. (Like R. Kelly, you can still search for and listen to Tay-K's music on Spotify.)

The rapper, who remains held in Tarrant County Jail but still tweets out regularly — likely via his management team — did not seem pleased Thursday late afternoon.

My songs have been removed from playlists because I’m being accused of something that I havent been convicted for. I don’t make hate music I rap about what goes on in every hood in America. I will never let a situation hold me back from what I believe in. RUGRAT PLAYLIST OUT NOW pic.twitter.com/TtCO2SaIwg — TAY-K 47 (@tayk) May 10, 2018

"My songs have been removed from playlists because I'm being accused of something that I haven't been convicted for," he tweeted. "I don't make hate music I rap about what goes on in every hood in America. I will never let a situation hold me back from what I believe in."