Proposed Refugee Admissions for Fiscal Year 2015
Report to the Congress

submitted on behalf of THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES

to the COMMITTEES ON THE JUDICIARY, UNITED STATES SENATE and UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

in fulfillment of the requirements of sections 207(d)(1) and (e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act

United States Department of State

United States Department of Homeland Security

United States Department of Health and Human Services

In these and other ways we will continue to adapt to meet changing needs and keep our refugee resettlement program strong. With the support of Congress and the American people, refugee resettlement will continue to be a proud American tradition for many years to come.

We continue to face challenges accessing refugee applicants in a variety of locations. In some countries, such as Syria, Yemen, and Eritrea, Department of Homeland Security (DHS) adjudicators have been unable to travel to interview applicants for several years. DHS-approved refugees in Syria continue to depart as their cases become fully cleared, and we have had applicants in Yemen, Iran, and Eritrea moved to a UNHCR Emergency Transit Center in Romania or Slovakia, but relatively small numbers benefit from this option due to capacity limitations. In Iraq, Lebanon, and Kenya, security concerns have hampered our ability to process applicants. In Chad, Ethiopia, and other countries, applicants are in extremely remote locations, and are hard and expensive to reach. We are constantly reviewing our operations to find efficient and creative ways to access larger numbers of vulnerable individuals in these locations for resettlement.

As we prepare to bring growing numbers of Congolese and Syrian refugees to the United States, we are simultaneously wrapping up longstanding resettlement programs for Burmese in Thailand and Bhutanese in Nepal. In 2014 we continued to process the cases of the more than 5,000 Burmese in Thailand who submitted expressions of interest in resettlement in 2013. The last several thousand eligible Burmese will arrive in the United States in 2015. In Nepal, we worked with UNHCR to issue a last call for expressions of interest among Priority Two (P-2) eligible Bhutanese. Approximately 3,000 individuals registered their interest by the June 30 deadline and we will move these cases to completion while reducing our operations in Nepal.

Benefits and services for refugees include the Reception and Placement grant provided by the State Department, time-limited assistance programs (up to eight months from arrival) and social service programs (up to five years) funded by the Office of Refugee Resettlement at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS/ORR). These programs help refugees find employment and become economically self-sufficient. They also encourage social integration. The State Department and HHS/ORR continue to work closely with receiving communities to give stakeholders the tools and information they need so that new arrivals can best benefit from the programs and services that are available to them. Over the past year we have consulted with groups in Arizona, Colorado, Illinois, Maine, New York, Texas, Utah, and Wisconsin. ORR established regional offices in order to increase engagement and consultation with resettlement stakeholders. The Administration will continue to explore ways of sustaining a strong federal-state-community partnership and ensuring that refugees can integrate successfully.

In FY 2014, to maintain quality reception and placement services for arriving refugees the Department of State continued to guarantee resettlement agencies a minimum level of funding, even during lulls caused when numbers dip, or referrals are delayed so staff and services will be available when needed. The Department expects to continue this funding mechanism in FY 2015.

In 2014, we took additional measures to protect the refugee admissions program against fraud. The Department of State has established new guidelines for its worldwide network of Resettlement Support Centers to improve the way we screen and train staff and interpreters, control access points, manage electronic data, and communicate with applicants. The U.S. government is also working with UNHCR to safeguard refugee referral data by improving registration procedures and enhancing electronic screening of registration data to detect identity fraud.

In late 2012, the United States reinstated the Priority Three (P-3) family reunification program for spouses, unmarried children under 21, and parents of persons lawfully admitted to the United States as refugees or asylees. It had been suspended for four years after DNA testing uncovered widespread fraud. Since 2012, we have received more than 2,000 P-3 applications for refugees in 50 countries. We are processing them according to more stringent procedures, including DNA testing to verify parent-child relationships. In some countries relatives must register with UNHCR and/or the host government to obtain permission to exit for third country resettlement. Last year we encountered challenges in a number of processing locations where they did not meet this requirement. Accordingly, we have recently tightened the rules for individuals accepted for P-3 consideration, and in most locations will accept applications only for those who meet all relevant local registration requirements.

For several years the U.S. government has provided targeted financial support to UNHCR. One goal is to expand the resettlement capacity and infrastructure it can make available to all countries running resettlement programs. In the Great Lakes region of Africa in particular we have enabled UNHCR to hire more staff. They in turn have been able to refer more refugees to more countries. We have also funded two new interview facilities that all countries can use to screen refugees from the region. The U.S. chairs the Congolese Core Group, made up of countries that have agreed to resettle Congolese refugees and plays an active role in other core groups tasked with resettling additional high priority populations.

That’s why I’m proud that the United States is the largest donor to humanitarian relief worldwide. Our humanitarian assistance has saved lives and eased suffering for 4.7 million people inside Syria and more than 2.8 million refugees in neighboring countries. We have also recently announced nearly $300 million in additional humanitarian assistance to help the people affected by the conflict in South Sudan. Beyond just dollars and programs, our efforts are assisting millions who have fled conflict and persecution in the Central African Republic, Burma, Afghanistan, and many other places around the world.”

When I visited the UN’s Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan last year, I saw firsthand the value and importance of our work. Hundreds of thousands of Syrians – many women and children – live there in suspended animation, waiting for the opportunity to rebuild their lives. I met with some of the camp’s many residents. Their needs were simple: food, shelter, stability. But most of all, they want to live their lives with the dignity and respect that all people deserve.

“The dreams refugees harbor have special meaning for Americans. Even before our land was a nation, America was a haven for those seeking freedom from persecution, hunger, oppression, and war. Today, refugees continue to look to America for relief and opportunity. These refugees, many of whom arrive having lost everything, become some of the most resilient, entrepreneurial, and devoted citizens we have.

Our efforts to convince more nations to resettle refugees continue to pay dividends. In recent years, countries without a history of resettling refugees have stepped forward and established programs. The list includes Switzerland, which has announced a regular resettlement program, and Japan, which has announced that its pilot program will become permanent next year. In 2013, a total of 27 countries resettled refugees identified and referred by UNHCR. At least 23 countries have agreed to accept Syrian refugees referred by UNHCR, including a number of countries without regular resettlement programs. They will admit Syrians through a humanitarian admissions program.

The number of unaccompanied children crossing the southwest border has risen exponentially. The Administration is taking a whole of government approach that addresses underlying causes of migration relating to economic prosperity, governance, and security. One element in our comprehensive strategy to reduce unlawful and dangerous migration to the United States is the planned establishment of in-country refugee programs for minors in Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala. The program would be open to certain qualifying lawfully present relatives in the United States to file for unmarried children under 21 who are still residing in their home country and who are eligible to be admitted to the United States as refugees.

The refugee crisis caused by the conflict in Syria is the worst the world has witnessed in a generation with more than 2.9 million refugees in the region. More than 9 million people need assistance including 6.5 million displaced inside Syria. The U.S. government is deeply committed to assisting the Syrian people and has provided more than $2 billion in humanitarian assistance since the start of the crisis, more than any other donor. While the vast majority of Syrians would prefer to return home when the conflict ends, we recognize that some remain extremely vulnerable in their country of asylum and would benefit from resettlement. UNHCR has announced that it aims to refer 30,000 Syrian refugees to all resettlement countries by the end of calendar year 2014. Those numbers will likely rise in 2015 and 2016. The United States has received more than 2,500 referrals as of August 2014 and expects thousands more in the remainder of the year. We will begin to welcome those Syrians who are approved for U.S. resettlement to communities across the country in larger numbers in 2015.

The ordeals refugees survive and the aspirations they hold resonate with us as Americans. This country was built by people who fled oppression and war, leapt at opportunity, and worked day and night to remake themselves in this new land. The refugees who arrive in the United States today continue this tradition, bringing fresh dreams and energy and renewing the qualities that help forge our national identity and make our country strong.”

Our commitment does not end overseas. Some refugees simply cannot return home because the risk of violence and persecution is too great. The U.S. admits more refugees for permanent resettlement than any other nation. Last year nearly 70,000 came to the United States and we expect to bring in the same number this year.

The United States provides more humanitarian assistance to refugees than any other nation. In the last year alone, the generosity of the American people, and the dedication of those who deliver food, medicine, shelter, and other emergency assistance, have helped to save hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions of lives.

The forces that shatter communities and uproot their residents are difficult to tame. This year we mark a grim milestone. Over 51 million people are now refugees, asylum seekers, or internally displaced persons, according to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. That is more than at any time since World War II.

“Today I join people around the world in commemorating World Refugee Day. It is an opportunity to honor the resilience of those who flee violence and persecution and the dedication of those who help them.

As the world’s leading resettlement country and chair of the Congolese Refugee Core Group, the United States will admit more than 3,000 Congolese refugees in FY 2014. In the coming years that number will rise steadily. We continue to work closely with UNHCR to help it resettle at least 50,000 Congolese worldwide over the next 4-5 years. Most of these refugees are in camps in Uganda, Tanzania, Rwanda, and Burundi, and come originally from the Kivus or Katanga in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Domestically, we are chairing a Congolese working group, made up of representatives from state governments, nongovernmental organizations, and international organizations who assist with resettlement. Our goal is to better equip Congolese refugees to be resettled in the U.S., to identify additional resources and to help U.S. communities prepare to accept larger numbers of Congolese.

Refugee arrivals in FY 2014 will again come close to reaching the President’s authorized ceiling of 70,000. Close interagency coordination on security checks helped to make this possible because it allowed us to scrutinize and process referrals more carefully and efficiently. We also helped the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) enhance its capacity to refer refugees for resettlement which in turn helped our program reach its ceiling. We had expected 15,000 refugees to arrive from Africa in 2014 but we are now on pace to exceed that. We will also welcome a large number of Iraqi refugees in 2014. Since 2007, we have resettled more than 105,000 Iraqis, despite the challenges of processing refugees in Iraq and some neighboring countries.

Resettlement in a third country is a solution for some of the world’s most vulnerable refugees, those who would face real danger if they tried to remain where they are or return to the countries they escaped. As a matter of principle, the USRAP offers resettlement to refugees regardless of their location, national origin, health status, occupational skills, or level of educational attainment.

On World Refugee Day, June 20, both President Obama and Secretary Kerry re-affirmed our nation’s commitment to helping refugees and our leading role in providing safe haven. This stance reflects our proud heritage as a land welcoming to immigrants. It also reflects a harsh reality. There are currently more refugees, asylum-seekers, and internally displaced persons than at any time since World War II. While starting life anew in the United States may be daunting, it also offers unparalleled hope. It is a chance not only to escape from violence and persecution but to start again. The assistance the American people provide helps newcomers find their footing and feel a part of their new communities. Refugees add to America’s vitality and diversity by making substantial contributions to our economic and cultural life.

This report contains information as required by Section 602(d) of the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-292, October 27, 1998, 112 Stat. 2787) (IRFA) about religious persecution of refugee populations eligible for consideration for admission to the United States. This report meets the reporting requirements of Section 305(b) of the North Korean Human Rights Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-333, October 18, 2004, 118 Stat. 1287) by providing information about specific measures taken to facilitate access to the United States refugee program for individuals who have fled “countries of particular concern” for violations of religious freedoms, identified pursuant to Section 402(b) of the IRFA.

(6) An analysis of the impact of the participation of the United States in the resettlement of such refugees on the foreign policy interests of the United States; and

(2) A description of the number and allocation of the refugees to be admitted and an analysis of conditions within the countries from which they came;

This Proposed Refugee Admissions for Fiscal Year 2015: Report to the Congress is submitted in compliance with Sections 207(d)(1) and (e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). The Act requires that before the start of the fiscal year and, to the extent possible, at least two weeks prior to consultations on refugee admissions, members of the Committees on the Judiciary of the Senate and the House of Representatives be provided with the following information:

I. Overview of U.S. Refugee Policy

At the end of 2013, the estimated refugee population worldwide stood at 16.7 million, with 11.7 million under the mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). The United States actively supports efforts to provide protection, assistance, and durable solutions to these refugees, as these measures fulfill our humanitarian interests and further our foreign policy and national security interests. Under the authority of the Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1962, as amended, the United States contributes to the programs of UNHCR, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and other international and non-governmental organizations that provide protection and assistance to refugees, internally displaced persons (IDPs), victims of conflict, stateless persons, and other vulnerable migrants. These contributions are used to address the legal and physical protection needs of refugees and to furnish basic assistance such as water, sanitation, food, health care, shelter, education, and other services. The United States monitors these programs to ensure the most effective use of resources, maximizing humanitarian impact for the beneficiaries.

The United States and UNHCR recognize that most refugees desire safe, voluntary return to their homeland. During FY 2014, the United States continued to support voluntary repatriation programs around the world. Refugee repatriation operations brought refugees home to Afghanistan, Cote d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), and Sri Lanka. These operations were carried out to protect returning refugees as well as to help them contribute to the stabilization, reconstruction, and development of their home countries.

Where opportunities for return remain elusive, the United States and partners pursue self-sufficiency and temporary, indefinite, or permanent local integration in countries of asylum. The Department of State encourages host governments to protect refugees and allow them to integrate into local communities. The State Department further promotes local integration by funding programs to enhance refugee self-sufficiency and support community-based social services. Groups that may avail themselves of opportunities for local integration include Afghans in India, Angolans in Zambia, Burundians in Tanzania, Eritreans in Sudan, Liberians and Sierra Leoneans in seven countries across West Africa, and Colombians in Ecuador, Costa Rica, Panama and Venezuela.

UNHCR estimates that there are 10 million people worldwide who are not recognized nationals of any state and are, therefore, legally or de facto stateless. Without recognized citizenship in any country, many stateless persons exist in refugee-like situations, unable to claim rights and denied even the most basic protections of law. The United States has supported UNHCR’s efforts to prevent and reduce statelessness, including addressing gaps in citizenship laws, eliminating provisions that discriminate against women, and promoting fair application of those laws. U.S. contributions to UNHCR’s core budget support efforts to prevent and address statelessness in Burma, the Dominican Republic, Cote d’Ivoire, Nepal, Sudan, Turkmenistan, and elsewhere. In addition, the Department of State seeks to use the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP) to demonstrate leadership and encourage other countries to do more to help stateless people and refugees stuck in protracted situations. This approach is reflected in the current resettlement of Rohingya refugees, as well as in past resettlement of Meskhetian Turks.

The United States and UNHCR recognize that resettlement in third countries is a vital tool for providing refugees protection and/or durable solutions in some particularly difficult cases. For some refugees, resettlement is the best, and perhaps the only, alternative. Stateless refugees who arrive in the United States for resettlement not only find a durable solution to their displacement, but are also placed on a path that will afford the opportunity to naturalize and resolve their stateless status.

For more than a decade, the U.S. government has provided financial support to expand and improve UNHCR’s resettlement capacity, principally by providing staff and constructing facilities. As a result, UNHCR has substantially increased referrals to the United States and other resettlement countries. We plan to continue to work with UNHCR and consult with host governments on group referrals. We will continue to assess resettlement needs and allow qualified NGOs to refer refugee applicants to the program.

The United States has also supported UNHCR’s efforts to expand the number of countries active in resettlement. In 2013, UNHCR referred refugees to 27 countries for resettlement consideration. Over 90 percent were referred to the United States, Australia, and Canada. Smaller numbers of referrals were made to Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Uruguay, and the United Kingdom.

While the overall number of refugees referred by UNHCR and the percentage resettled by various countries fluctuate from year to year, the United States aims to ensure at least 50 percent of all refugees referred by UNHCR worldwide are considered for resettlement in the United States, depending on the availability of funds. Some 67 percent of UNHCR-referred refugees who were resettled in 2013, were resettled in the United States (see Table VIII).

The foreign policy and humanitarian interests of the United States are often advanced by addressing refugee issues in first asylum and resettlement countries. In some cases, the United States has been able to use its leadership position in resettlement to promote and secure other durable solutions for refugees, or advance other human rights or foreign policy objectives. The United States is by far the largest single donor to UNHCR, providing over $1.05 billion in FY 2013. During the past few years, U.S. resettlement efforts in Africa, the Middle East, and East Asia have helped energize efforts by UNHCR and other countries to ensure that first asylum is maintained for larger refugee populations or that local integration or third country resettlement are options offered to those in need. In certain locations, the prompt resettlement of politically sensitive cases has helped defuse regional tensions.

During its history, the USRAP has responded to changing circumstances. The end of the Cold War dramatically altered the context in which the USRAP operated. The program shifted its focus away from large groups concentrated in a few locations (primarily refugees from Vietnam, the former Soviet Union, and the former Yugoslavia) and began to admit refugees representing over 50 nationalities per year. Interviews of refugees by American officials from the Department of Homeland Security’s U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) are often conducted in remote locations and are geared toward populations in greatest need of third country resettlement opportunities.

While maintaining the United States’ leadership role in humanitarian protection, an integral part of this mission is to ensure that refugee resettlement opportunities go to those who are eligible for such protection and do not present a risk to the safety and security of our country. Accordingly, the USRAP is committed to deterring and detecting fraud among those seeking to resettle in the United States and continues to employ the most rigorous security measures possible to protect against threats to our national security.

Refugees resettled in the United States enrich our nation. The USRAP is premised on the idea that refugees should become economically self-sufficient as quickly as possible. The Department of State works domestically with agencies participating in the Reception and Placement (R&P) program to ensure that refugees receive services in the first thirty to ninety days after arrival in accordance with established standards. During and after the initial resettlement period, the Office of Refugee Resettlement at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS/ORR) provides leadership, technical assistance, and funding to states, the District of Columbia, and nonprofit organizations to help refugees become self-sufficient and integrated into U.S. society. ORR programs use formula and discretionary grants to provide cash and medical assistance, employment and training programs, and other services to newly arriving and recently arrived refugees. Moreover, upon arrival, refugees are Americans in waiting. Refugees are immediately eligible for lawful employment and after one year, are required to apply for adjustment of status to lawful permanent resident. Five years after admission, a refugee who has been granted lawful permanent resident status is eligible to apply for citizenship.

A number of factors create challenges for resettlement agencies striving to meet the needs of refugees in the program. The refugee population is ever more linguistically diverse, with wide-ranging educational and employment histories. To better prepare refugees for arrival in the United States, the USRAP continues to improve overseas cultural orientation, including thorough curricula review and teacher training. In 2013, we determined via two pilot rounds of English as a Second Language classes for some refugees in Kenya, Thailand, and Nepal that the classes provided basic English competency and promoted continued language learning after arrival in the United States. As a result, we began to fund our Resettlement Support Center for Africa to provide ESL to some Congolese prior to resettlement in the United States. We intend to continue this funding in 2015.



Refugee Admissions Program for FY 2015

PROPOSED CEILINGS

Table I

Refugee Admissions in FY 2013 and FY 2014,

Proposed Refugee Admissions by Region for FY 2015 [2]

Region FY 2013 Actual arrivals FY 2014 Ceiling FY 2014 projected arrivals Proposed FY2015 Ceiling Africa 15,980 15,000 15,800 17,000 East Asia 16,537 14,000 14,500 13,000 Europe and Central Asia 580 1,000 900 1,000 Latin America/Caribbean 4,439 5,000 4,300 4,000 Near East/South Asia 32,389 33,000 34,000 33,000 Regional Subtotal 69,925 68,000 69,500 68,000 Unallocated Reserve 2,000 2,000 Total 69,925 70,000 69,500 70,000

Generally, to be considered a refugee, a person must be outside his or her country of nationality or, if stateless, outside his or her country of last habitual residence. Under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) § 101(a)(42)(B), however, the President may specify circumstances under which individuals who are within their countries of nationality or last habitual residence may be considered a refugee for purposes of admission to the United States. The FY 2015 proposal recommends continuing such in-country processing for specified persons in Iraq, Cuba, Eurasia and the Baltics, and commencing such in-country processing for specified persons in Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala. Persons for whom resettlement is requested by a U.S. ambassador in any location in the world may also be considered, with the understanding that they will only be referred to the USRAP following Department of State consultation with USCIS at the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).

Unallocated Reserve

This proposal includes 2,000 unallocated admissions numbers to be used if needed for additional refugee admissions from any region. The unallocated numbers would only be used following notification to Congress.

ADMISSIONS PROCEDURES

Eligibility Criteria

The Department of State’s Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM) is responsible for coordinating and managing the USRAP. A critical part of this responsibility is determining which individuals or groups from among the millions of refugees worldwide will have access to U.S. resettlement consideration. PRM coordinates within the Department of State, as well as with DHS/USCIS and other agencies, in carrying out this responsibility.

Section 207(a)(3) of the INA states that the USRAP shall allocate admissions among refugees “of special humanitarian concern to the United States in accordance with a determination made by the President after appropriate consultation.” Which individuals are “of special humanitarian concern” to the United States for the purpose of refugee resettlement consideration is determined through the USRAP priority system. There are currently three priorities or categories of cases:

Priority 1 – Individual cases referred to the program by virtue of their circumstances and apparent need for resettlement;

Priority 2 – Groups of cases designated as having access to the program by virtue of their circumstances and apparent need for resettlement;

Priority 3 – Individual cases from designated nationalities granted access for purposes of reunification with anchor family members already in the United States.

(Note: Refugees resettled in the United States may also seek the admission of spouses and unmarried children under 21 who are still abroad by filing a “Following to Join” petition, which obviates the need for a separate refugee claim adjudication. This option is described in more detail in the discussion of Following to Join cases below.)

Access to the program under one of the above-listed processing priorities does not mean an applicant meets the statutory definition of “refugee” or is admissible to the United States under the INA. Applicants who are eligible for access within the established priorities are presented to DHS/USCIS officers for interview. The ultimate determination as to whether an applicant can be admitted as a refugee is made by DHS/USCIS in accordance with criteria set forth in the INA and various security protocols.

Although the access categories to the USRAP are referred to as “processing priorities,” it is important to note that entering the program under a certain priority does not establish precedence in the order in which cases will be processed. Once cases are established as eligible for access under one of the three processing priorities, they all undergo the same processing steps.

Priority 1 – Individual Referrals

Priority 1 (P-1) allows consideration of refugee claims from persons of any nationality [3] , usually with compelling protection needs, for whom resettlement appears to be the appropriate durable solution. Priority 1 cases are identified and referred to the program by UNHCR, a U.S. Embassy, or a designated NGO. UNHCR, which has the international mandate worldwide to provide protection to refugees, has historically referred the vast majority of cases under this priority. Some NGOs providing humanitarian assistance in locations where there are large concentrations of refugees have also undergone training by PRM and DHS/USCIS and have been designated eligible to provide Priority 1 referrals.

Process for Priority 1 Individual Referral Applications

Priority 1 referrals from UNHCR and NGOs are generally submitted to the appropriate Regional Refugee Coordinator, who forwards the referrals to the appropriate Resettlement Support Center (RSC) for case processing and scheduling of the DHS/USCIS interview. PRM’s Office of Admissions reviews embassy referrals for completeness and may consult with DHS in considering these referrals.

A U.S. ambassador may make a Priority 1 referral for persons still in their country of origin if the ambassador determines that such cases are in need of exceptional treatment and the Departments of State (PRM) and Homeland Security (DHS/USCIS) concur. In some cases, a Department of State request to DHS/USCIS for parole may be a more appropriate option.

Priority 2 – Group Referrals

Priority 2 (P-2) includes specific groups (within certain nationalities, clans or ethnic groups, sometimes in specified locations) identified by the Department of State in consultation with DHS/USCIS, NGOs, UNHCR, and other experts as being in need of resettlement. Some Priority 2 groups are processed in their country of origin. The process of identifying the group and its characteristics includes consideration of whether the group is of special humanitarian concern to the United States and whether members of the group will likely be able to qualify for admission as refugees under U.S. law. Groups may be designated as Priority 2 during the course of the year as circumstances dictate, and the need for resettlement arises. PRM plays the coordinating role for all group referrals to the USRAP.

There are two distinct models of Priority 2 access to the program: open access and predefined group access, normally upon the recommendation of UNHCR. Under both models, Priority 2 designations are made based on shared characteristics that define the group. In general, the possession of these characteristics is the reason the group has been persecuted in the past or faces persecution in the future.

The open-access model for Priority 2 group referrals allows individuals to seek access to the program on the basis of meeting designated criteria. To establish an open-access Priority 2 group, PRM, in consultation with DHS/USCIS, and (as appropriate) with UNHCR and others, defines the specific criteria for access. Once the designation is in place, applicants may approach the program at any of the processing locations specified as available for the group to begin the application process. Applicants must demonstrate that they meet specified criteria to establish eligibility for access.

The open-access model has functioned well in the in-country programs, including the long-standing programs in Eurasia and the Baltics, and in Cuba. It was also used successfully for Vietnamese for nearly thirty years (1980-2009), Bosnian refugees during the 1990s, and is now in use for Iranian religious minorities and Iraqis with links to the United States.

The RSCs responsible for handling open-access Priority 2 applications, working under the direction of PRM, make a preliminary determination as to whether the applicants qualify for access and should be presented to DHS/USCIS for interview. Applicants who clearly do not meet the access requirements are “screened out” prior to DHS/USCIS interview.

In contrast to an open-access group, a predefined group designation is normally based on a UNHCR recommendation that lays out eligibility criteria that should apply to individuals in a specific location. Once PRM, in consultation with DHS/USCIS has established the access eligibility criteria for the group, the referring entity (usually UNHCR) provides the bio data of eligible refugee applicants for processing. This type of group referral is advantageous in situations in which the intensive labor required to generate individual referrals would be impracticable, potentially harmful to applicants due to delays, or counterproductive. Often, predefined groups are composed of persons with similar persecution claims. The predefined group referral process saves steps and can conserve scarce resources, particularly for UNHCR. In recent years, predefined groups have included certain Burmese in Thailand, certain Bhutanese in Nepal, and certain Congolese in Rwanda. Predefined group referrals with clear, well-defined eligibility criteria and several methods for cross-checking group membership can serve as a fraud deterrent as well, preventing non-group members from gaining access to the USRAP by falsely claiming group membership. It can also speed the resettlement process in cases where immediate protection concerns are present.

FY 2015 Priority 2 Designations

In-country processing programs

The following ongoing programs that process individuals still in their country of origin under Priority 2 group designations will continue in FY 2015:

Eurasia and the Baltics

This Priority 2 designation applies to Jews, Evangelical Christians, and Ukrainian Catholic and Orthodox religious adherents identified in the Lautenberg Amendment, Public Law No. 101-167, § 599D, 103 Stat. 1261 (1989) (codified at 8 U.S.C. § 1157) as amended (“Lautenberg Amendment”), with close family in the United States. With annual renewal of the Lautenberg Amendment, these individuals are considered under a reduced evidentiary standard for establishing a well-founded fear of persecution.

Cuba

Included in this Priority 2 program are human rights activists, members of persecuted religious minorities, former political prisoners, forced-labor conscripts, and persons deprived of their professional credentials or subjected to other disproportionately harsh or discriminatory treatment resulting from their perceived or actual political or religious beliefs.

Iraqis Associated with the United States

Under various Priority 2 designations, including those set forth in the Refugee Crisis in Iraq Act, employees of the U.S. Government, a U.S. government-funded contractor or grantee, U.S. media or U.S. NGOs working in Iraq, and certain family members of such employees, as well as beneficiaries of approved I-130 (immigrant visa) petitions, are eligible for refugee processing in Iraq.

The following planned program that would process individuals still in their country of origin under a Priority 2 group designation may be launched in FY 2015:

Minors in Honduras, El Salvador, and Guatemala

Under this planned new P-2 program, certain lawfully present qualifying relatives in the United States could request access to a refugee interview for an unmarried child under 21 in his/her country of origin.

Groups of Humanitarian Concern outside the Country of Origin

The following Priority 2 groups are already designated and, in most cases, undergoing processing with significant arrivals anticipated during FY 2014. (Additional Priority 2 groups may be designated over the course of the year.)

Ethnic Minorities and others from Burma in camps in Thailand

Under this existing Priority 2 designation, individuals who have fled Burma, are registered in nine refugee camps along the Thai/Burma border, are identified by UNHCR as in need of resettlement, and expressed interest prior to January 2014 (depending on the location), are eligible for processing.

Ethnic Minorities from Burma in Malaysia

Under this Priority 2 designation, ethnic minorities from Burma who are recognized by UNHCR as refugees in Malaysia and identified as being in need of resettlement are eligible for processing.

Bhutanese in Nepal

Under this existing Priority 2 designation, Bhutanese refugees registered by UNHCR in camps in Nepal, identified as in need of resettlement, and expressed interest prior to June 30, 2014, are eligible for processing.

Iranian Religious Minorities

Under this Priority 2 designation, Iranian members of certain religious minorities are eligible for processing and are considered under a reduced evidentiary standard for establishing a well-founded fear of persecution, pursuant to annual renewal of the Lautenberg Amendment as amended in 2004 by Sec. 213 of Title II, Division E, of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2004, P.L. 108-199, 118 Stat. 3 (“the Specter Amendment”).

Iraqis Associated with the United States

Under various Priority 2 designations, including those set forth in the Refugee Crisis in Iraq Act, employees of the U.S. government, a U.S. government-funded contractor or grantee, U.S. media or U.S. NGOs working in Iraq, and certain family members of such employees, as well as beneficiaries of approved I-130 (immigrant visa) petitions, are eligible for refugee processing. This program is operating in Jordan and Egypt, in addition to the in-country program in Iraq.

Congolese in Rwanda

Under this existing Priority 2 designation, certain Congolese refugees in Rwanda who were verifiably registered in 1997 and identified as in need of resettlement are eligible for processing.

Priority 3 – Family Reunification

The Priority 3 (P-3) category affords USRAP access to members of designated nationalities who have immediate family members in the United States who initially entered as refugees or were granted asylum. At the beginning of each fiscal year, PRM, in consultation with DHS/USCIS, establishes the list of nationalities eligible for processing under this priority. The PRM Assistant Secretary may modify the list during the year, in consultation with DHS/USCIS, but additions or deletions are generally made to coincide with the fiscal year.

Inclusion on the P-3 list represents a finding by PRM that the nationality is of special humanitarian concern to the United States for the purpose of family-reunification refugee processing. Eligible nationalities are selected following careful review of several factors. UNHCR’s annual assessment of refugees in need of resettlement, provides insight into ongoing refugee situations, which could create the need for family-reunification processing. In addition, prospective or ongoing repatriation efforts and U.S. foreign policy interests must be weighed in determining which nationalities should be eligible.

The P-3 program has undergone significant changes in recent years. In order to qualify for access under the P-3 program, an applicant must be outside of his or her country of origin, be registered or have legal status in the country of asylum (with some exceptions), have had an Affidavit of Relationship (AOR) filed on his or her behalf by an eligible “anchor” relative in the United States during a period in which the nationality was included on the eligibility list, and have been cleared for onward processing by the DHS/USCIS Refugee Access Verification Unit (RAVU).

Since the P-3 program resumed in October 15, 2012, after a suspension period due to fraud concerns, the AOR has been an official Department of State form (DS-7656). The form contains new language about penalties for committing fraud, and alerts filers that DNA evidence of certain claimed biological parent-child relationships will be required in order to gain access to a USCIS interview for refugee admission to the United States through the P-3 program. As of June 30, we have received more than 2,000 AORs that are in various stages of processing. We anticipate that P-3 arrivals to the United States will begin in FY2015.

The following family members of the U.S.-based anchor are qualified for P-3 access: spouses, unmarried children under 21, and/or parents. Qualifying anchors are persons who were admitted to the United States as refugees or were granted asylum, including persons who are lawful permanent residents or U.S. citizens who initially were admitted to the United States as refugees or were granted asylum. The anchor relative must be at least 18 years of age at the time the AOR is filed and must file the AOR within 5 years of the date the anchor entered the U.S. as a refugee or was granted asylum.

In addition to the qualifying family members of a U.S.-based anchor listed above, the qualifying family member’s spouse and unmarried children under 21 may derive refugee status from the principal applicant for refugee status. On a case-by-case basis, an individual may be added to a qualifying family member’s P-3 case if that individual:

1) lived in the same household as the qualifying family member in the country of nationality or, if stateless, last habitual residence; AND

2) was part of the same economic unit as the qualifying family member in the country of nationality or, if stateless, last habitual residence; AND

3) demonstrates exceptional and compelling humanitarian circumstances that justify inclusion on the qualifying family member’s case.

These individuals “are not “spouses” or “children”, under INA 207(c)(2)(A)” and thus cannot derive their refugee status from the Principal Applicant. They must, therefore, independently establish that they qualify as a refugee.

FY 2015 Priority 3 Nationalities

P-3 processing is available to individuals of the following nationalities:

Afghanistan

Bhutan

Burma

Burundi

Central African Republic

Colombia

Cuba

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK)

Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)

El Salvador

Eritrea

Ethiopia

Guatemala

Haiti

Honduras

Iran

Iraq

Mali

Somalia

South Sudan

Sri Lanka

Sudan

Syria

Uzbekistan

Following-to-Join Family Reunification Petitions

Under 8 CFR Section 207.7, a principal refugee admitted to the United States may request following-to-join benefits for his or her spouse and/or unmarried children under the age of 21 who were not previously granted refugee status. Once in the United States, and within two years of admission, the refugee may file a Form I-730 Refugee/Asylee Relative Petition [4] with DHS/USCIS for each eligible family member. If the Form I-730 petition is approved by DHS/USCIS (signifying adequate proof of eligibility based on a file review), the National Visa Center then forwards the petition to the embassy or consulate nearest to the location of the beneficiary for travel eligibility.

Cases gaining access to the USRAP through an approved I-730 petition are interviewed by DHS/USCIS or consular officers to verify the relationships claimed in the petition, as well as to examine any applicable bars to status and admissibility to the United States. The beneficiaries are not required to demonstrate persecution claims, as they derive their status from the refugee relative in the United States who filed the petition. Beneficiaries of I-730 petitions may be processed within their country of origin or in other locations.

Anchor relatives in the United States may file an I-730 Refugee/Asylee Relative Petition and seek Priority 3 access (if eligible) simultaneously. In some cases, the I-730 petition will be the only option as the family members are still in their country of origin. It is also important to note that the I-730 or “follow-to-join” process does not allow the relative in the United States to petition for parents as the P-3 process does.

DHS/USCIS REFUGEE ADJUDICATIONS

Section 207(c) of the INA grants the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security authority to admit, at his/her discretion, any refugee who is not firmly resettled in a third country, who is determined to be of special humanitarian concern, and who is admissible to the United States. The authority to determine eligibility for refugee status has been delegated to USCIS. Beginning in FY 2006, DHS/USCIS restructured the Refugee Affairs Division and established the Refugee Corps, a specially trained cadre of officers dedicated to adjudicating applications for refugee status. The Refugee Corps provides DHS/USCIS with the necessary resources and flexibility to respond to an increasingly diversified refugee admissions program. Each quarter of the fiscal year, on average, USCIS deploys approximately 100 Refugee Officers, Supervisory Refugee Officers, and fingerprinters to 12-16 locations around the world to interview refugee applicants. DHS/USCIS has also substantially enhanced its security vetting, anti-fraud, and training capacity related to refugee processing.

The Eligibility Determination

In order to be approved as a refugee, an applicant must meet the refugee definition contained in § 101(a)(42) of the INA. That section provides that a refugee is a person who is outside his or her country of nationality or last habitual residence and is unable or unwilling to return to that country because of persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. As mentioned above, the President may specify special circumstances under which a person can meet the refugee definition when he or she is still within the country of origin. The definition excludes a person who has ordered, incited, assisted, or otherwise participated in persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. Further, an applicant who has been “firmly resettled” in a third country may not be admitted as a refugee under INA Section207. Applicants are also subject to various statutory grounds of inadmissibility, including criminal, security, and public health grounds, some of which may be waived or from which applicants may be exempted.

The grounds of inadmissibility that apply to refugee applicants include the broad terrorism-related inadmissibility grounds (TRIG) at Section 212(a)(3)(B) of the INA. Beginning in 2005, the Departments of Homeland Security, State, and Justice began to exercise a discretionary Secretarial authority to exempt certain categories of refugee applicants from TRIG inadmissibility based on a determination that they did not represent a threat to the United States and otherwise merited an exemption for humanitarian purposes. As of June 2014, more than 12,700 TRIG exemptions have been granted to refugee applicants. [5] .

A DHS/USCIS officer conducts a non-adversarial, face-to-face interview of each refugee applicant designed to elicit information about the applicant’s claim for refugee status and any grounds of ineligibility. The officer asks questions about the applicant’s experiences in the country of origin, including problems and fears about returning (or remaining), as well as questions concerning the applicant’s activities, background, and criminal history. The officer also considers evidence about conditions in the country of origin and assesses the applicant’s credibility and claim.

Background Checks

Refugee applicants of all nationalities are required to undergo background security checks. Security checks include biographic name checks for all refugee applicants and biometric (fingerprint) checks for refugee applicants aged 14 to 79. PRM, through its overseas Resettlement Support Centers, initiates required biographic name checks, while USCIS is responsible for collecting biometric data for screening. Biographic and biometric information is vetted against a broad array of law enforcement, intelligence community, and other relevant databases to help confirm identity, to check for any criminal or other derogatory information (including watchlist information), and to identify information that could inform lines of questioning during the interview. Refugee applicants must clear all required security checks prior to final approval of their application.

In late 2010, the USRAP implemented an enhanced security check requirement for all refugee applicants. While implementing the enhanced check was critical to strengthening the integrity of the program, refugee admissions were disrupted in FY 2011 and FY 2012. Interagency coordination and processing procedures were improved, however, resulting in increased refugee admissions levels beginning in May 2012. Admissions levels continued at these higher levels in FY 2013 and reached 99.9% of the ceiling set by Presidential Determination.

PROCESSING ACTIVITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Overseas Processing Services

In most processing locations, PRM engages an NGO, an international organization (IO), or U.S. embassy contractors to manage a Resettlement Support Center (RSC) that assists in the processing of refugees for admission to the United States. RSC staff pre-screen applicants to determine preliminarily if they qualify for one of the applicable processing priorities and to prepare cases for DHS/USCIS adjudication. The RSCs assist applicants in completing documentary requirements and schedule DHS/USCIS refugee eligibility interviews. If an applicant is conditionally approved for resettlement, RSC staff guide the refugee through post-adjudication steps, including obtaining medical screening exams and attending cultural orientation programs. The RSC obtains sponsorship assurances and, once all required steps are completed, refers the case to IOM for transportation to the United States.

In FY 2014, NGOs (Church World Service, Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, and International Rescue Committee) worked under cooperative agreements with PRM as RSCs at locations in Austria (covering Austria only), Kenya (covering sub-Saharan Africa), and Thailand (covering East Asia). International organizations and NGOs (IOM and the International Catholic Migration Commission) support refugee processing activities based in Ecuador, Jordan, Russia, Nepal, and Turkey covering Latin America, the Middle East, South and Central Asia, and Europe. The U.S. Department of State supports refugee processing in Havana, Cuba.

Cultural Orientation

The Department of State strives to ensure that refugees who are accepted for admission to the United States are prepared for the profound life changes they will experience by providing cultural orientation programs prior to departure for the United States. It is critical that refugees arrive with a realistic idea of what their new lives will be like, what services will be available to them, and what their responsibilities will be.

Every refugee family receives Welcome to the United States, a resettlement guidebook developed with contributions from refugee resettlement workers, resettled refugees, and government officials. The 2012 edition is available in eight languages: Arabic, Burmese, Chin, English, Karen, Kinyarwanda, Nepali, and Somali. The previous (2007) edition is still available in 16 languages: Albanian, Amharic, Arabic, Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian, English, Farsi, French, Karen, Kirundi, Nepali, Russian, Somali, Spanish, Swahili, Tigrinya, and Vietnamese. Through this book, refugees have access to accurate information about the initial resettlement period before they arrive. The Welcome to the United States refugee orientation video was also revised in 2012 and is available in eight languages: Arabic, Burmese, Chin, English, Karen, Kinyarwanda, Nepali, and Somali. The 2004 version of the video is available in 13 languages: Arabic, English, Farsi, Hmong, Karen, Karenni, Kirundi, Nepali, Russian, Somali, Spanish, Swahili, and Tigrinya.

In addition, the Department of State funds one- to five-day pre-departure orientation classes for eligible refugees at sites throughout the world. In an effort to further bridge the information gap for certain groups, brief video presentations featuring the experience of recently resettled refugees of the same ethnic group are made available to refugee applicants overseas. Groups featured include refugees from Bhutan, Burma, Cuba, Darfur, and Iraq. Faces of Resettlement, a video produced in 2013, shows five individuals who entered the United States as refugees, from Bhutan, Burma, Burundi, Iraq, and Sudan. Each of them tells their own story of the ways in which they are rebuilding their lives in their new communities. Faces of Resettlement also includes interviews with receiving community members.

Transportation

The Department of State funds the international transportation of refugees resettled in the United States through a program administered by IOM. The cost of transportation is provided to refugees in the form of a loan. Refugees are responsible for repaying these loans over time, beginning six months after their arrival, although it is possible to request a deferral based on inability to begin paying at six months.

Reception and Placement (R&P)

In FY 2014, PRM funded cooperative agreements with nine private resettlement agencies to provide initial resettlement services to refugees arriving in the United States. The R&P agencies are responsible for providing initial reception and core services (including housing, furnishings, clothing and food, as well as assistance with access to medical, employment, educational, and social services) to arriving refugees. These services are provided according to standards of care within a framework of outcomes and indicators developed jointly by the NGO community, state refugee coordinators, and U.S. government agencies. The nine organizations maintain a nationwide network of some 350 affiliated offices in 185 cities to provide services. Two of the organizations also maintain a network of 24 affiliated offices through which unaccompanied refugee minors are placed into foster care, a program administered and funded by HHS/ORR.

Using R&P funds from PRM supplemented by cash and in-kind contributions from private and other sources, the participating agencies provide the following services, consistent with the terms of the R&P cooperative agreement:

Sponsorship;

Pre-arrival resettlement planning, including placement;

Reception on arrival;

Basic needs support (including housing, furnishings, food, and clothing) for at least 30 days;

Cultural orientation;

Assistance with access to health, employment, education, and other services as needed; and

Development and implementation of an initial resettlement plan for each refugee.

Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR)

Through the Refugee Act, Congress directed HHS/ORR to provide refugees with resettlement assistance that includes employment training, English language training, cash assistance (in a manner that promotes early independence), and job placement – including providing women with equal opportunities to employment as men. . ORR’s mission is to help refugees transition into the U.S. by providing benefits and assistance that assist them to achieve self-sufficiency and become integrated members of society as soon as possible. To this end, ORR funds and administers various programs, some of which are highlighted below.

State-Administered and Wilson-Fish Programs

Under ORR’s state-administered or Wilson-Fish (WF) programs, refugees not eligible for Temporary Assistance for Needy Familes (TANF) or Supplemental Security Income (SSI) are eligible to receive up to eight months of Refugee Cash Assistance (RCA). Refugees not eligible for Medicaid are eligible to receive up to eight months of Refugee Medical Assistance (RMA) upon arrival. In state-administered programs that operate a publicly administered RCA program (33 States), RCA benefits are based oncash benefit levels established by state TANF programs. In States that operate their RCA program through a Public-Private Program (PPP) model (5 States) and WF States (12 States plus one county), the RCA benefit is based on the higher of the RCA rates outlined in the ORR regulations or the State TANF rates.

The WF program is an alternative to the traditional state-administered program, and is usually administered by local voluntary resettlement agencies. The WF program emphasizes early employment and economic self-sufficiency by integrating cash assistance, case management, and employment services, and by incorporating innovative strategies for the provision of cash assistance (e.g. financial bonuses for early employment). WF programs also serve as a replacement for the State when the State government withdraws from all or part of the ORR- funded refugee assistance program. There are currently 13 WF programs nationwide.

ORR also provides states/WF programs with Formula Refugee Social Services (RSS) and Targeted Assistance (TAG) funds. ORR distributes these funds based on arrival numbers and refugee concentration levels in counties with a high utilization of public assistance. Funding is time limited, and refugees can only access RSS and TAG services up to five years after arrival. These services include: employability services, employment assessment services, on-the-job training, English language instruction, vocational training, case management, translation/interpreter services, social adjustment services, health-related services, home management, and if necessary for employment, day care and transportation.

Additionally, to assist specific groups of refugees, ORR administers the following specialized programs through states/WF programs, including Cuban-Haitian, Older Refugees, Preventive Health, Refugee School Impact, and Targeted Assistance.

ORR Matching Grant Program

The ORR Matching Grant program (MG) is provided through the nine national resettlement agencies that provide R & P services and their resettlement affiliates in 42 states. The objective of MG is to guide newly-arrived refugee households toward economic self-sufficiency through employment within four to six months of program eligibility (usually within the first month of arrival). In MG, self-sufficiency is defined as total household income from employment that enables a family unit to support itself without receipt of public cash assistance. ORR awards $2,200 on a per capita basis to each national resettlement agency, which then allocates funds to its local service providers based on projected enrollments. Agencies provide a 50% match to every federal dollar.

Through the ORR Matching Grant Program, local service providers ensure core maintenance services for a minimum of 120 days which include housing, transportation, food, and a cash allowance. Clients also receive intensive case management and employment services. Refugees who are unable to attain self-sufficiency by day 120 or 180, may access RCA for the remainder of the eight month eligibility period. In FY 13, over 29,000 individuals were enrolled in the program, 69% of whom achieved self-sufficiency. Approximately 33% of refugees participate in the ORR Matching Grant Program.

ORR Refugee Health

ORR recently created a Division of Refugee Health (DRH) to address the health and well-being of refugees. DRH is working on various initiatives including: collaborating with partners in the implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), including the expansion of Medicaid and implementation of the state/federal Health Insurance Marketplaces; administering the Survivors of Torture program; providing technical assistance on medical screening guidelines, mental health awareness and linkages, suicide prevention, emergency preparedness and other health and mental health initiatives (e.g. vision care, autism, etc.).

ORR Unaccompanied Refugee Minor (URM) Program

ORR provides funds to 15 states who administer over 20 URM programs. States contract with local licensed foster care agencies that provide specialized placements and services to URMs. URMs live in various placements including: traditional and therapeutic foster homes, group homes, semi-independent and independent living and residential treatment centers, and homes of relatives. URMs receive various services including: English language training, educational and vocational training, cultural preservation, social integration, family tracing, permanency planning, independent living, and health/mental health care. ORR regulations require states to provide services to URM in parity with the state’s Title IV-B foster care plan.

Other ORR Discretionary Refugee Service Programs

ORR also provides funding to non-profit agencies to focus on special initiatives or programs for refugees including: case management, ethnic community development, home-based child care business development, individual development accounts, microenterprise development, and agricultural projects.

ORR Technical Assistance

ORR provides technical assistance (TA) to resettlement stakeholders through various organizations that have expertise in certain fields. Currently ORR’s TA providers assist stakeholders in the areas of community engagement/integration, employment, health, survivors of torture, and TANFstate programs.

Regional Programs

Table II

Proposed FY 2015 Regional Ceilings by Priority

Africa Priority 1 Individual Referrals 14,000 Priority 2 Groups 2,500 Priority 3 Family Reunification Refugees 500 Total Proposed: 17,000 East Asia Priority 1 Individual Referrals 1,800 Priority 2 Groups 11,000 Priority 3 Family Reunification Refugees 200 Total Proposed: 13,000 Europe / Central Asia Priority 1 Individual Referrals Priority 2 Groups 1,000 Priority 3 Family Reunification Refugees Total Proposed: 1,000 Latin America / Caribbean Priority 1 Individual Referrals 700 Priority 2 Groups 3,250 Priority 3 Family Reunification Refugees 50 Total Proposed: 4,000 Near East / South Asia Priority 1 Individual Referrals 18,450 Priority 2 Groups 14,500 Priority 3 Family Reunification Refugees 50 Total Proposed: 33,000 Unallocated Reserve 2,000 TOTAL PROPOSED CEILING: 70,000

AFRICA

There are currently some 3.6 million refugees across the African continent, constituting roughly 20 percent of the global refugee population. UN-organized repatriations were still underway in 2014 for refugees able to return to safe areas in northwestern Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and Côte d’Ivoire. Organized repatriations to Angola, Burundi, Liberia, and Rwanda have largely been completed, but residual populations remain. UNHCR recommended cessation of prima facie refugee status for refugees from Angola and Liberia effective June 30, 2012, and for pre-1999 caseload Rwandan refugees effective June 30, 2013. Efforts continue to repatriate those who still wish to return and to locally integrate residual populations where asylum countries agree to provide permanent residence or citizenship.

While there has been significant voluntary repatriation among African refugee populations over the past decade, intensified conflict in the Central African Republic, South Sudan, and Nigeria since December 2013 has resulted in some 500,000 new refugees in 2014 to date. In the Central African Republic, violence perpetrated by the predominantly Muslim ex-Séléka forces and the predominantly Christian anti-Balaka militia, together with earlier conflict, has now displaced over 600,000 Central Africans internally and forced nearly 350,000 to flee to neighboring Cameroon, Chad, the DRC, and Republic of the Congo. In South Sudan, conflict erupted in December 2013 between political factions and quickly escalated into a major conflict along ethnic lines. Over 900,000 South Sudanese have been internally displaced and refugee numbers have now reached over 430,000. In Nigeria, terrorist attacks by Boko Haram rebels and reprisals by government forces have displaced an estimated 500,000 in northern Nigeria. Nearly 60,000 people have been uprooted in Nigeria, including more than 15,000 refugees to neighboring Niger and Cameroon.

Ongoing conflict in the DRC, Sudan, and Somalia has also continued to generate new refugee outflows over the past year. Intensified conflict in eastern DRC since mid-2012 has led an additional 170,000 Congolese to seek asylum in Uganda, Rwanda, and Burundi. Additionally, the persistent threat of attack posed by the Lord’s Resistance Army (LRA) in northeastern DRC as well as southeastern CAR continues to cause instability in the region, preventing the return of some 40,000 refugees and 400,000 IDPs displaced by the LRA since 2008. In Sudan, renewed fighting between the Sudanese government and Darfur rebels resulted in more than 40,000 new Darfuri refugees fleeing to Chad, bringing the total number to more than 350,000. At the same time, the ongoing Sudanese conflict with rebel groups in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states has forced some 253,000 Sudanese refugees to flee to South Sudan, Ethiopia, and Kenya since June 2011. In Somalia, still the largest refugee generating country in Africa with 1 million refugees, small scale conflict and food insecurity continues to generate new refugees from some areas while improved conditions in other parts of the country has led to some spontaneous refugee returns. Some 26,000 Somalis fled to neighboring countries in 2013, while over 34,000 refugees returned to Somalia in the same year, though most on a temporary basis. The steady outflow of Eritreans also continues, not only to refugee camps in Ethiopia and eastern Sudan, but also further north as Eritreans attempt to migrate to Europe and Israel. More than 300,000 Eritreans have fled political repression, forced conscription, and economic collapse over the past decade.

Africa has also not been immune to conflicts in the neighboring Near East region. North Africa has long hosted large numbers of Palestinian refugees. The ongoing crisis in Syria has added more than 150,000 new refugees to the region including 136,000 in Egypt and 17,000 in Libya. No progress was made over the past year in seeking a resolution to the Western Saharan conflict that would enable an estimated 90,000 Sahrawi refugees in Algeria to return home.

Most African countries honor the principle of first asylum and most have allowed refugees to remain – and in many cases to effectively economically and/or socially integrate – until voluntary repatriation is possible. Some countries, such as Egypt, have forcibly returned refugees over the past year. For countries growing weary of hosting large refugee caseloads, we continue to advocate for hospitality and first asylum for refugees. And, for those countries that lack formal mechanisms for asylum, we continue to advocate for the establishment of systems in consultation with UNHCR. Morocco in particular has made progress in this regard.

While most African countries adhere to encampment policies for refugees, many have allowed for de facto integration by providing land for refugee farmers or permitting refugees to open small businesses. Some African countries have gone a step further in agreeing to legal local integration of refugees, including the granting of legal permanent residence, the right to work, or voting rights. Several West African countries, including Côte d’Ivoire, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone have initiated programs legalizing the status of long-staying former Liberian and Sierra Leonean refugee populations interested in remaining in asylum countries. Likewise, Zambia and Namibia have offered permanent residence status to more than 10,000 former Angolan refugees. Tanzania, in 2008, announced a plan to grant citizenship to Burundi refugees who fled their country in 1972. Some 165,000 accepted the offer of “naturalization,” but most still lack official documentation of their new citizenship.

Religious Freedom

In Sub-Saharan Africa, people are generally free to practice their chosen religions. Governments regularly provide for and respect freedom of religion, although in some countries, such as Eritrea and Sudan, religious freedom is limited, particularly in the midst of ethnic and other conflicts.

The Government of Eritrea is responsible for severe religious freedom abuses in Africa. In recent years the country has engaged in serious religious repression by harassing, arresting, and detaining members of independent evangelical groups, including Pentecostals and Jehovah’s Witnesses (who lost certain rights of citizenship for not participating in the 1993 national referendum). Detainees are held in harsh conditions and some have died in custody. The government has also sought greater control over the four State-approved religious groups: the Eritrean Orthodox Church, the Roman Catholic Church, the Evangelical (Lutheran) Church, and the Islamic community. The government reportedly holds individuals who are jailed for their religious affiliation at various locations. Often detainees are not formally charged, accorded due process, or allowed access to their families. While many are ostensibly jailed for evasion of military conscription, significant numbers were being held solely for their religious beliefs; the current estimate is between 1,200-3,000 individuals detained on religious grounds. At least three Jehovah's Witnesses had been detained for 15 years, reportedly for evading compulsory military service, a term far beyond the maximum legal penalty of two years for refusing to perform national service.

In Sudan, the government continues to place restrictions on Christians in a manner that is inconsistent with its obligation to uphold freedom of religion. Although there is no penalty for converting from another religion to Islam, converting from Islam is punishable by death, as was demonstrated in the recent apostasy case of Ms. Meriam Ishag who was sentenced to death though the sentenced was not enforced and she was subsequently released. Authorities express their strong prejudice against conversion by occasionally subjecting converts to intense scrutiny, ostracism, and intimidation, or by encouraging converts to leave the country.

Both Eritrea and Sudan are currently designated as “Countries of Particular Concern” (CPC) for particularly severe violations of religious freedom by the Department of State under the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998. The USRAP continues to be available through Priority 1 referrals to Sudanese, Eritrean, and other refugees who are victims of religious intolerance. Refugees from Eritrea and Sudan with certain refugee or asylee family members in the United States will have access to the USRAP through Priority 3.

In Somalia the provisional federal constitution provides for freedom of religion, although it enshrines Islam as the state religion and prohibits proselytism for any religion other than Islam. Since its inception in July 2012, the Federal Government of Somalia has made incremental progress to establish institutions and expanding its authority, but its capacity to enforce the provisional constitution remains extremely limited, particularly outside of Mogadishu. There have been reports that non-Muslim individuals experience discrimination, violence, and detention because of their religious beliefs. Refugees from Somalia with certain refugee or asylee family members in the United States also have access to the USRAP through Priority 3.

Voluntary Repatriation

Despite new and protracted refugee situations, voluntary repatriation to improved conditions in the home country remains the most common and desirable durable solution. With the conclusion of various peace agreements and the support of the U.S. government and other donors, UNHCR has made great progress in promoting and supporting refugee repatriation and reintegration in Africa. Over the past 20 years, net refugee numbers in Africa have fallen by nearly half (from more than six million at their height in the 1990s to 3.6 million today) even in the face of new outflows.

In West Africa, out of an estimated 300,000 who fled the 2010-2011 election-related violence in Côte d’Ivoire, over 230,000 have now returned home. UNHCR anticipates assisting with the return of an additional 20,000 Ivoirian refugees in 2014. The final round of UNHCR’s Liberian repatriation program was completed at the end of December 2012, with more than 155,000 Liberians benefiting from assisted returns since 2004; in all, more than 700,000 Liberians have returned home either spontaneously or with UNHCR assistance. In Mali, while UNHCR is not yet promoting refugee return to northern Mali, refugees are beginning to return spontaneously to safe regions now under government control. Neighboring states still host some 190,000 Malian refugees, but an estimated 22,500 had returned home by April 2014.

In East Africa, the repatriation to South Sudan that started in 2005 was largely concluded in 2011 with the return of more than 370,000 refugees. However, due to growing instability in South Sudan in 2012 and 2013 and the current widespread conflict, all repatriation has stopped and the focus has instead shifted to emergency response to the 300,000 new refugees. No UNHCR-organized repatriation initiatives are currently anticipated for the Darfur region of Sudan or Somalia, where insecurity continues to prevent safe and dignified return. UNHCR, the Government of Kenya, and the Government of Somalia signed a Somali refugee repatriation framework in 2013 and are engaged in coordination and regional plans for refugee returns when conditions are appropriate in Somalia, but UNHCR does not deem it safe to encourage return to Somalia at this point. Despite the efforts of some asylum countries, including Israel, to repatriate Eritrean refugees, UNHCR has strongly discouraged returns to Eritrea given ongoing political repression and harsh treatment of returnees.

In Central Africa, most organized repatriation to Burundi ended in 2010 and there have been over 500,000 returns since 2002, including over 53,000 of the 1972-caseload refugees who chose not to accept the Government of Tanzania’s offer of naturalization. Repatriation of the last of the 1993-era Burundi refugees in Tanzania was completed with the closure of Mtabila Camp in December 2012. Although the majority of Rwandan refugees returned home in the late 1990’s, some 50,000-100,000 remain in exile. With the cessation of prima facie refugee status for pre-1999 Rwandan refugees on June 30, 2013, remaining Rwandans may be required either to repatriate or to seek other means of remaining in asylum countries. Repatriation to relatively stable areas of eastern DRC wound down in 2011 with the conclusion of returns from Zambia and Tanzania to Katanga Province, but renewed hostilities between the GDRC and the M23 rebel group—and increased activity of other armed groups across eastern DRC-- erased most of these gains and North and South Kivu provinces and Katanga remain mostly too insecure for large-scale refugee return. Ethnic violence that erupted in late 2009 in Equateur Province forced some 140,000 Congolese to flee to the Central African Republic and the Republic of Congo. A facilitated repatriation for these Congolese refugees began in May 2012; as of April 2014, more than 112,000 refugees have been repatriated back to northwestern DRC and UNHCR hopes to repatriate an additional 20,000 refugees by June 30, 2014.

Local Integration

In a number of protracted situations, refugees have been able to become self-sufficient, and their camps and settlements have been efficiently integrated both economically and socially into the host communities, even as legal rights lag behind. This integration dynamic has occurred particularly for refugees who fled during the 1960s through the early 1980s to countries that had arable land available, allowing many refugees to move out of camps. Despite such de facto integration, refugees residing among the local population did not necessarily enjoy the rights, entitlements, or economic opportunities available to legal residents. As a result, this piecemeal integration was often an interim, rather than a durable, solution for many African refugees.

More recently, however, a number of African countries have offered more formal integration as a durable solution for residual refugee populations who will not or cannot repatriate. In conjunction with UNHCR, the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone launched a regional local integration program for Liberian and Sierra Leonean refugees in 2007. That program provided refugees opportunities for economic self-reliance; activities to enhance the quality of their social integration; and legal rights and documentation, including access to citizenship in some countries and freedom of movement in all countries under the protocols of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). The Government of Zambia pledged in 2012 to provide permanent residence status to 10,000 former Angolan refugees -- mainly refugees who arrived before 1986, were born in Zambia, or are married to Zambians -- and has already approved 6,000 who meet eligibility criteria. Namibia as well has agreed to legal local integration of 2,400 former Angolan refugees.

Senegal offered Mauritanian refugees who wished to remain in Senegal the option of becoming Senegalese citizens in 2007, and UNHCR, in partnership with the Senegalese government, launched a campaign in 2012 to provide digitized and biometric identity cards to some 19,000 refugees (of whom 14,000 were Mauritanians) by the end of the year. The card guarantees holders the same rights as Senegalese citizens, including the right to residence in the country and to travel to ECOWAS member states. The Governments of Uganda and Mozambique have previously stated their intention to provide refugees with local integration opportunities and citizenship, but have not yet passed the required legislation. As mentioned above, the Government of Tanzania offered to provide permanent settlement and citizenship to nearly 200,000 1972-era Burundi refugees; some 165,000 accepted the offer and were collectively naturalized, although the vast majority have not yet received documentation and the modalities of the integration process are still being negotiated.

While not formal integration programs, a few countries (Uganda and Niger, for example) have permitted refugees to live or work outside of camps or have temporarily adapted to natural rural to urban migration that involves refugees as well as nationals (for example, Kenya until late 2012). Ethiopia formally introduced an out-of-camp policy for Eritrean refugees in August 2010, allowing Eritreans to live outside camps if they are able to support themselves or if they have someone to sponsor them financially. While it does not give Eritrean refugees the right to work, it does offer additional educational opportunities, including tertiary education. In 2013, Sudan also agreed to issue work permits to some 30,000 Eritrean refugees who wish to work outside of refugee camps in eastern Sudan.

Third-Country Resettlement

Given the political and economic volatility in many parts of Africa, resettlement to third countries outside the region is an essential durable solution and element of protection for certain refugees. With limited opportunities for permanent integration in many countries of asylum and the protracted nature of some refugee situations, the need for third-country resettlement of African refugees is expected to continue. In recent years, UNHCR has increasingly viewed resettlement as an important tool of protection for refugees in Africa and has shown an increase in resettlement referrals this past year.

FY 2014 U.S. Admissions

We project close to 16,000 African refugee arrivals in FY 2014. This number is a result of the increase in processing capacity in a number of countries of asylum.

We expect to admit nearly 12,000 refugees from various processing locations in East and Central Africa. Two countries of origin – Somalia and DRC – account for the vast majority of U.S. refugee admissions from the region, followed by Eritrea, Sudan and Ethiopia. Approximately 4,000 refugees will depart for the United States from Kenya this year, mostly Somalis in Kakuma. Although we have resumed processing in Dadaab intermittently, originally suspended in October 2011, capacity is limited by the security situation and interview slots are generally reserved for the most urgent cases. To reach the remaining refugees pending USCIS adjudication, PRM funded the construction of a transit center in Kakuma camp that can accommodate approximately 2,000 refugees from Dadaab and is currently at capacity. Admissions from Ethiopia continue to be strong with approximately 3,500 U.S. arrivals projected this fiscal year. Populations include Somalis from camps in the east and Eritreans from the northern camps, including approximately 50 Eritrean unaccompanied refugee minors. Implementation of the enhanced Congolese Resettlement Strategy – UNHCR’s effort to refer 50,000 DRC refugees for resettlement from Rwanda, Uganda, Tanzania and Burundi to all resettlement countries over the next 5-7 years – continued with increased processing in Rwanda and Uganda. We anticipate strong arrivals from Rwanda and Uganda in FY14, at 2,000 and 1,700 arrivals respectively.

From Southern Africa, we expect to admit 1,300 refugees consisting primarily of Somalis from South Africa and Congolese from Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Elsewhere in Africa, we continue to interview refugees from the Central African Republic in southern Chad, Sudanese Darfuri refugees in Eastern Chad and expect to admit nearly 400 refugees altogether from Chad in FY 2014. We restarted resettlement from eastern Chad following a three-year suspension after obtaining the support of the Government of Chad.

Outside of sub-Saharan Africa, we anticipate approximately 2,500 Sudanese, Somali, Ethiopian, Eritrean and other sub-Saharan African refugees who will be arriving primarily from Tunisia, Egypt, Turkey, and Russia or via one of the UNHCR Emergency Transit Centers in Romania and Slovakia. In all, we expect to admit refugees of nearly 30 African nationalities, processed in dozens of countries during FY 2014.

FY 2015 U.S. Resettlement Program

We propose up to 17,000 resettlement numbers for African refugees in FY 2015. PRM has actively engaged relevant offices within the Department of State, UNHCR, the NGO community, and DHS/USCIS to identify caseloads appropriate for resettlement consideration. As a result of these discussions, PRM has identified a number of nationalities and groups for priority processing during FY 2015.

From East Africa, we expect 13,000 admissions. Kenya will continue to be the largest resettlement country departing primarily Somalis. Ethiopia will be the second largest resettlement country with the continued processing of Somalis and Eritreans. We also expect UNHCR to continuing referring Eritrean unaccompanied refugee minors at a rate of about 100 per year from camps in northern Ethiopia. We anticipate that the first successful P-3 family reunification program applicants will arrive in the United States in FY 2015. In the Great Lakes region, processing of Congolese in Rwanda, Uganda, Tanzania, and Burundi will continue, and P-2 processing will continue in Rwanda.

From southern Africa, we expect to admit 1,500 refugees consisting primarily of Somalis from South Africa and Congolese from Mozambique, Malawi, Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. In Chad, UNHCR intends to rapidly increase the number of referrals in FY 2014 and 2015 to create a robust resettlement program for Sudanese Darfuris in eastern Chad. This will be in addition to the continued processing of Central African Republic refugees from southern Chad.

Outside of sub-Saharan Africa, we anticipate up to 2,000 Sudanese, Somali, Ethiopian, Eritrean and other sub-Saharan African refugees will be admitted from Egypt, Lebanon, Turkey, Jordan, and Russia. Processing in these locations largely depends on the local security situation which will determine if teams of DHS/USCIS refugee officers can access these locations.

Proposed FY 2015 Africa program to include arrivals from the following categories:

Priority 1 Individual Referrals 14,000 Priority 2 Groups 2,500 Priority 3 Family Reunification 500 Total Proposed Ceiling 17,000

EAST ASIA

Several East Asian countries host large and diverse refugee populations. Recent years have seen important developments for these groups. Thailand, Malaysia, Bangladesh, and India continue to host large numbers of Burmese refugees and asylum-seekers. The U.S. government continues to press for meaningful political and democratic reform and national reconciliation with ethnic minority groups in Burma, while recognizing reforms made over the past three years by easing sanctions. The international community continues to engage in discussions regarding the voluntary return of Burmese refugees, but acknowledges that ongoing conflict, the pending nationwide ceasefire agreement with armed ethnic groups, peace and national reconciliation efforts, and limited access to provide humanitarian and development assistance make large-scale return of refugees in safety and with dignity a gradual process.

The resettlement of more than 100,000 Burmese refugees from Thailand since 2006 – including more than 75,000 to the United States – has significantly reduced the number of Burmese refugees in the camps who are eligible for the U.S. P-2 resettlement program due to the registration date requirement. After more than seven years of large-scale resettlement, we have arrived at the natural conclusion of the group resettlement program that has specific eligibility criteria for Burmese refugees who were re-registered by UNHCR in 2005 and formally registered by the Royal Thai Government (RTG). Throughout 2013 we conducted rolling announcement deadlines for eligible Burmese refugees to apply for U.S. resettlement that varied by camp based on when resettlement operations began. More than 5,000 eligible Burmese refugees submitted expressions of interest during the announcement period. P-2 processing will continue - with a steady decline in annual departures - until we have completed the processing of every application received by the deadline in each camp. Those who do not exercise this option will be able to remain in the camps until safe and voluntary returns are possible. The United States will continue to accept individual referrals from UNHCR for all nationalities, including Burmese.

Since 2006, UNHCR Malaysia has operated the second largest refugee status determination program in the world and it is currently the largest single country in the U.S. resettlement program with some 9,000 projected refugee departures in FY14 and more than 51,000 since 2006. As of the end of March 2014, there were 143,435 persons of concern registered with UNHCR in Malaysia of which 133,070, or 92.8 percent, are from Burma. In addition, some 10,365 asylum-seekers and refugees from various countries – primarily Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, and Sri Lanka – are registered with UNHCR in Malaysia. Malaysia is not a party to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees or its 1967 Protocol, but generally tolerates the presence of refugees.

The systematic and continuous persecution of the Rohingya, an ethnic, linguistic, and religious minority from Rakhine State, Burma who are de jure stateless by Burmese law, have resulted in large numbers seeking safety in Bangladesh and in other neighboring countries for over five decades. The most recent large influx of approximately 250,000 Rohingya from Rakhine State to the Cox’s Bazar district in southeastern Bangladesh began in July 1991. Since then, small but steady flows of Rohingya continue to arrive, with a spike after hundreds of thousands fled to Bangladesh and neighboring countries following the June and October 2012 violence in Rakhine State. Between 1992 and 2005, over 236,000 UNHCR-registered Rohingya refugees were voluntarily repatriated from Cox’s Bazar to Rakhine State, most of them immediately after their arrival. No repatriation operation has taken place since. UNHCR currently supports some 30,000 refugees who remain in two official refugee camps (Kutupalong and Nayapara) in Cox’s Bazar. An additional 9,000 unregistered Rohingya reside in an unofficial settlement in Leda and approximately 26,000 unregistered Rohingya reside in the makeshift Kutupalong site, adjacent to the official Kutupalong refugee camp. In addition, the Government of Bangladesh (GOB) estimated that 200,000 – 500,000 undocumented Rohingya are currently residing in various villages and towns outside the refugee camps, while UNHCR estimates approximately 200,000 living in Cox’s Bazar, Bandarban, and Chittagong districts. UNHCR continues to work to improve the protection environment, promote greater self-reliance, ensure access to essential services, and continue advocacy for durable solutions for both registered refugees and undocumented Rohingya populations.

The cases of more than 500 individual Rohingya in Bangladesh, including 281 individuals approved for resettlement to several countries, have been on hold since October 2010 when the GOB halted third-country resettlement activities pending a review of their refugee policy. In February 2014, the GOB announced its national strategy on “Myanmar Refugees and Undocumented Myanmar Nationals in Bangladesh.” The U.S. government is encouraged by GOB commitments made in the national strategy, particularly to survey and list the undocumented Rohingya and to allow third country resettlement to continue. We are prepared to resume resettlement activity immediately upon notification by the GOB that we may proceed. In addition, we expect ongoing UNHCR referrals of urban Burmese in India.

As reflected in the North Korean Human Rights Act, the United States remains deeply concerned about the human rights situation of North Koreans both inside the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) and in various countries in the region. The United States began resettling interested, eligible North Korean refugees and their family members in 2006 and remains committed to continuing this program.

Religious Freedom

Although many governments in East Asia do not restrict religious freedom, religious believers face serious persecution in several countries. The DPRK, China, and Burma are designated by the Department of State as Countries of Particular Concern (CPCs) under the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998 for systematic, ongoing, and egregious violations of religious freedom.

The DPRK severely restricts religious freedom, including organized religious activity, except that which is supervised tightly by officially recognized groups linked to the government. Although the DPRK constitution provides for “freedom of religious belief,” genuine religious freedom does not exist. Information about the day-to-day life of religious persons in the country is limited. Religious and human rights groups outside of the country have provided numerous reports that members of underground churches have been beaten, arrested, tortured, or killed because of their religious beliefs.

While the constitutions of China, Burma, and Vietnam provide for freedom of religion, in practice, these governments restrict or repress religious activities of some members of religious communities in a manner that is inconsistent with their commitments to uphold freedom of religion.

The Chinese government continues to harass and interfere with unregistered religious groups, most notably the unofficial Catholic churches loyal to the Holy See, Protestant “house churches,” some Muslim groups (especially ethnic Uighur Muslims in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region), members of the Falun Gong, and Tibetan Buddhists reverent to the Dalai Lama. China additionally reprimanded members of government-sanctioned churches for advocacy on behalf of their church communities. Certain religious or spiritual groups are banned by law. The criminal law defines banned groups as “evil cults” and those belonging to them can be sentenced to prison. This includes Falun Gong and some other qigong-based groups, in addition to some Christian groups. Although legislation officially abolished the Reeducation Through Labor (RTL) system in December 2013, religious believers have been harassed, arrested, detained in “black jails” without due process and sentenced to long jail terms. There have been credible allegations of torture.

In Burma, the government implemented considerable political and economic reforms, resulting in improved respect for many human rights. While some deficiencies in respect for and protection of the right to religious freedom continued, the government continued to support interfaith dialogue and provided some members of the international community and international organizations greater access to ethnic minority areas. However, the government continues to discriminate against religious minorities. Antidiscrimination laws do not apply to ethnic groups not formally recognized under the law as citizens, including the Muslim Rohingya in northern Rakhine State, and some other ethnic groups. Incidents of violence against Rohingya increased beginning in 2012 and have carried over into 2014. Further, societal abuses and discrimination based on a mix of ethnicity and religious affiliation, belief or practice occurred.

Vietnam and the United States signed an agreement on religious freedom in May 2005, under which Vietnam committed to improving the status of religious freedom in Vietnam. As a result of the progress Vietnam made after signing the agreement, the U.S. Government removed Vietnam from the CPC list in November 2006. Over the past three years, Vietnam’s religious freedom record has been mixed. Progress has been made with regard to the registration/recognition of religious groups and congregations. In addition, religious groups have experienced expanded freedom of assembly. However, there are also reports of harassment at the local level, including through the use of land laws. Several Protestant congregations in rural areas continue to report harassment, including beatings and forced renunciations.

Nationals of the DPRK, Vietnam, China, Laos, and Burma have access to the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program. North Korean and Burmese refugees also have access to family reunification processing through Priority 3.

Voluntary Repatriation

Although the Burmese government has taken steps to implement significant democratic and political reforms, ongoing fighting continues in Kachin and northern Shan States, and tensions remain high in Rakhine State since the June and October 2012 violence. Since 2011, Burmese President Thein Sein’s reform-minded administration has been working towards a national peace process. We are hopeful that substantial progress towards this goal will be made in the near future. Further, the post-ceasefire peace process will require resolution of unresolved political grievances. Therefore, the voluntary repatriation of most Burmese refugees and asylum seekers in Thailand, Bangladesh, Malaysia, India and elsewhere is not a viable solution in the immediate future.

Local Integration

Due to fears of a “pull factor,” countries in the region have traditionally been reluctant to integrate refugees or to grant asylum. We hope that U.S. efforts to resettle large numbers of refugees from the camps along the Thailand-Burma border will encourage the RTG to allow greater opportunities for livelihood, vocational training and other skills-building activities for those refugees who will not be resettled. The United States and other donor governments continue to engage regularly with the RTG concerning the future of the nine camps on the Thailand-Burma border. Local integration remains a difficult option, due to opposition from host countries, such as Thailand, Bangladesh, Malaysia, and India. UNHCR and the international community continue to advocate for these governments to make policy changes relating to refugees, and to expand humanitarian protection and assistance space for refugees, asylum seekers and other persons of concern.

Third-Country Resettlement

The United States continues to lead third country resettlement efforts in the region. Other countries, including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the Nordic countries, resettle refugees referred by UNHCR. In FY 2014, the United States processed UNHCR-referred refugee cases in China, the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand.

In March 2014, UNHCR informed us that it had identified more than two thousand registered Burmese Chin refugees in Malaysia with duplicate biographical data who may have gained access to the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program using fraudulent identities. The cases of these refugees who had not departed Malaysia were immediately placed on hold pending the results of UNHCR’s investigation. UNHCR’s preliminary findings suggest that the vast majority of Burmese Chin refugees who committed identity fraud did so in order to register with UNHCR and obtain a registration document as protection from arr