Proposed Refugee Admissions for Fiscal Year 2016
Report to the Congress

submitted on behalf of THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES

to the COMMITTEES ON THE JUDICIARY, UNITED STATES SENATE and UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES

in fulfillment of the requirements of sections 207(d)(1) and (e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act

United States Department of State

United States Department of Homeland Security

United States Department of Health and Human Services

Introduction

This Proposed Refugee Admissions for Fiscal Year 2016: Report to the Congress is submitted in compliance with Sections 207(d)(1) and (e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA). The Act requires that before the start of the fiscal year and, to the extent possible, at least two weeks prior to consultations on refugee admissions, members of the Committees on the Judiciary of the Senate and the House of Representatives be provided with the following information:

(1) A description of the nature of the refugee situation;

(2) A description of the number and allocation of the refugees to be admitted and an analysis of conditions within the countries from which they came;

(3) A description of the plans for their movement and resettlement and the estimated cost of their movement and resettlement;

(4) An analysis of the anticipated social, economic, and demographic impact of their admission to the United States; [1]

(5) A description of the extent to which other countries will admit and assist in the resettlement of such refugees;

(6) An analysis of the impact of the participation of the United States in the resettlement of such refugees on the foreign policy interests of the United States; and

(7) Such additional information as may be appropriate or requested by such members.

This report contains information as required by Section 602(d) of the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-292, October 27, 1998, 112 Stat. 2787) (IRFA) about religious persecution of refugee populations eligible for consideration for admission to the United States. This report meets the reporting requirements of Section 305(b) of the North Korean Human Rights Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-333, October 18, 2004, 118 Stat. 1287) by providing information about specific measures taken to facilitate access to the United States refugee program for individuals who have fled “countries of particular concern” for violations of religious freedoms, identified pursuant to Section 402(b) of the IRFA.

Foreword

On the occasion of World Refugee Day, June 20, President Obama re-affirmed our nation’s commitment to helping refugees and our leading role in providing safe haven. This commitment comes at a time when the global community faces an unprecedented crisis of displacement. There are currently more refugees, asylum-seekers, and internally displaced persons – nearly 60 million – than at any time since World War II. The United States leads the world in providing humanitarian aid to crises from which innocent people flee and also is the top destination for refugees recommended for resettlement by the UN refugee agency (UNHCR).

While starting life anew in the United States may be daunting, it also offers hope and unparalleled opportunity. It is a chance not only to escape from violence and persecution but to start again. The assistance the American people provide helps newcomers find their footing and become a part of their new communities. Refugees are not the only ones who benefit; they add to America’s vitality and diversity and make substantial contributions to our economic and cultural life.

Resettlement in a third country is a solution for some of the world’s most vulnerable refugees. As a matter of principle, the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP) offers the possibility of resettlement to refugees regardless of their location, national origin, health status, occupational skills, or level of educational attainment.

U.S. Resettlement Program Remains Strong

In FY 2015, the Administration aims to reach the ceiling of 70,000 refugee arrivals established by the President. The program is on target to do this, despite safety concerns that halted refugee interviews in Baghdad for more than ten months; more than 10,000 Iraqi refugees are expected to come to the United States in 2015. Since 2007, more than 120,000 Iraqis have been resettled via the refugee program, including at least 38,000 who were affiliated with the United States by family ties or employment. FY 2015 also saw other events that slowed the pace of arrivals, such as the earthquake in Nepal, challenges staging interviews of refugees in hard-to-reach or insecure places, and occasional foreign government reluctance to approve departures. Nonetheless, concerted refugee processing efforts will mean that USRAP will likely reach the FY 2015 ceiling. For example, we had estimated that 17,000 refugees would arrive from Africa in 2015 but now expect to exceed that number by several thousand. More refugees will come to the United States from Africa this year than in any year since 2005.

Reflective of our commitment to offer safe haven to even more refugees, the Administration is proposing an increase in the FY 2016 ceiling to 85,000. This will require cooperation among several US government agencies, including close interagency coordination on security checks to ensure refugee cases are scrutinized thoroughly and still processed efficiently. As a public-private partnership, it will also require the support of American non-governmental organizations, charities, faith-based groups and thousands of volunteers and supporters of the program in hundreds of communities across the country. In honor of World Refugee Day, the White House celebrated the courage and resilience of those who flee violence and persecution, and the dedication of those individuals who provide protection and assistance to refugees abroad and ensure a warm reception for them here in the United States at a White House Champions of Change event held on June 25, 2015.

“Tomorrow, on World Refugee Day, we will pause to reflect on the millions around the world who have been displaced from their homes—the hardships they face, the courage and resilience they demonstrate, and the dedication of those who come to their aid. This year’s commemoration comes as worldwide displacement reaches record levels, with nearly 60 million people uprooted by wars, violence, and persecution. From Syria to Iraq, from Burma to Burundi, from South Sudan to eastern Ukraine, the number of displaced and vulnerable has escalated. The struggles of some are captured in searing images—of people waiting at border crossings, housed in endless lines of tents, and crammed into rickety boats at sea—while those of others, crowded into the shadows of large cities, may go unobserved. As the largest global donor of humanitarian aid, the United States supports programs that provide food, water, shelter, and medical care to refugees and other displaced persons. We thank the aid workers who deliver this assistance, sometimes at great personal risk, and we offer our gratitude to the many families who open their homes to those in need. All the while, we express our appreciation for the millions of men and women who, having endured the struggles of displacement, have contributed so much to the life of this Nation. President Barack Obama

June 19, 2015

In commemoration of World Refugee Day

Syrian Resettlement

The refugee crisis caused by the conflict in Syria is the worst the world has witnessed in a generation, with more than 4 million refugees in the region. The U.S. government is deeply committed to assisting the Syrian people and is providing more than $4.5 billion in humanitarian assistance since the start of the crisis, more than any other donor. While the vast majority of Syrians would prefer to return home when the conflict ends, it is clear that some remain extremely vulnerable in their countries of asylum and would benefit from resettlement. The Administration is committed to increasing Syrian resettlement in 2016 and beyond. The United States is one of 28 countries that have agreed to accept referrals from UNHCR as part of its ambitious international effort to secure permanent or temporary resettlement for 130,000 Syrian refugees by the end of 2016. As of mid-2015, UNHCR has referred more than 15,000 Syrian refugees to the United States and these individuals are being screened to determine whether they are eligible. We expect to admit some 1,600-1,800 Syrian refugees in FY 2015. In FY 2016, we project we will admit at least 10,000 Syrians.

It’s almost unfathomable that nearly 60 million men, women, and children are now displaced inside and outside of their countries. That is the largest number the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has ever counted and 8 million more than the record set just one year ago. We’ve seen haunting images of Syrian families fleeing indiscriminate barrel bombings and young children rescued at sea after days without food. Escaping from bullets, bombs, or machetes is often just the beginning of the ordeal. Refugees remain in exile for an average of 17 years. Some are born and grow up in camps and never get to leave them. I’ll never forget meeting with refugee leaders on my recent trip to Kenya, where 350,000 mainly Somali refugees live in a remote, dusty camp complex called Dadaab. By video link to Nairobi, I spoke to a group of Dadaab’s best students. They told me how they dream of attending university and pursuing careers in medicine, politics, and human rights. But they also shared their fears that they would end up trapped and jobless, and that all their striving would be in vain. We cannot let that happen. Secretary John Kerry

June 18, 2015

In commemoration of World Refugee Day

In-Country Processing in Central America

In December 2014, the Administration established an in-country refugee and parole program for children in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras. If their parents are lawfully present in the United States, the parents may file to bring their unmarried children under 21 to join them in this country. As of August 2015, parents have submitted nearly 3,000 applications and children are being interviewed to determine their eligibility. Because the majority of applications were received from May-to-July, very few such minors will be admitted to the United States in FY 2015. We expect a modest, yet increasing number of admissions in FY 2016. The Departments of State and Homeland Security continue to inform eligible parents in the Central American community about the new program, through the media, community meetings and conference calls, and are exploring ways to broaden outreach.

Improvements to Global Resettlement

Our efforts to convince more nations to resettle refugees continue to pay dividends. In recent years, countries without a history of resettling refugees have stepped forward and established programs. The list includes Switzerland, which has announced a regular resettlement program, and Japan, which has announced that its pilot program will become permanent next year. In 2014, a total of 28 countries resettled refugees that had been identified and referred by UNHCR. Most of these countries have agreed to accept Syrian refugees referred by UNHCR. A number of other countries without regular resettlement programs have also stepped forward to admit Syrians through humanitarian admissions programs.

For several years the U.S. government has provided targeted financial support to UNHCR in order to boost resettlement globally. For example, in the Great Lakes region of Africa UNHCR has been able to hire more staff. They in turn have been able to refer more refugees to more countries. The United States has also funded two new facilities for holding interviews that all countries can use to screen refugees from the region.

Great Lakes Core Group

In 2013, UNHCR and the United States established the Congolese Core Group, designed to leverage UNHCR’s newly announced large-scale resettlement initiative for refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo located in other Great Lakes region countries (Burundi, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda). The United States has chaired this group and, in addition to resettlement, spearheaded other initiatives to help larger numbers of Congolese refugees.

In 2015, the group was renamed the Great Lakes Core Group in recognition that refugees of other nationalities in the four main hosting countries should also benefit from the multinational group’s work. Current activities include pursuing local integration for 15,000 long-staying refugees in Uganda and exploring ways to build on the resettlement of some 30,000 Congolese from Tanzania.

Combatting Fraud and Ensuring National Security in the Refugee Admissions Program

The USRAP is committed to deterring and detecting fraud among those seeking to resettle in the United States and continues to employ the most rigorous security measures possible to protect against threats to our national security.

In 2015, we took additional measures to protect the refugee admissions program against fraud. The Department of State has issued updated guidelines for its worldwide network of Resettlement Support Centers to improve the way we screen and train staff and interpreters, control access points, manage electronic data, and communicate with applicants. The U.S. government also continues to work with UNHCR and other resettlement countries to safeguard refugee referral data by improving registration procedures and enhancing electronic screening of registration data to detect identity fraud. We also note the importance of working closely with refugee hosting countries in those places where the host country, and not UNHCR, registers refugees.

Refugee applicants of all nationalities are also required to undergo background security checks. Security checks include biographic name checks for all refugee applicants and biometric (fingerprint) checks for refugee applicants. Refugee applicants must clear all required security checks prior to final approval of their application.

Protecting the Health of Refugees and U.S. Communities

In recent years, the Department of State and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) have collaborated to develop and implement a comprehensive pre-departure vaccination program for U.S.-bound refugees to protect the health of refugees and the U.S. public. In coordination with the International Organization for Migration, the program is fully implemented in six countries and partially implemented in two countries. To date, more than 88,000 refugees have been vaccinated with 315,000 vaccines administered. More than half of the refugees admitted in FY 2015 benefitted from the program. In addition to the health benefits, pre-departure vaccines also prevent delays in the resettlement process during overseas outbreaks of diseases such as measles. The Administration will continue to look for opportunities to expand the program to additional locations overseas.

Ensuring a Suitable Welcome

In FY 2015, to maintain quality reception and placement services for arriving refugees, the Department of State continued to guarantee resettlement agencies a minimum level of funding for their operations, even during lulls caused when the numbers of refugees arriving in the United States dip or referrals are delayed. This policy ensures that staff and services will be available when needed. The Department expects to continue this practice in FY 2016.

Benefits and services for refugees include the Reception and Placement grant provided by the State Department and time-limited assistance programs (up to eight months from arrival) and social service programs (up to five years) funded by the Office of Refugee Resettlement at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS/ORR). These programs help refugees find employment, become economically self-sufficient, and integrate into American society. The State Department and HHS/ORR continue to work closely with communities receiving refugees so that they are prepared to welcome them and know about programs and services that are available to them. Over the past year, the State Department and Department of Health and Human Services have consulted with groups in Georgia, Maryland, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, South Carolina, Texas, Vermont, and Virginia. HHS/ORR’s newly established regional offices have increased engagement and consultation with those who have a stake in the resettlement program. In November 2014, President Obama created a formal interagency body, the White House Task Force on New Americans, which aims to strengthen integration efforts nationwide and build welcoming communities for all immigrants, including refugees. The Administration will continue to explore ways of sustaining a strong federal-state-community partnership and ensuring that refugees can integrate successfully.

Planning for the Future

As we prepare to bring growing numbers of Congolese and Syrian refugees to the United States, we are simultaneously bringing to a close longstanding resettlement programs for Burmese in Thailand and Bhutanese in Nepal. In 2015 the cases of some 6,000 remaining priority two (P-2) eligible Burmese in Thailand were processed.[2] We are processing the cases of the approximately 12,000 Bhutanese refugees who will depart Nepal over the next two years before operations there are reduced.

In a number of places, we continue to face challenges carrying out the program. In some countries, such as Syria, Yemen, and Eritrea, Department of Homeland Security (DHS) adjudicators have been unable to travel to interview applicants for several years. Some applicants in Yemen, Iran, and Eritrea were moved to a UNHCR Emergency Transit Center in Romania or Slovakia as an intermediate step, but space limitations mean that relatively small numbers are able to benefit from this option. In Iraq, Lebanon, and Kenya, security concerns have hampered our ability to process cases. We are constantly reviewing our operations to find efficient and creative ways to interview applicants in remote locations in Africa. This may include setting up interviewing facilities and health clinics so that interviews can be conducted nearby and refugees do not have to be transported long distances.

In these and other ways, the program will adapt to stay strong while meeting changing needs. With the support of Congress and the American people, refugee resettlement will continue to be a proud American tradition for many years to come.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction ..... i

Foreword ..... ii

I. Overview of U.S. Refugee Policy ..... 1

II. Refugee Admissions Program for FY 2016 ..... 5

Proposed Ceilings ..... 5

Unallocated Reserve ..... 6

Admissions Procedures ..... 6

Eligibility Criteria ..... 6

Priority 1: Individual Referrals ..... 7

Priority 2: Group Referrals ..... 8

FY 2016 Priority 2 Designations ..... 9

Priority 3: Family Reunification Cases ..... 11

FY 2016 Priority 3 Nationalities ..... 13

Following to Join Reunification Cases ..... 14

DHS/USCIS Refugee Adjudications ..... 15

The Eligibility Determination ..... 15

Background Checks ..... 16

Processing Activities of the Department of State ..... 17

Overseas Processing Services ..... 17

Cultural Orientation ..... 17

Transportation ..... 19

Reception and Placement (R&P) ..... 19

Office of Refugee Resettlement ..... 20

III. Regional Programs ..... 23

Africa ..... 24

Religious Freedom .....25

Voluntary Repatriation ..... 26

Local Integration ..... 28

Third-Country Resettlement ..... 29

FY 2015 U.S. Admissions ..... 29

FY 2016 U.S. Resettlement Program ..... 30

East Asia ..... 32

Religious Freedom ..... 34

Voluntary Repatriation ..... 36

Local Integration ..... 36

Third-Country Resettlement ..... 36

FY 2015 U.S. Admissions ..... 37

FY 2016 U.S. Resettlement Program ..... 37

Europe and Central Asia ..... 38

Religious Freedom ..... 40

Voluntary Repatriation ..... 41

Local Integration ..... 42

Third-Country Resettlement ..... 42

FY 2015 U.S. Admissions ..... 43

FY 2016 U.S. Resettlement Program ..... 43

Latin America and the Caribbean ..... 43

Religious Freedom ..... 45

Voluntary Repatriation ..... 45

Local Integration ..... 46

Third and In-Country Resettlement ..... 46

FY 2015 U.S. Admissions ..... 48

FY 2016 U.S. Resettlement Program ..... 48

Near East and South Asia ..... 49

Religious Freedom ..... 51

Voluntary Repatriation ..... 53

Local Integration ..... 54

Third-Country Resettlement .....57

FY 2015 U.S. Admissions ..... 59

FY 2016 U.S. Resettlement Program ..... 59

IV. Domestic Impact of Refugee Admissions ..... 61

LIST OF TABLES

Page

I. Refugee Admissions in FY 2014 and FY 2015, Proposed Refugee Admissions by Region for FY 2016 ..... 5

II. Proposed FY 2016 Regional Ceilings by Priority ..... 23

III. Refugee Arrivals by Country of Origin, FY 2014 ..... 62

IV. Median Age and Gender of Refugee Arrivals, FY 2014 ..... 65

V. Select Age Categories of Refugee Arrivals, FY 2014 ..... 66

VI. Refugee Arrivals by State of Initial Resettlement, FY 2014 ..... 67

VII. Estimated Funding of Refugee Processing, Movement, and Resettlement FY 2015 and FY 2016 ..... 69

VIII. UNHCR Resettlement Statistics by Resettlement Country, CY 2014 ..... 70

I. Overview of U.S. Refugee Policy

At the end of 2014, the estimated refugee population worldwide stood at 19.5 million, with 14.4 million under the mandate of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). This represents an increase of 2.7 million refugees under UNHCR mandate in one year. The United States actively supports efforts to provide protection, assistance, and durable solutions to these refugees, as these measures fulfill our humanitarian interests and further our foreign policy and national security interests. Under the authority of the Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1962, as amended, the United States contributes to the programs of UNHCR, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), the International Organization for Migration (IOM), the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA), and other international and non-governmental organizations that provide protection and assistance to refugees, internally displaced persons (IDPs), victims of conflict, stateless persons, and other vulnerable migrants. These contributions are used to address the legal and physical protection needs of refugees and to furnish basic assistance such as water, sanitation, food, health care, shelter, education, and other services. The United States monitors these programs to ensure the most effective use of resources, maximizing humanitarian impact for the beneficiaries.

The United States and UNHCR recognize that most refugees desire safe, voluntary return to their homeland. In 2014, some 126,800 refugees voluntarily repatriated to their country of origin – the lowest recorded number since 1983. Refugee repatriation operations brought refugees home to Afghanistan, Cote d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), and Sri Lanka. These operations were carried out to protect returning refugees as well as to help them contribute to the stabilization, reconstruction, and development of their home countries.

Where opportunities for return remain elusive, the United States and partners pursue self-sufficiency and temporary, indefinite, or permanent local integration in countries of asylum. The Department of State encourages host governments to protect refugees and allow them to integrate into local communities. The State Department further promotes local integration by funding programs to enhance refugee self-sufficiency and support community-based social services. Groups that have availed themselves of opportunities for local integration in recent years include Afghans in India, Angolans in Zambia, Burundians in Tanzania, Liberians and Sierra Leoneans in seven countries across West Africa, and Colombians in Ecuador, Costa Rica, Panama and Venezuela. Mali agreed to provide birth certificates to some 8,000 Mauritanian refugee children, paving the way for them to eventually apply for Malian citizenship.

UNHCR estimates that there are at least 10 million people worldwide who are not recognized nationals of any state and are therefore stateless. Without recognized citizenship in any country, many stateless persons exist in refugee-like situations, unable to access benefits or services and denied protections. The United States has supported UNHCR’s efforts to prevent and reduce statelessness, including encouraging States to address gaps in citizenship laws and eliminate provisions that discriminate against women, and by promoting fair application of those laws. U.S. contributions to UNHCR’s core budget support efforts to prevent and address statelessness in Burma, the Dominican Republic, Cote d’Ivoire, Nepal, Sudan, and elsewhere. In addition, the Department of State seeks to use the U.S. Refugee Admissions Program (USRAP) to demonstrate leadership and encourage other countries to do more to help stateless people and refugees in protracted situations. This approach is reflected in, for example, the current resettlement of protracted Rohingya refugees from Burma who were born outside Burma, mostly in Malaysia and Thailand.

The United States, like UNHCR, recognizes that resettlement in third countries is a vital tool for providing refugees protection and/or durable solutions in some particularly difficult cases. For some refugees, resettlement is the best, and perhaps the only, alternative. In particular, stateless refugees who arrive in the United States for resettlement not only find a durable solution to their displacement, but are also placed on a path that will afford the opportunity to naturalize and resolve their stateless status.

For more than a decade, the U.S. government has provided financial support to expand and improve UNHCR’s resettlement capacity, principally by funding staff and constructing facilities. As a result, UNHCR has substantially increased referrals to the United States and other resettlement countries. We plan to continue to work with UNHCR and consult with host governments on group referrals. We will continue to assess resettlement needs and allow qualified NGOs to refer refugee applicants to the program.

The United States has also supported UNHCR’s efforts to expand the number of countries active in resettlement. In 2014, UNHCR referred refugees to 30 countries for resettlement consideration. Over 90 percent were referred to the United States, Australia, and Canada. Smaller numbers of referrals were made to Argentina, Belarus, Brazil, Chile, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Lichtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Uruguay, and the United Kingdom.

While the overall number of refugees referred by UNHCR and the percentage resettled by various countries fluctuate from year to year, the United States aims to ensure at least 50 percent of all refugees referred by UNHCR worldwide are considered for resettlement in the United States, depending on the availability of funds. Some 67 percent of UNHCR-referred refugees who were resettled in 2014, were resettled in the United States (see Table VIII).

The foreign policy and humanitarian interests of the United States are often advanced by addressing refugee issues in asylum and resettlement countries. In some cases, the United States has been able to use its leadership position in resettlement to promote and secure other durable solutions for refugees, or advance other human rights or foreign policy objectives. The United States is by far the largest single donor to UNHCR, providing over $1.28 billion in FY 2014. During the past few years, U.S. resettlement efforts in Africa, the Middle East, and East Asia have helped energize efforts by UNHCR and other countries to ensure that first asylum is maintained for larger refugee populations or that local integration or third country resettlement are options offered to those in need. In certain locations, the prompt resettlement of politically sensitive cases has helped defuse regional tensions.

During its history, the USRAP has responded to changing circumstances. The end of the Cold War dramatically altered the context in which the USRAP operated. The program shifted its focus away from large groups concentrated in a few locations (primarily refugees from Vietnam, the former Soviet Union, and the former Yugoslavia) and began to admit refugees representing over 50 nationalities per year. Interviews of refugees by officials from the Department of Homeland Security’s U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) are often conducted in remote locations and are focused on members of populations in greatest need of third country resettlement opportunities.

While maintaining the United States’ leadership role in humanitarian protection, an integral part of this mission is to ensure that refugee resettlement opportunities go only to those who are eligible for such protection and who do not present a risk to the safety and security of our country. Accordingly, the USRAP is committed to deterring and detecting fraud among those seeking to resettle in the United States and continues to employ the most rigorous security measures possible to protect against threats to our national security.

Refugees resettled in the United States enrich our nation. The USRAP is premised on the idea that refugees should become economically self-sufficient as quickly as possible. The Department of State works domestically with agencies participating in the Reception and Placement (R&P) program to ensure that refugees receive services in the first thirty to ninety days after arrival in accordance with established standards. During and after the initial resettlement period, the Office of Refugee Resettlement at the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS/ORR) provides leadership, technical assistance, and funding to states, the District of Columbia, and nonprofit organizations to help refugees become self-sufficient and integrated into U.S. society. ORR programs use formula and discretionary grants to provide cash and medical assistance, employment and training programs, and other services to newly arriving and recently arrived refugees. Moreover, upon arrival, refugees are potential Americans in waiting. Refugees are immediately eligible for lawful employment, and after one year are required to apply for adjustment of status to that of lawful permanent resident. Five years after admission, a refugee who has been granted lawful permanent resident status is eligible to apply for citizenship.

To strengthen the integration of refugees and immigrants and ensure that all community members have the tools and opportunities to fully contribute to the nation, in November 2014 President Obama created the White House Task Force on New Americans, comprised of 16 Federal departments, agencies, and White House offices. In April 2015, the Task Force submitted to President Obama a strategic action plan to better integrate refugees and immigrants into American communities through a series of recommendations to support civic, economic, and linguistic integration. Under this plan, federal agencies are taking actions such as extending competitive grant funding for citizenship preparation programs in communities across the country, and providing information and tools to employers about increasing access to ESL courses, education services, and other training programs for immigrant and refugee workers.

A number of factors create challenges for resettlement agencies striving to meet the needs of refugees in the program. The refugee population is ever more linguistically diverse, with wide-ranging educational and employment histories. To better prepare refugees for arrival in the United States, the USRAP continues to improve overseas cultural orientation, including thorough curricula review and teacher training. In 2013, the Department of State determined after two pilot rounds of English language training (ELT) for some refugees in Kenya, Thailand, and Nepal that the classes provided basic English competency and promoted continued language learning after arrival in the United States. As a result, since 2014 the Department has funded the Resettlement Support Center for Africa to provide ELT to some Congolese prior to resettlement in the United States.

Refugee Admissions Program for FY 2016

PROPOSED CEILINGS

Table I

Refugee Admissions in FY 2014 and FY 2015

Proposed Refugee Admissions by Region for FY 2016[3]

Region FY 2014 Actual arrivals FY 2015 Ceiling Revised FY 2015 Ceiling FY 2015 projected arrivals Proposed FY2016 Ceiling Africa 17,476 17,000 20,400 22,600 25,000 East Asia 14,784 13,000 17,300 18,200 13,000 Europe and Central Asia 959 1,000 2,300 2,350 4,000 Latin America/Caribbean 4,318 4,000 2,300 2,050 3,000 Near East/South Asia 32,450 33,000 27,700 24,800 34,000 Regional Subtotal 69,987 68,000 70,000 70,000 79,000 Unallocated Reserve 2,000 6,000 Total 69,987 70,000 70,000 70,000 85,000

Generally, to be considered a refugee, a person must be outside his or her country of nationality or, if stateless, outside his or her country of last habitual residence. Under the Immigration and Nationality Act (INA) § 101(a)(42)(B), however, the President may specify circumstances under which individuals who are within their countries of nationality or last habitual residence may be considered a refugee for purposes of admission to the United States. The FY 2016 proposal recommends continuing such in-country processing for specified persons in Iraq, Cuba, Eurasia and the Baltics, Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala. Persons for whom resettlement is requested by a U.S. ambassador in any location in the world may also be considered, with the understanding that those within their countries of nationality or last habitual residence will only be referred to the USRAP following Department of State consultation with USCIS at the Department of Homeland Security (DHS).

Unallocated Reserve

This proposal includes 6,000 unallocated admissions numbers to be used if needed for additional refugee admissions from any region. The unallocated numbers would only be used following notification to Congress.

ADMISSIONS PROCEDURES

Eligibility Criteria

The Department of State’s Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration (PRM) is responsible for coordinating and managing the USRAP. A critical part of this responsibility is determining which individuals or groups from among the millions of refugees worldwide will have access to U.S. resettlement consideration. PRM coordinates within the Department of State, as well as with DHS/USCIS and other agencies, in carrying out this responsibility.

Section 207(a)(3) of the INA states that the USRAP shall allocate admissions among refugees “of special humanitarian concern to the United States in accordance with a determination made by the President after appropriate consultation.” Which individuals are “of special humanitarian concern” to the United States for the purpose of refugee resettlement consideration is determined through the USRAP priority system. There are currently three priorities or categories of cases:

• Priority 1 – Individual cases referred to the program by virtue of their circumstances and apparent need for resettlement;

• Priority 2 – Groups of cases designated as having access to the program by virtue of their circumstances and apparent need for resettlement;

• Priority 3 – Individual cases from designated nationalities granted access for purposes of reunification with family members already in the United States.

(Note: Refugees resettled in the United States may also seek the admission of spouses and unmarried children under 21 who are still abroad by filing a “Following to Join” petition, which obviates the need for a separate refugee claim adjudication. This option is described in more detail in the discussion of Following to Join cases below.)

Access to the program under one of the above-listed processing priorities does not necessarily mean an applicant meets the statutory definition of “refugee” or is admissible to the United States under the INA. Applicants who are eligible for access within the established priorities are presented to DHS/USCIS officers for interview. The ultimate determination as to whether an applicant can be admitted as a refugee is made by DHS/USCIS in accordance with criteria set forth in the INA and various security protocols.

Although the access categories to the USRAP are referred to as “processing priorities,” it is important to note that entering the program under a certain priority does not establish precedence in the order in which cases will be processed. Once cases are established as eligible for access under one of the three processing priorities, they all undergo the same processing steps.

Priority 1 – Individual Referrals

Priority 1 (P-1) allows consideration of refugee claims from persons of any nationality[4], usually with compelling protection needs, for whom resettlement appears to be the appropriate durable solution. Priority 1 cases are identified and referred to the program by UNHCR, a U.S. Embassy, or a designated NGO. UNHCR, which has the international mandate worldwide to provide protection to refugees, has historically referred the vast majority of cases under this priority. Some NGOs providing humanitarian assistance in locations where there are large concentrations of refugees have also undergone training by PRM and DHS/USCIS and have been designated eligible to provide Priority 1 referrals.

Process for Priority 1 Individual Referral Applications

Priority 1 referrals from UNHCR and NGOs are submitted to the appropriate Regional Refugee Coordinator, who forwards the referrals to the appropriate Resettlement Support Center (RSC) for case processing and scheduling of the DHS/USCIS interview. PRM’s Office of Admissions reviews embassy referrals for completeness and may consult with DHS in considering these referrals.

A U.S. ambassador may make a Priority 1 referral for persons still in their country of origin if the ambassador determines that such cases are in need of exceptional treatment and the Departments of State (PRM) and Homeland Security (DHS/USCIS) concur. When a Priority 1 referral cannot be made, in some limited cases, a Department of State request to DHS/USCIS for parole may be an appropriate option.

Priority 2 – Group Referrals

Priority 2 (P-2) includes specific groups (within certain nationalities, clans or ethnic groups, sometimes in specified locations) identified by the Department of State in consultation with DHS/USCIS, NGOs, UNHCR, and other experts whose members are in need of resettlement. Some Priority 2 groups are processed in their country of origin. The process of identifying the group and its characteristics includes consideration of whether the group is of special humanitarian concern to the United States and whether individual members of the group will likely be able to qualify for admission as refugees under U.S. law. Groups may be designated as Priority 2 during the course of the year as circumstances dictate, and the need for resettlement arises. PRM plays the coordinating role for all group referrals to the USRAP.

There are two distinct models of Priority 2 access to the program: open access and predefined group access, normally upon the recommendation of UNHCR. Under both models, Priority 2 designations are made based on shared characteristics that define the group. In general, the possession of these characteristics is the reason members of the group have been persecuted in the past or face persecution in the future.

The open-access model for Priority 2 group referrals allows individuals to seek access to the program on the basis of meeting designated criteria. To establish an open-access Priority 2 group, PRM, in consultation with DHS/USCIS, and (as appropriate) with UNHCR and others, defines the specific criteria for access. Once the designation is in place, applicants may approach the program at any of the processing locations specified as available for the group to begin the application process. Applicants must demonstrate that they meet specified criteria to establish eligibility for access.

The open-access model has functioned well in the in-country programs, including the long-standing programs in Eurasia and the Baltics, and in Cuba. It was also used successfully for Vietnamese for nearly thirty years (1980-2009), Bosnian refugees during the 1990s, and is now in use for Iranian religious minorities, Iraqis with links to the United States, and minors from El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras with lawfully present parents in the United States.

The RSCs responsible for handling open-access Priority 2 applications, working under the direction of PRM, make a preliminary determination as to whether individual applicants qualify for access and should be presented to DHS/USCIS for interview. Applicants who clearly do not meet the access requirements are “screened out” prior to the DHS/USCIS interview.

In contrast to an open-access group, a predefined group designation is normally based on a UNHCR recommendation that lays out eligibility criteria that should apply to individuals in a specific location. Once PRM, in consultation with DHS/USCIS, has established the access eligibility criteria for the group, the referring entity (usually UNHCR) provides the bio data of eligible refugee applicants for processing. This type of group referral is advantageous in situations in which the intensive labor required to generate individual UNHCR referrals would be impracticable, potentially harmful to applicants due to delays, or counterproductive. Often, predefined groups are composed of persons with similar persecution claims. The predefined group referral process saves the labor intensive individual referral step and can conserve scarce UNHCR resources. In recent years, predefined groups have included certain Burmese in Thailand, certain Bhutanese in Nepal, and certain Congolese in Rwanda. Predefined group referrals with clear, well-defined eligibility criteria and several methods for cross-checking group membership can serve as a fraud deterrent as well, preventing non-group members from gaining access to the USRAP by falsely claiming group membership. Once an individual gains access to processing via a P-2 designation, all other processing steps are the same as for those referred by P-1, including individual pre-screening and USCIS interviews, and all security and medical checks.

FY 2016 Priority 2 Designations

In-country processing programs

The following ongoing programs that process individuals still in their country of origin under Priority 2 group designations will continue in FY 2016, all of which are “open-access” type P-2s:

Eurasia and the Baltics

This Priority 2 designation applies to Jews, Evangelical Christians, and Ukrainian Catholic and Orthodox religious adherents identified in the Lautenberg Amendment, Public Law No. 101-167, § 599D, 103 Stat. 1261 (1989) (codified at 8 U.S.C. § 1157) as amended (“Lautenberg Amendment”), with close family in the United States. With annual renewal of the Lautenberg Amendment, these individuals are considered under a reduced evidentiary standard for establishing a well-founded fear of persecution.

Cuba

Included in this Priority 2 program are human rights activists, members of persecuted religious minorities, former political prisoners, forced-labor conscripts, and persons deprived of their professional credentials or subjected to other disproportionately harsh or discriminatory treatment resulting from their perceived or actual political or religious beliefs.

Iraqis Associated with the United States

Under various Priority 2 designations, including those set forth in the Refugee Crisis in Iraq Act, employees of the U.S. Government, a U.S. government-funded contractor or grantee, U.S. media or U.S. NGOs working in Iraq, and certain family members of such employees, as well as beneficiaries of approved I-130 (immigrant visa) petitions, are eligible for refugee processing in Iraq.

Minors in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras

Under this Priority 2 program, certain lawfully present parents in the United States can request access to a refugee interview for an unmarried child under 21 in his/her country of origin.

Groups of Humanitarian Concern outside the Country of Origin

The following Priority 2 groups are already designated and, in most cases, undergoing processing with significant arrivals anticipated during FY 2015. (Additional Priority 2 groups may be designated over the course of FY 2016.)

Pre-defined Group Access P-2s:

Ethnic Minorities and others from Burma in camps in Thailand

Under this existing Priority 2 designation, individuals who have fled Burma, are registered in nine refugee camps along the Thai/Burma border, are identified by UNHCR as in need of resettlement, and expressed interest prior to January 2014 (depending on the location), are eligible for processing.

Ethnic Minorities from Burma in Malaysia

Under this Priority 2 designation, members of ethnic minorities from Burma who are recognized by UNHCR as refugees in Malaysia and identified as being in need of resettlement are eligible for processing.

Bhutanese in Nepal

Under this existing Priority 2 designation, Bhutanese refugees registered by UNHCR in camps in Nepal, identified as in need of resettlement, and expressed interest prior to June 30, 2014, are eligible for processing.

Congolese in Rwanda

Under this existing Priority 2 designation, certain Congolese refugees in Rwanda who were verifiably registered in 1997 and identified as in need of resettlement are eligible for processing.

Congolese in Tanzania

Under this Priority 2 designation signed in May 2015, certain Congolese refugees registered by UNHCR in Tanzania whose residence in Nyaragusu camp was confirmed in a 2013-2014 UNHCR verification exercise are eligible for processing.

Open Access Model P-2s:

Iranian Religious Minorities

Under this Priority 2 designation, Iranian members of certain religious minorities are eligible for processing and are considered under a reduced evidentiary standard for establishing a well-founded fear of persecution, pursuant to annual renewal of the Lautenberg Amendment as amended in 2004 by Sec. 213 of Title II, Division E, of the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2004, P.L. 108-199, 118 Stat. 3 (“the Specter Amendment”).

Iraqis Associated with the United States

Under various Priority 2 designations, including those set forth in the Refugee Crisis in Iraq Act, employees of the U.S. government, a U.S. government-funded contractor or grantee, U.S. media or U.S. NGOs working in Iraq, and certain family members of such employees, as well as beneficiaries of approved I-130 (immigrant visa) petitions, are eligible for refugee processing. This program is operating in Jordan and Egypt, in addition to the in-country program in Iraq.

Priority 3 – Family Reunification

The Priority 3 (P-3) category affords USRAP access to members of designated nationalities who have immediate family members in the United States who initially entered as refugees or were granted asylum. At the beginning of each fiscal year, PRM, in consultation with DHS/USCIS, establishes the list of nationalities eligible for processing under this priority. The PRM Assistant Secretary may modify the list during the year, in consultation with DHS/USCIS, but additions or deletions are generally made to coincide with the fiscal year.

Inclusion on the P-3 list represents a finding by PRM that the nationality is of special humanitarian concern to the United States for the purpose of family-reunification refugee processing. Eligible nationalities are selected following careful review of several factors. UNHCR’s annual assessment of refugees in need of resettlement provides insight into ongoing refugee situations which could create the need for family-reunification processing. In addition, prospective or ongoing repatriation efforts and U.S. foreign policy interests must be weighed in determining which nationalities should be eligible.

The P-3 program has undergone significant changes in recent years. In order to qualify for access under the P-3 program, an applicant must be outside of his or her country of origin, be registered or have legal status in the country of asylum, have had an Affidavit of Relationship (AOR) filed on his or her behalf by an eligible family member in the United States during a period in which the nationality was included on the eligibility list, and have been cleared for onward processing by the DHS/USCIS Refugee Access Verification Unit (RAVU).

Since the P-3 program resumed in October 15, 2012, after a suspension period due to fraud concerns, the AOR has been an official Department of State form (DS-7656). The form contains new language about penalties for committing fraud, and alerts filers that DNA evidence of certain claimed biological parent-child relationships will be required in order to gain access to a USCIS interview for refugee admission to the United States through the P-3 program. As of May 30, we have received more than 3,700 AORs that are in various stages of processing.

The following family members of the U.S.-based family members are qualified for P-3 access: spouse, unmarried children under 21, and/or parents. A U.S.-based family member may apply for a same-sex spouse if a legal marriage was conducted and documented. Cognizant that same-sex marriage is not legal in the vast majority of refugee-producing and refugee-hosting countries, the United States will allow a qualifying individual to file for P-3 access for a same-sex partner if he or she can provide evidence that he/she had a relationship with the partner for at least one year overseas prior to the submission of the AOR and considered that person to be his/her spouse or life partner, and that the relationship is ongoing, together with evidence that legal marriage was not an obtainable option due to social and/or legal prohibitions.

Under certain circumstances, a qualifying individual may file for P-3 access for an opposite sex partner if he or she can provide evidence that he/she had a relationship with the partner for at least one year overseas prior to the submission of the AOR and considered that person to be his/her spouse or life partner, and that the relationship is ongoing, together with evidence that legal marriage was not an obtainable option due to social and/or legal prohibitions.

Qualifying individuals are persons who were admitted to the United States as refugees or were granted asylum, including persons who are lawful permanent residents or U.S. citizens who initially were admitted to the United States as refugees or were granted asylum. The U.S.-based filer must be at least 18 years of age at the time the AOR is filed and must file the AOR within 5 years of the date the individual entered the U.S. as a refugee or was granted asylum. The USRAP may reject any AOR for a relationship that does not comport with public policy, such as under-age or plural marriages.

In addition to the qualifying family members of a U.S.-based individual listed above, the qualifying family member’s spouse and unmarried children under 21 may derive refugee status from the principal applicant for refugee status.

On a case-by-case basis, an individual may be added to a qualifying family member’s P-3 case if that individual:

1) lived in the same household as the qualifying family member in the country of nationality or, if stateless, last habitual residence; AND

2) was part of the same economic unit as the qualifying family member in the country of nationality or, if stateless, last habitual residence; AND

3) demonstrates exceptional and compelling humanitarian circumstances that justify inclusion on the qualifying family member’s case.

These individuals “are not “spouses” or “children”, under INA 207(c)(2)(A)” and thus cannot derive their refugee status from the Principal Applicant. They must, therefore, independently establish that they qualify as a refugee.

FY 2016 Priority 3 Nationalities

P-3 processing is available to individuals of the following nationalities:

Afghanistan

Bhutan

Burma

Burundi

Central African Republic

Colombia

Cuba

Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK)

Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)

El Salvador

Eritrea

Ethiopia

Guatemala

Haiti

Honduras

Iran

Iraq

Mali

Somalia

South Sudan

Sri Lanka

Sudan

Syria

Uzbekistan

Following-to-Join Family Reunification Petitions

Under 8 CFR Section 207.7, a principal refugee admitted to the United States may request following-to-join benefits for his or her spouse and/or unmarried children under the age of 21 who were not previously granted refugee status. Once in the United States, and within two years of admission, the refugee may file a Form I-730 Refugee/Asylee Relative Petition[5] with DHS/USCIS for each eligible family member. If the Form I-730 petition is approved by DHS/USCIS (signifying adequate proof of eligibility based on a file review), the National Visa Center then forwards the petition to the USCIS office, embassy or consulate nearest to the location of the beneficiary for travel eligibility.

Cases gaining access to the USRAP through an approved I-730 petition are interviewed by DHS/USCIS or consular officers to verify the relationships claimed in the petition, as well as to examine any applicable bars to status and admissibility to the United States. The beneficiaries are not required to demonstrate persecution claims, as they derive their status from the refugee relative in the United States who filed the petition. Beneficiaries of I-730 petitions may be processed within their country of origin or in other locations.

Certain relatives in the United States may file an I-730 Refugee/Asylee Relative Petition and seek Priority 3 access (if eligible) simultaneously. In some cases, the I-730 petition will be the only option as the family members are still in their country of origin. It is also important to note that the I-730 or “follow-to-join” process does not allow the relative in the United States to petition for parents as the P-3 process does.

DHS/USCIS REFUGEE ADJUDICATIONS

Section 207(c) of the INA grants the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security authority to admit, at his/her discretion, any refugee who is not firmly resettled in a third country, who is determined to be of special humanitarian concern, and who is admissible to the United States. The authority to determine eligibility for refugee status has been delegated to USCIS. In 2005, DHS/USCIS restructured the Refugee Affairs Division and established the Refugee Corps, a specially trained cadre of officers dedicated to adjudicating applications for refugee status. The Refugee Corps provides DHS/USCIS with the necessary resources and flexibility to respond to an increasingly diversified refugee admissions program. Each quarter of the fiscal year, on average, USCIS deploys approximately 100 Refugee Officers, Supervisory Refugee Officers, and fingerprinters to 12-16 locations around the world to interview refugee applicants. DHS/USCIS also devotes substantial resources to security vetting, anti-fraud, and training related to refugee processing, and it has strong partnerships with the law enforcement, national security, and intelligence communities to promote the integrity of the USRAP.

The Eligibility Determination

In order to be approved as a refugee, an applicant must meet the refugee definition contained in § 101(a)(42) of the INA. That section provides that a refugee is a person who is outside his or her country of nationality or last habitual residence and is unable or unwilling to return to that country because of persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. As mentioned above, the President may specify special circumstances under which a person can meet the refugee definition when he or she is still within the country of origin. The definition excludes a person who has ordered, incited, assisted, or otherwise participated in persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. Further, an applicant who has been “firmly resettled” in a third country may not be admitted as a refugee under INA Section 207. Applicants are also subject to various statutory grounds of inadmissibility, including criminal, security, and public health grounds, some of which may be waived or from which applicants may be exempted.

The grounds of inadmissibility that apply to refugee applicants include the broad terrorism-related inadmissibility grounds (TRIG) at Section 212(a)(3)(B) of the INA. Beginning in 2005, the Departments of Homeland Security, State, and Justice began to exercise a discretionary Secretarial authority to exempt certain categories of refugee applicants from TRIG inadmissibility based on a determination that they did not represent a threat to the United States and otherwise merited an exemption for humanitarian purposes. In FY 2015, DHS/USCIS began implementing two new exemptions for individuals who provided insignificant or “certain limited” material support (including through routine commercial or social transactions, in the course of providing humanitarian assistance, or under sub-duress pressure), to undesignated terrorist organizations. As of June 2015, more than 15,560 TRIG exemptions have been granted to refugee applicants.[6]

A DHS/USCIS officer conducts a non-adversarial, face-to-face interview of each refugee applicant designed to elicit information about the applicant’s claim for refugee status and any grounds of ineligibility. The officer asks questions about the applicant’s experiences in the country of origin, including problems and fears about returning (or remaining), as well as questions concerning the applicant’s activities, background, and criminal history. The officer also considers evidence about conditions in the country of origin and assesses the applicant’s credibility and claim.

Background Checks

Refugee applicants of all nationalities are required to undergo background security checks. Security checks include biographic name checks for all refugee applicants and biometric (fingerprint) checks for certain refugee applicants. PRM, through its overseas Resettlement Support Centers, initiates required biographic name checks, while USCIS is responsible for collecting biometric data for screening. Biographic and biometric information is vetted against a broad array of law enforcement, intelligence community, and other relevant databases to help confirm identity, to check for any criminal or other derogatory information (including watchlist information), and to identify information that could inform lines of questioning during the interview. Refugee applicants must clear all required security checks prior to final approval of their application.

PROCESSING ACTIVITIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF STATE

Overseas Processing Services

In most processing locations, PRM engages an NGO, an international organization (IO), or U.S. embassy contractors to manage a Resettlement Support Center (RSC) that assists in the processing of refugees for admission to the United States. RSC staff pre-screen applicants to determine preliminarily if they qualify for one of the applicable processing priorities and to prepare cases for DHS/USCIS adjudication. The RSCs assist applicants in completing documentary requirements and schedule DHS/USCIS refugee eligibility interviews. If an applicant is conditionally approved for resettlement, RSC staff guide the refugee through post-adjudication steps, including obtaining medical screening exams and attending cultural orientation programs. The RSC obtains sponsorship assurances and, once all required steps are completed, including all necessary security clearances, refers the case to IOM for transportation to the United States.

In FY 2015, NGOs (Church World Service, Hebrew Immigrant Aid Society, and International Rescue Committee) worked under cooperative agreements with PRM as RSCs at locations in Austria (covering Austria only), Kenya (covering sub-Saharan Africa), and Thailand (covering East Asia). International organizations (IOM and the International Catholic Migration Commission) supported refugee processing activities based in Ecuador, Jordan, Russia, Nepal, and Turkey which covered Latin America, the Middle East, South and Central Asia, and Europe. The U.S. Department of State supported refugee processing in Havana, Cuba.

Cultural Orientation

The Department of State strives to ensure that refugees who are accepted for admission to the United States are prepared for the profound life changes they will experience by providing cultural orientation programs prior to departure for the United States as well as upon arrival. It is critical that refugees have a realistic idea of what their new lives will be like, what services will be available to them, and what their responsibilities will be.

Every refugee family is offered a copy of Welcome to the United States, a resettlement guidebook developed with contributions from refugee resettlement workers, resettled refugees, and government officials. The current edition is available in ten languages: Arabic, Burmese, Chin, English, Farsi, Karen, Kinyarwanda, Nepali, Somali, and Swahili. The previous (2007) edition is still available in nine other languages: Albanian, Amharic, Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian, French, Kirundi, Russian, Spanish, Tigrinya, and Vietnamese. Through this book, refugees have access to accurate information about the initial resettlement period before they arrive in the U.S. The Welcome to the United States refugee orientation video is available in ten languages: Arabic, Burmese, Chin, English, Farsi, Karen, Kinyarwanda, Nepali, Somali, and Swahili. The 2004 version of the video is available in five other languages: Karenni, Kirundi, Russian, Spanish, and Tigrinya. The Department of State also funded the development of an interactive online learning tool that combines cultural orientation with English language learning. Released in early FY2015, Choosing My Way is for refugees who would like to interact with orientation material independently or who may not actively engage in formal orientation. It is also designed for use by orientation providers to encourage group discussion and reflection. All of these materials are available to download free of charge at www.COResourceExchange.org.

In addition, the Department of State funds one- to five-day pre-departure orientation classes for eligible refugees at sites throughout the world. In an effort to further bridge the information gap for certain groups, brief video presentations featuring the experience of recently resettled refugees of the same ethnic group are made available to refugee applicants overseas. Groups featured include refugees from Bhutan, Burma, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Cuba, Darfur, and Iraq. Faces of Resettlement, a video produced in 2013, shows five individuals who entered the United States as refugees, from Bhutan, Burma, Burundi, Iraq, and Sudan. Each of them tells their own story of the ways in which they are rebuilding their lives in their new communities. Faces of Resettlement also includes interviews with receiving community members. This video is accompanied by discussion guides for community members, service providers, and refugees.

In FY2014, the Department of State released a new curriculum for cultural orientation after arrival in the United States. Based on Reception and Placement (R&P) program objectives and indicators, the curriculum was developed to provide domestic cultural orientation providers with lesson plans, tools, and techniques to help refugees develop the knowledge, skills, and attitudes they will need to adjust to new life in the U.S. In addition to lesson plans, the publication contains a User's Guide; a section on staff preparation; and a section on tools for trainers and orientation development, with sub-sections on topics such as instructional approach, working with groups of different sizes, incorporating English into orientation, and conducting needs assessments. A companion toolkit includes a model assessment intended to provide domestic orientation providers with a sample tool for assessing refugee understanding of orientation topics during the R&P period.

Transportation

The Department of State funds the international transportation of refugees resettled in the United States through a program administered by IOM. The cost of transportation is provided to refugees in the form of a loan. Refugees are responsible for repaying these loans over time, beginning six months after their arrival, although it is possible to request a deferral based on inability to begin paying at six months.

Reception and Placement (R&P)

In FY 2015, PRM funded cooperative agreements with nine private resettlement agencies to provide initial resettlement services to refugees arriving in the United States. The R&P agencies are responsible for providing initial reception and core services (including housing, furnishings, clothing and food, as well as assistance with access to medical, employment, educational, and social services) to arriving refugees. These services are provided according to standards of care within a framework of outcomes and indicators developed jointly by the NGO community, state refugee coordinators, and U.S. government agencies. The nine organizations maintain a nationwide network of 312 affiliated offices in 185 locations to provide services. Two of the organizations also maintain a network of 24 affiliated offices through which unaccompanied refugee minors are placed into foster care, a program administered and funded by HHS/ORR.

Using R&P funds from PRM supplemented by funds and in-kind contributions from private and other sources, the participating agencies provide the following services, consistent with the terms of the R&P cooperative agreement:

• Sponsorship;

• Pre-arrival resettlement planning, including placement;

• Reception on arrival;

• Basic needs support (including housing, furnishings, food, and clothing) for at least 30 days;

• Cultural orientation;

• Assistance with access to health, employment, education, and other services, as needed; and

• Development and implementation of an initial resettlement service plan for each refugee.

Office of Refugee Resettlement (ORR)

Through the Refugee Act, Congress directed HHS/ORR to provide refugees with resettlement assistance that includes employment training, English language training, cash assistance (in a manner that promotes early independence), and job placement – including providing women with equal opportunities to employment as men. ORR’s mission is to help refugees transition into the U.S. by providing benefits and assistance to achieve self-sufficiency and become integrated members of society as soon as possible. To this end, ORR funds and administers various programs, some of which are highlighted below.

State-Administered and Wilson-Fish Programs

Under ORR’s state-administered or Wilson-Fish (WF) programs, refugees not eligible for Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) or Supplemental Security Income (SSI) are eligible to receive up to eight months of Refugee Cash Assistance (RCA). Refugees not eligible for Medicaid are eligible to receive up to eight months of Refugee Medical Assistance (RMA) upon arrival. In state-administered programs that operate a publicly administered RCA program (33 States), RCA benefits are based on cash benefit levels established by state TANF programs. In States that operate their RCA program through a Public-Private Program (PPP) model (5 States) and WF States (12 States plus one county), the RCA benefit is based on the higher of the RCA rates outlined in the ORR regulations or the State TANF rates.

The WF program is an alternative to the traditional state-administered program, and is usually administered by local voluntary resettlement agencies. The WF program emphasizes early employment and economic self-sufficiency by integrating cash assistance, case management, and employment services, and by incorporating innovative strategies for the provision of cash assistance (e.g. financial bonuses for early employment). WF programs also serve as a replacement for the State when the State government declines to participate in the ORR-funded refugee assistance program. There are currently 13 WF programs nationwide.

ORR also provides states/WF programs with Formula Refugee Social Services (RSS) and Targeted Assistance (TAG) funds. ORR distributes these funds based on arrival numbers and refugee concentration levels in counties with a high utilization of public assistance. Funding is time limited, and refugees can only access RSS and TAG services up to five years after arrival. These services include: employability services, employment assessment services, on-the-job training, English language instruction, vocational training, case management, translation/interpreter services, social adjustment services, health-related services, home management, and if necessary to support employment, childcare and transportation.

Additionally, to assist specific groups of refugees, ORR administers the specialized programs through states/WF programs, including Cuban-Haitian, Older Refugees, Preventive Health, Refugee School Impact, and Targeted Assistance.

ORR Matching Grant Program

The ORR Matching Grant program (MG) is provided through the nine national resettlement agencies that provide R & P services and their resettlement affiliates in 42 states. The objective of MG is to guide newly-arrived refugee households toward economic self-sufficiency through employment within four to six months of program eligibility (usually within the first month of arrival). In MG, self-sufficiency is defined as total household income from employment that enables a family unit to support itself without receipt of public cash assistance. For each MG participant, ORR awards $2,200 per capita to participating national resettlement agencies, which then allocate funds to its local service providers. Agencies provide a 50% match to every federal dollar.

Through the ORR Matching Grant Program, local service providers ensure core maintenance services for a minimum of 120 days which include housing, transportation, food, and a cash allowance. Clients also receive intensive case management and employment services. Refugees who are unable to attain self-sufficiency by day 120 or 180 may access RCA for the remainder of the eight month eligibility period. In FY 2014, over 29,000 individuals were enrolled in the program, 76% of whom achieved self-sufficiency. Approximately 33% of refugees participate in the ORR Matching Grant Program.

ORR Refugee Health

ORR’s Division of Refugee Health (DRH) continued to address the health and well-being of refugees. DRH is working on various initiatives including: collaborating with states and partners in support of the expansion of Medicaid, administering the Survivors of Torture program; providing technical assistance on medical screening guidelines, mental health awareness and linkages, suicide prevention, emergency preparedness and other health and mental health initiatives (e.g. women’s health issues, mental health training, etc.).

ORR Unaccompanied Refugee Minor (URM) Program

ORR provides funds to 15 states who administer over 20 URM programs. States contract with local licensed foster care agencies that provide specialized placements and services to URMs. URMs live in various placements including: traditional and therapeutic foster homes, group homes, semi-independent and independent living and residential treatment centers, and homes of relatives. URMs receive various services including: English language training, educational and vocational training, cultural preservation, social integration, family tracing, permanency planning, independent living, medical care, and mental health care. ORR regulations require states to provide services to URM in parity with the state’s Title IV-B foster care plan.

Other ORR Discretionary Refugee Service Programs

ORR also provides funding to non-profit agencies to focus on special initiatives or programs for refugees including: case management, ethnic community development, home-based child care business development, individual development accounts, microenterprise development, and agricultural projects.

In the past year, ORR has expanded its Preferred Communities Program to support long-term case management services to the more at risk populations as the program is seeing an increasing number of women heads of household and refugees with significant medical and mental health needs.

ORR Technical Assistance

ORR provides technical assistance (TA) to resettlement stakeholders through various organizations that have relevant expertise. Currently ORR’s TA providers assist stakeholders in the areas of community engagement/integration, employment, health, services to survivors of torture, and TANF state programs.

Regional Programs

Table II

Proposed FY 2016 Regional Ceilings by Priority

Africa Priority 1 Individual Referrals 15,000 Priority 2 Groups 9,500 Priority 3 Family Reunification Refugees 500 Total Proposed: 25,000 East Asia Priority 1 Individual Referrals 1,800 Priority 2 Groups 11,000 Priority 3 Family Reunification Refugees 200 Total Proposed: 13,000 Europe / Central Asia Priority 1 Individual Referrals 990 Priority 2 Groups 3,000 Priority 3 Family Reunification Refugees 10 Total Proposed: 4,000 Latin America / Caribbean Priority 1 Individual Referrals 950 Priority 2 Groups 2,000 Priority 3 Family Reunification Refugees 50 Total Proposed: 3,000 Near East / South Asia Priority 1 Individual Referrals 16,000 Priority 2 Groups 17,900 Priority 3 Family Reunification Refugees 100 Total Proposed: 34,000 Unallocated Reserve 6,000 TOTAL PROPOSED CEILING: 85,000

AFRICA

There are currently some 4.3 million refugees across the African continent, constituting roughly 25 percent of the global refugee population. Refugee numbers in Africa increased by nearly 1 million in 2014 and 2015 to date due to new or intensified conflicts across the continent. At the same time, there have been only limited opportunities in Africa for local integration and refugee repatriation.

New and ongoing conflicts in four countries – Burundi, the Central African Republic (CAR), Nigeria, and South Sudan – are responsible for the rapid growth in refugee numbers in 2014 and 2015. In Burundi, 2015 election-related violence forced nearly 200,000 refugees to flee to neighboring Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Rwanda, and Tanzania; this outflow is expected to continue to grow throughout 2015. In CAR, the overthrow of the government and widespread clashes between armed groups, together with earlier conflict, has now displaced nearly 440,000 Central Africans internally and forced over 460,000 to flee to neighboring Cameroon, Chad, the DRC, and Republic of the Congo. Instability and violence in Nigeria, Cameroon, Chad and Niger have displaced more than 1.5 million in northern Nigeria and sent some 200,000 refugees to neighboring Cameroon, Chad, and Niger. Cameroon, Niger and Chad continue to struggle with rising numbers of internally displaced people as well. In South Sudan, conflict erupted in December 2013 between political factions and quickly escalated into a major conflict along ethnic lines. Over 1.5 million South Sudanese are internally displaced and total refugee numbers have now reached nearly 754,000.

Ongoing conflict in the DRC and Sudan has also continued to generate new refugee outflows over the past few years. Intensified conflict in eastern DRC since mid-2012 has led an additional 180,000 Congolese to seek asylum in Uganda, Rwanda, and Burundi, bringing the total number of Congolese refugees to nearly 514,000. In Sudan, ongoing fighting between armed groups in Darfur has resulted in some 30,000 new Darfuri refugees fleeing to Chad, bringing the total number to nearly 370,000. At the same time, the ongoing Sudanese conflict with rebel groups in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile states has forced some 270,000 Sudanese refugees to flee to South Sudan, Ethiopia, and Kenya since June 2011. The steady outflow of Eritreans also continues, not only to refugee camps in Ethiopia and eastern Sudan, but also further north as Eritreans attempt to migrate to Europe. More than 300,000 Eritreans have fled political repression, forced conscription, and economic collapse over the past decade with some 200,000 living as refugees in Africa.

Africa’s refugee numbers have been augmented as well by conflicts outside of Africa, primarily in the neighboring Near East region. North Africa has long hosted large numbers of Palestinian refugees. The ongoing crisis in Syria has added more than 160,000 new refugees to the region including 140,000 in Egypt and 18,000 in Libya. The new crisis in Yemen has led some 15,000 Yemenis and Somalis living in Yemen to flee to Djibouti and Somalia in 2015 to date, with higher numbers expected. No progress was made over the past year in seeking a resolution to the Western Saharan conflict that would enable an estimated 90,000 Sahrawi refugees in Algeria to return home.

Most African countries honor the principle of first asylum and most have allowed refugees to remain – and in many cases to effectively economically and/or socially integrate – until voluntary repatriation is possible. Some countries, such as Egypt and Sudan, have forcibly returned refugees over the past year. For countries growing weary of hosting large refugee caseloads, we continue to advocate for hospitality and first asylum for refugees. And, for those countries that lack formal mechanisms for asylum, we continue to advocate for the establishment of systems in consultation with UNHCR. Morocco in particular has made progress in this regard.

Religious Freedom

In Sub-Saharan Africa, people are generally free to practice their chosen religions. Governments regularly provide for and respect freedom of religion, although in some countries, such as Eritrea and Sudan, religious freedom is limited, particularly in the midst of ethnic and other conflicts.

The Government of the State of Eritrea is responsible for severe religious freedom abuses. In recent years the country has engaged in serious religious repression by harassing, arresting, and detaining members of independent evangelical groups, including Pentecostals and Jehovah’s Witnesses (who lost certain rights of citizenship for not participating in the 1993 national referendum). Detainees are held in harsh conditions and some have died in custody. The government has also sought greater control over the four State-approved religious groups: the Eritrean Orthodox Church, the Roman Catholic Church, the Evangelical (Lutheran) Church, and the Sunni Islamic community. The government reportedly holds individuals who are jailed for their religious affiliation at various locations. Often detainees are not formally charged, accorded due process, or allowed access to their families. While many are ostensibly jailed for evasion of military conscription, significant numbers were being held solely for their religious beliefs; the current estimate is between 1,200-3,000 individuals detained on religious grounds. At least three Jehovah's Witnesses had been detained for 15 years, reportedly for evading compulsory military service, a term far beyond the maximum legal penalty of two years for refusing to perform national service.

In Sudan, the government continues to place restrictions on non-Muslims in a manner that is inconsistent with domestic and international obligations to uphold freedom of religion. Although there is no penalty for converting from another religion to Islam, converting from Islam is punishable by death, as was demonstrated in the recent case of Ms. Meriam Ishag who was sentenced to death for apostasy. Though the sentence was overturned and she was subsequently released, authorities express their strong prejudice against conversion by occasionally subjecting converts to intense scrutiny, ostracism, and intimidation, or by encouraging converts to leave the country.

Both Eritrea and Sudan are currently designated as “Countries of Particular Concern” (CPC) for particularly severe violations of religious freedom by the Department of State under the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998. The USRAP continues to be available through Priority 1 referrals to Sudanese, Eritrean, and other refugees who are victims of religious intolerance. Refugees from Eritrea and Sudan with certain refugee or asylee family members in the United States have access to the USRAP through Priority 3.

In Somalia the provisional federal constitution provides for freedom of religion within limits, although it enshrines Islam as the state religion. The law prohibits proselytism for any religion other than Islam. Since its inception in July 2012, the Federal Government of Somalia has made incremental progress to establish institutions and expanding its authority, but its capacity to enforce the provisional constitution remains extremely limited, particularly outside of Mogadishu. There have been reports that non-Muslim individuals experience discrimination, violence, and detention because of their religious beliefs. Refugees from Somalia with certain refugee or asylee family members in the United States also have access to the USRAP through Priority 3.

Voluntary Repatriation

Despite new and protracted refugee situations, voluntary repatriation to improved conditions in the home country remains the most common and desirable durable solution. With the conclusion of various peace agreements and the support of the U.S. government and other donors, UNHCR has made some progress in promoting and supporting refugee repatriation and reintegration in Africa. Over the past 20 years, net refugee numbers in Africa have fallen by nearly one third (from more than six million at their height in the 1990s to 4.3 million today) even in the face of new outflows. Large-scale organized repatriations to Angola, Liberia, and Rwanda have largely been completed, but residual populations remain. UNHCR recommended cessation of prima facie refugee status for refugees from Angola and Liberia effective June 30, 2012, and for pre-1999 caseload Rwandan refugees effective June 30, 2013. Efforts continue to repatriate those who still wish to return and to locally integrate residual populations where asylum countries agree to provide permanent residence or citizenship.

Smaller-scale repatriation efforts continue throughout the continent. In West Africa, out of an estimated 300,000 who fled the 2010-2011 election-related violence in Côte d’Ivoire, over 230,000 have now returned home. Repatriation was delayed in 2014 and early 2015 due to the Ebola crisis and subsequent border closures. However, UNHCR anticipates assisting with the return of the remaining 60,000 Ivoirian refugees in 2015 and 2016. In Mali, while UNHCR is not yet promoting refugee return to northern Mali, more than 30,000 refugees returned spontaneously in 2014 to safe regions under government control. Returns have been slower in 2015 due to periodic outbreaks of violence in northern Mali.

In East Africa, the repatriation to South Sudan that started in 2005 was largely concluded in 2011 with the return of more than 370,000 refugees. However, due to widespread conflict since 2013, all repatriation has stopped and the focus has instead shifted to emergency response to the over 622,000 new refugees. UNHCR, the Government of Kenya, and the Government of Somalia signed a Somali refugee repatriation framework in 2013, and UNHCR has supported the return of some 3,500 Somalis to date to pilot areas within Somalia. Most parts of Somalia, however, are not conducive to safe refugee return. Despite the efforts of some asylum countries, including Israel, to repatriate Eritrean refugees, UNHCR has strongly discouraged returns to Eritrea given ongoing political repression and harsh treatment of returnees.

In Central Africa, most organized repatriation to Burundi ended in 2010 and there were over 500,000 returns from 2002 to 2014. The 2015 election-related violence in Burundi, which has generated nearly 200,000 refugees to date, threatens to erase progress on Burundi repatriation. Although the majority of Rwandan refugees returned home in the late 1990’s, some 100,000 to 200,000 are thought to remain in exile. With the cessation of prima facie refugee status for pre-1999 Rwandan refugees on June 30, 2013, most remaining Rwandans will be required either to repatriate or to seek non-refugee means of remaining in asylum countries. UNHCR had made significant progress in repatriating Congolese to eastern DRC earlier in the past decade. However, renewed hostilities between the Congolese government and other armed groups across eastern DRC erased most of these gains. Eastern DRC is too insecure for large-scale refugee return at this point. UNHCR was able to conclude its repatriation program for some 130,000 Congolese refugees to western DRC’s Equateur Province from 2012 through 2014.

Local Integration

While most African countries adhere to encampment policies for refugees, many have allowed for de facto integration by providing land for refugee farmers or permitting refugees to open small businesses. This integration dynamic has occurred particularly for refugees who fled during the 1960s through the early 1980s to countries that had arable land available, allowing many refugees to move out of camps. Despite such de facto integration, refugees residing among the local population did not necessarily enjoy the rights, entitlements, or economic opportunities available to legal residents. As a result, this piecemeal integration was often an interim, rather than a durable, solution for many African refugees.

More recently, however, a number of African countries have offered more formal integration as a durable solution for residual refugee populations who will not or cannot repatriate. In West Africa, in conjunction with UNHCR, the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Liberia, Nigeria, and Sierra Leone launched a regional local integration program for Liberian and Sierra Leonean refugees in 2007. That program provided refugees opportunities for economic self-reliance; activities to enhance the quality of their social integration; and legal rights and documentation, including access to citizenship in some countries and freedom of movement in all countries under the protocols of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS). Senegal offered Mauritanian refugees who wished to remain in Senegal the option of becoming Senegalese citizens in 2007, and UNHCR, in partnership with the Senegalese government, launched a campaign in 2012 to provide digitized and biometric identity cards to some 19,000 refugees (of whom 14,000 were Mauritanians). The card guarantees holders the same rights as Senegalese citizens, including the right to residence in the country and to travel to ECOWAS member states. Mali agreed to provide birth certificates to some 8,000 Mauritanian refugee children, paving the way for them to eventually apply for Malian citizenship.

In Southern Africa, local integration is being provided for up to 15,000 former Angolan refugees. The Government of Zambia pledged in 2012 to offer permanent residence status to 10,000 former Angolan refugees -- mainly refugees who arrived before 1986, were born in Zambia, or are married to Zambians -- and has already approved 6,000 applicants who meet eligibility criteria. Namibia and South Africa have agreed to legal local integration of 2,400 and 2,500 former Angolan refugees respectively.

In East Africa, the Government of Tanzania offered to provide permanent settlement and citizenship to nearly 200,000 1972-era Burundi refugees; some 160,000 accepted the offer and are now in the process of receiving official documentation. While not offering a formal integration program, Uganda has permitted refugees to live or work outside of camps. Ethiopia formally introduced an out-of-camp policy for Eritrean refugees in August 2010, allowing Eritreans to live outside camps if they are able to support themselves or if they have someone to sponsor them financially. Approximately 3,000 Eritreans are part of this program now. While it does not give Eritrean refugees the right to work, it does offer the ability to pursue additional educational opportunities, including tertiary education. In 2013, Sudan agreed to issue work permits to some 30,000 Eritrean refugees who wish to work outside of refugee camps in eastern Sudan, although only a handful have been issued permits to date.

Third-Country Resettlement

Given the political and economic volatility in many parts of Africa, resettlement to third countries outside the region is an essential durable solution and element of protection for certain refugees. With limited opportunities for permanent integration in many countries of asylum and the protracted nature of some refugee situations, the need for third-country resettlement of African refugees is expected to continue. In recent years, UNHCR has increasingly viewed resettlement as an important tool of protection for refugees in Africa and has increased resettlement referrals this past year.

FY 2015 U.S. Admissions

We project just over 21,000 African refugee arrivals in FY 2015. This number is primarily a result of increased processing capacity for Congolese refugees in the Great Lakes region. Two countries of origin – Somalia and DRC – account for the vast majority of U.S. refugee admissions from Africa, followed by Eritrea, Sudan and Ethiopia.

Implementation of the enhanced Congolese Resettlement Strategy – UNHCR’s effort to refer 50,000 DRC refugees for resettlement from Rwanda, Uganda, Tanzania and Burundi to all resettlement countries over the next 5-7 years – continued in FY 2015 with increased processing in Tanzania and Burundi, following on efforts from Rwanda and Uganda. We anticipate strong arrivals of Congolese refugees from all four countries totaling approximately 7,000 arrivals.

We expect to admit nearly 7,000 refugees from our two largest processing locations in Africa: Kenya and Ethiopia, plus another 600 from other locations in East Africa. Over 3,000 refugees will depart for the United States from Kenya this year, mostly Somalis in the Kakuma and Dadaab camps. PRM continues to fund movements of refugee applicants from Dadaab to Kakuma for the purposes of DHS interview and adjudication. Applicants return to Dadaab for medical exams and other post-DHS steps until their departure for the United States. Admissions from Ethiopia also continue to be strong with approximately 3,700 U.S. arrivals projected this fiscal year. Populations include primarily Somalis from camps in the east and Eritreans from the northern camps, including approximately 70 Eritrean unaccompanied refugee minors. We also will resettle smaller numbers of Sudanese from camps in West. We continue to interview refugees from the Central African Republic in southern Chad and Sudanese Darfuri refugees in Eastern Chad. We expect to admit nearly 500 refugees from Chad in FY 2015, part of an effort to build a large resettlement operation for Darfuri refugees in Eastern Chad. An additional 250 refugees from various locations in West Africa are also expected to be admitted in FY 2015.

From Southern Africa, we expect to admit 2,400 refugees consisting primarily of Somalis from South Africa and Congolese from Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. Resettlement of these populations will allow UNHCR to decrease its “footprint” in these countries by closing or reducing the size of camps, so that resources can be utilized elsewhere.

Outside of sub-Saharan Africa, we anticipate approximately 3,000 Sudanese, Somali, Ethiopian, Eritrean, and other sub-Saharan African refugees who will be arriving primarily from Egypt, Malta, or via one of the UNHCR Emergency Transit Centers in Romania and Slovakia. In all, we expect to admit refugees of nearly 30 African nationalities, processed in dozens of countries during FY 2015.

FY 2016 U.S. Resettlement Program

We propose up to 22,000 resettlement numbers for African refugees in FY 2016. PRM has actively engaged relevant offices within the Department of State, UNHCR, the NGO community, and DHS/USCIS to identify caseloads appropriate for resettlement consideration. As a result of these discussions, PRM has identified a number of nationalities and groups for processing during FY 2016.

From East Africa and the Great Lakes region, we expect close to 15,000 admissions. We expect to resettle just over 3,000 refugees each from Kenya and Ethiopia, primarily Somalis and Eritreans. We also expect UNHCR to continue referring Eritrean unaccompanied refugee minors at a rate of about 100 per year from camps in northern Ethiopia. In the Great Lakes region, processing of Congolese in Rwanda, Uganda, and Tanzania (and Burundi if the situation calms) is expected to result in a total of 8,000 departures. Approximately 3,500 of these admissions will be the result of a P-2 group designation for Congolese refugees in the sole remaining camp for Congolese in Tanzania. Departures from Uganda and Rwanda will likely hold steady with 2,000 and 1,800 departures respectively, but violence in Burundi will result in lower arrival numbers from Burundi in FY 2016.

From southern Africa, we expect to admit 2,000 refugees consisting primarily of Somalis from South Africa and Congolese from Mozambique, Malawi, Namibia, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.

In Chad, UNHCR intends to continue its effort to establish an infrastructure for a robust resettlement program for Sudanese Darfuris in eastern Chad. This will be in addition to the continued processing of Central African Republic refugees from southern Chad. Total admission numbers from West Africa and Chad are expected to be approximately 400.

Outside of sub-Saharan Africa, we anticipate 2,500 to 3,500 Sudanese, Somali, Ethiopian, Eritrean and other sub-Saharan African refugees will be admitted from Egypt and Malta, and through the Emergency Transit Centers in Slovakia and Romania.

Proposed FY 2016 Africa program to include arrivals from the following categories:

Priority 1 Individual Referrals 15,000

Priority 2 Groups 9,500

Priority 3 Family Reunification 500

Total Proposed Ceiling 25,000

EAST ASIA

Several countries in East Asia host large and diverse refugee populations. Recent years have seen important developments for these groups. Thailand and Bangladesh continue to host large numbers of Burmese refugees and asylum-seekers, and thousands of urban asylum seekers and refugees are in the capital cities of Bangkok, Kuala Lumpur and New Delhi, including Burmese, Pakistanis, Sri Lankans, West Africans, Syrians, Palestinians, and others. The number of persons of concern to UNHCR across the archipelago of Indonesia has also increased to nearly 12,000, including some 4,300 refugees, in recent years.

The U.S. government continues to press for meaningful political and democratic reforms in Burma, as well as a national ceasefire agreement with ethnic minority groups. The international community is engaged in discussions regarding the voluntary return of Burmese refugees, but acknowledges that ongoing conflict with armed ethnic groups, particularly in Kachin and Shan States, peace and national reconciliation efforts, and limited access to humanitarian and development assistance make large-scale return of refugees in safety and with dignity a slow, gradual process.

The resettlement of more than 100,000 Burmese refugees from Thailand since 2006 – including more than 77,000 to the United States – has significantly reduced the number of Burmese refugees in the camps who are eligible for the U.S. P-2 resettlement program. After more than seven years of large-scale resettlement, we have arrived at the natural conclusion of the group resettlement program with specific eligibility criteria for Burmese refugees who were re-registered by UNHCR in 2005 and formally registered by the Royal Thai Government (RTG). P-2 processing will continue until we have completed the processing of every application received by the deadline in each camp. Those who do not exercise this option will be able to remain in the camps until safe and voluntary returns are possible. The United States will continue to accept individual referrals from UNHCR for all nationalities, including registered Burmese.

Since 2006, UNHCR Malaysia has operated the second largest refugee status determination program in the world and Malaysia is currently one of the largest resettlement countries in the U.S. program with some 9,000 projected refugee departures in FY15 and more than 53,000 since 2006. As of the end of March 2015, there were 152,574 persons of concern registered with UNHCR in Malaysia of which 141,568, or 92.8 percent, are from Burma. In addition, some 11,000 asylum-seekers and refugees from various countries – primarily Afghanistan, Iraq, Somalia, and Sri Lanka – are registered with UNHCR. Malaysia is not a party to the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees or its 1967 Protocol, but generally tolerates the presence of refugees.

The systematic and continuous persecution and discrimination of members of the Rohingya minority from Rakhine State, Burma have resulted in large numbers fleeing Rakhine State to seek safety in Bangladesh, Thailand, Malaysia, and other countries in the region for over five decades. The mid-2015 migrant crisis in the Indian Ocean began to unfold on May 1 when Thai authorities discovered mass graves of migrants in Songkhla, Thailand and began cracking down on migrant smuggling operations. Because of this crackdown and significantly higher volumes of Rohingya seeking passage to Malaysia through smuggling networks, smugglers have taken to holding their ships at sea as they await conditions for disembarkation or sometimes abandon them. By May 10 over 4,100 people landed in Indonesia, Malaysia, Bangladesh, Burma, and Thailand. On May 20, the Foreign Ministers of Malaysia and Indonesia and Thailand agreed to continue to provide humanitarian assistance and temporary shelter to some 7,000 migrants and asked the international community to take responsibility for the repatriation of the migrants or resettlement to third countries within a period of one year. The Administration is actively involved in supporting the regional response that stresses the need to address the root causes of the crisis in source countries, including by promoting and protecting the human rights of members of vulnerable populations in source countries.

The last large influx of approximately 250,000 Rohingya from Rakhine State to the Cox’s Bazar district in southeastern Bangladesh began in July 1991. Since then, steady flows of Rohingya