John L. Graham Back to Faculty Profiles Title: Professor Emeritus, Marketing and International Business, Faculty Director of the Center for Global Leadership and Director of International Programs

Professor Emeritus, Marketing and International Business, Faculty Director of the Center for Global Leadership and Director of International Programs Office Phone: 949.824.8468

949.824.8468 Fax: 949.725.2831

Office Location: SB2 326

SB2 326 Email: jgraham@uci.edu Key Research/Interest Areas:

Global marketing International business negotiations Innovation Business in Japan Negotiation styles in the United States, Japan, Canada, Mexico, Brazil, Taiwan and The Peoples’ Republic of China, South Korea, France, Germany, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union

Education:

PhD, University of California, Berkeley MBA, San Diego State University BA, San Jose State University

John Graham is an expert in global marketing, international business negotiations, and business in Greater China and Japan. He has co-authored several books: International Marketing (with Philip R. Cateora and Mary C. Gilly), McGraw-Hill, 14th edition, 2009; Global Negotiation: The New Rules (with William Hernandez Requejo), Palgrave Macmillan, 2008; Doing Business with the New Japan (with James Day Hodgson and Yoshihiro Sano), Rowman & Littlefield, 2008; China Now: Doing Business in the World’s Most Dynamic Marketplace (with N. Mark Lam), McGraw-Hill, 2007; and Together Again: A Creative Guide to Successful Multigenerational Living (with Sharon Graham Niederhaus), M. Evans, 2007. Marketing. See www.GlobalNegotiationResources.com and www.TogetherAgainBook.com for details.



He has also published extensively in academic and management journals including Harvard Business Review, MIT Sloan Management Review, Journal of Marketing, Management Science, Marketing Science, Journal of Consumer Research, Journal of International Business Studies, Strategic Management Journal, and the Journal of Higher Education.



Professor Graham has been interviewed by numerous local, national, and international broadcast media outlets, including “NBC Nightly News” and the BBC, and written several articles for the Los Angeles Times, La Opinion, and the New York Times.



He has also been a consultant for executive groups for major corporations, associations and institutions. They include Toyota Motor Sales, AT&T, the United States Trade Representative, the United States Institute of Peace, and The National Institute of Health. Books William Hernandez Requejo and John L. Graham, Global Negotiations: The New Rules , New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. See www.GlobalNegotiationResources.com for details.

, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. See www.GlobalNegotiationResources.com for details. N. Mark Lam and John L. Graham, China Now: Doing Business in the World’s Most Dynamic Market , New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Trade, 2007. See www.ChinaNowBook.com for details.

, New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Trade, 2007. See www.ChinaNowBook.com for details. James Day Hodgson, Yoshihiro Sano, and John L. Graham, Doing Business in the New Japan , Boulder, CO: Rowman & Littlefield, 2008. See www.GlobalNegotiationResources.com for details.

, Boulder, CO: Rowman & Littlefield, 2008. See www.GlobalNegotiationResources.com for details. Sharon Graham Niederhaus and John L. Graham, Together Again: A Creative Guide to Successful Multigenerational Living, Landham, MD: M. Evans, 2007. See www.TogetherAgainBook.com for details and related publicity including a segment on ABC Good Morning America about the book.

Academic Honors Academy of Management International Division Best Paper Award at the Annual Meetings, San Diego, CA, August 1998 for “ Language’s Consequences: A Test of Linguistic Based Measures of Culture Using Hofstede’s Dimensions ,” with Joel West.

,” with Joel West. Lauder Institute of Management and International Studies (at the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania) 1993 Citation Winner for a paper with A. Mintu and W. Rodgers, " Explorations of Negotiation Behavior in Ten Foreign Cultures Using a Model Developed in the United States ," Management Science, January 1994, 40 (1), page 72-95.

," Management Science, January 1994, 40 (1), page 72-95. Rated third among scholars in International Business during the 1980's based upon research productivity (cf. "An Analysis of Significant Contributions to the International Business Literature," A.J. Morrison & A.C. Inkpen, Journal of International Business Studies, vol. 22, no. 1, 1991).