Your grandma is Remain campaign’s last chance to stay in the EU
Remain is trying to get to your Nan (Picture: Getty)

It’s less than a week until the EU referendum and your nan has a lot of thinking to do.

She may not own a mobile phone, thinks Twitter is brand of bird feed and is still wondering what happened to Teletext…

When will we know the result of the EU poll? Everything you need to know about the referendumBut damn it, she could be the Remain campaign’s secret weapon!

Many recent polls have suggested that those over 50 mostly want out of the EU.

In fact, it appears to be the young – particularly those between 18 and 34 – who make up the majority of camp Bremain.

A website Call Your Nan has been set up to help persuade the older voter (Picture: Getty Images)

That’s why a new campaign is urging the youngsters to get their grannies on side with Call Your Nan.

It’s sometimes easy to forget that your dear old grandmother, who never forgets your birthday, is sat at home waiting to hear that phone ring.

Russia is banned from the Olympics and Putin isn’t at all happyFeel guilty?

Team Remain is pretty much hoping that your nan, who would do ANYTHING for you, will give into your gentle persuasions.

There’s a website too, called (you guessed it) www.callyournan.com

They’ve helpfully pieced together an automated script – all you have to do is insert your name and picture (your nan would be so proud).

This is what it says: Hey Nan, its me. Yes…<insert name here>… I really want to talk you about the upcoming EU referendum on Thursday June 23rd. I’m sure you’ve already made up your mind on which way to vote, but I would love it if you voted to remain in the EU. Three million UK jobs are directly linked to trade with the EU, and my job/work is heavily dependent on trade with other EU markets. A vote to leave could really have an impact on both my own, and my friends’ jobs. The EU has also given me guaranteed holiday pay and paid maternity/paternity leave, which makes my life a great deal easier and puts far less strain on my bank balance.

It goes on, but you get the gist.

And if she refuses, then just say ‘don’t you love me anymore?’

Works every time.

MORE: People keep rescuing baby animals that really don’t need to be rescued