Austin news, sports, weather, Longhorns, business
If you use an RSS reader, here is feed for First Reading: XML . Learn more about RSS.

Home > First Reading > Archives > 2010 > November > 04 > Entry

Sorry this is later than usual, wanted to catch the governor on national TV this morning.

(Happy birthday to Eddie Solis and GOP operative Will Fullerton.)

Gov. Rick Perry is off and running on his media tour to promote his new book, “Fed Up! Our Fight to Save America From Washington.”

He was supposed to be on the beginning of the “Today” show this morning, but got bumped for a story about an emergency plane landing. He did tape an interview, and a Tweeter who can see into the future (meaning she’s watching the show on the East Coast) says the Perry segment is coming up at 8:40. (My understanding is that the show just runs on an hour delay in our time zone, so it should be on at 8:40 our time just as it was on at 8:40 their time.)

Perry did make his scheduled appearance on Fox and Friends on the Fox News Channel. He followed a ventriloquist. Here’s the gist of the Perry interview:

First question was about Perry’s wins in primary and general election.

Perry: “Two capable opponents, but Texans wanted to keep us on track. We think low taxes, the regulatory climate fair and balanced (On Fox! Nice.) and obviously a legal system that doesn’t allow for over-suing, particularly on the medical side, public schools that keep a skilled workforce in place, those four things put Texas at the top of the list from a job-creation standpoint and economy, and people said, ‘Let’s keep it that way.’”

Interviewer noted that some people said after Tuesday’s results they would move from California to Texas.

Perry: “They’ve been doing that for a decade now. Since the first of the year, 153 businesses at last count had moved out of California to Texas. And that’s what the book is really about, it’s about freedom. It’s about freedom from Washington, D.C., setting the standard, if you will, setting us on a one-size-fits-all course and mentality. And the book is about freedom, freedom from an oppressive Washington tax and regulatory, and a Supreme Court that frankly has been abusing the Constitution as well for way too long.”

Then Fox’s Brian Kilmeade had this non-question question: “Twenty-one Democratic incumbents lost their seats in Texas. When you talk about freedom, government doing less allows people the freedom to fail if that so be it.”

Perry: “The states ought to be laboratory of innovation. That is the way our founding fathers had it set up. The Tenth Amendment clearly says that the states are where the action’s supposed to be, if you will. And frankly whether Bobby Jindal over there in Louisiana comes up with a great way to deliver health care, trust me I’ll go snitch that and move it back to Texas and try it out. But we shouldn’t be forced into this Obamacare, for instance, a great misuse of the Constitution and forcing states to do things that are not in their best interest.”

Then they talked for a moment at the end about the fact that there are now 30-31 Republican governors and that was about it.

Check out the Statesman’s Postcards blog later this morning for updates on Perry’s “Today” interview. Also, as the Statesman’s Corrie MacLaggan was the first to confirm, Perry will be on “The Daily Show with Jon Stewart” on Monday.

• The Statesman’s Corrie MacLaggan and Kate Alexander did great work in giving Perry’s new book a full reading, and they’ve got the story this morning: “In his new book about states’ rights, GOP Gov. Rick Perry celebrates the spirit of tea party activists and others who, in the name of the Constitution, he says, are mounting a revolution to save America from grave and imminent danger. He blames what he sees as the invasive and corrosive nature of the federal government on everyone from President Barack Obama to Republicans who ‘capitulate’ through compromise, including George W. Bush.”

• From the Statesman’s Mike Ward: “On the day after the general election, and after months of official reluctance to talk publicly about the issue of taxes, a task force on Wednesday aired its report on a controversial business margins tax that was designed to help boost state revenue. It concludes that the tax is generating much less money than expected, adding to a whopping state budget shortfall that could perhaps reach $24 billion.”

• From the Statesman’s Tim Eaton: “A day after Republicans won a record 99 seats in the Texas House, the race began for the next important election facing legislators: the one in January when they choose their leader for the upcoming session. Speaker Joe Straus said Wednesday that he has secured pledges from almost 130 of the 150 members of the House.”

• Ken Herman: “The race is on, says a West Texas House member mounting an insurgent campaign for speaker from his small office in the Capitol basement. The race is over, says Speaker Joe Straus from his suite of offices behind the House chamber.”

• Dallas Morning News: “Republicans on Wednesday celebrated their huge wins in the state Capitol, particularly in the House, where the party may revive efforts on issues that have failed in the past, including illegal immigration, voter ID and school vouchers. Democrats’ losses were so staggering that they may only be able to block some of the bills in the Senate because of procedural rules.”

• Texas Tribune: “The Texas Democratic Trust might have been the biggest single loser in Tuesday’s election, as Texas Republicans swept away most of the advances that group financed and fought for during the last three election cycles. And the losses came as the Trust prepared to shut down its operations — its mission ended, if not accomplished.”

• Houston Chronicle: “The Texas House teetered Wednesday on the edge of a two-thirds GOP majority as a challenge to Speaker Joe Straus brewed over just how Republican a Republican House must be. Tuesday’s election knocked off 21 Democratic incumbents, and another Democrat held a slim 15-vote lead that could evaporate when overseas military votes are counted. That means the GOP has the potential to hold 100 seats in the 150-member body. Democrats lost important committee chairmanships and seats on the powerful budget-writing committee that will be charged with trying to erase a state shortfall of $18 billion to $24 billion.”

• Interesting tease on KXAN this morning: “After months of digging, KXAN Austin News exposes the lives of Texas lawmakers. Sunday after the game.” Looks like Nanci Wilson has been spending a lot of time looking at how lawmakers use campaign funds to pay for their lifestyle.

Countdown

68 days until the start of the 82nd Texas Legislature.

Everything else

Austin weather from News 8 Austin’s Maureen McCann: Becoming mostly sunny. Slightly warmer with a high around 70.

Hornets 107, Rockets 99. (The Rockets are not good.)

Spurs 112, Suns 110.

Mavs 102, Nuggets 101.

Charlie Sheen has hired a sober coach. He should have hired Ken Herman.

Send me an e-mail at jembry@statesman.com if you want a link to First Reading as soon as I post it. Also, you can follow me on Twitter for news updates around the clock.

Get more Legislative coverage inside the Virtual Capitol

Permalink | Comments (11) | Post your comment