Austin news, sports, weather, Longhorns, business
If you use an RSS reader, here is feed for First Reading: XML . Learn more about RSS.

Home > First Reading > Archives > 2010 > August > 12 > Entry

I come to you this morning from the Renaissance Hotel, where both Gov. Rick Perry and Democratic challenger Bill White will address the Texas Association of Broadcasters. Separately. The program starts early, so FR will be shorter than usual.

But we’ve got an exclusive: Perry will not meet with newspaper editorial boards leading up to his faceoff with White, Perry spokesman Mark Miner said.

“We’ve made the decision that a better use of the governor’s time is to talk directly to Texans and reporters throughout the state,” Miner said, adding that the Perry campaign will also continue to use social media extensively.

Perry will field questions from reporters after his public events and in interviews. What he won’t do is go to newspapers around the state and spend an hour or more at each stop answering questions from editorial writers, editors, publishers and whoever else sits in on those meetings.

Perry did not meet with any editorial boards in the March Republican primary, and it worked out pretty well for him. He beat his chief rival, U.S. Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, by 20 percentage points. The question is, will his decision to snub the top brass at the state’s newspapers make more of an impact in a general election?

The Perry camp doesn’t appear to think so. But there is some danger here in light of the fact that Perry also says he will not debate White until White meets his demands, which are that White release tax returns from his years in the U.S. Department of Energy and as chairman of the Texas Democratic Party.

White has been highly critical of Perry’s decision to skip editorial boards in the primary, suggesting that the decision shows Perry’s arrogance. And White is making a thorough effort to meet with those boards. He recently stopped for an endorsement interview at the Killeen Daily Herald, which isn’t exactly a traditional stop for gubernatorial candidates.

Miner said Perry isn’t afraid to take questions. “Governor Perry’s the most scrutinized governor in the history of Texas,” Miner said.

Perry met with editorial boards in his 2006 re-election. That year, the Dallas Morning News, San Antonio Express-News and Austin American-Statesman were among the newspapers that endorsed him.

But he’s skipping some conventional campaign practices this year. Remember, this is the guy who won the primary without any yard signs or direct mail.

• From the Statesman’s Tim Eaton: “GOP Gov. Rick Perry’s campaign on Wednesday accused Democrat Bill White of making a racially charged statement, setting off a flurry of defensive reactions from White’s supporters in the African American community. It was the first time this year that the governor’s race, the most competitive Texas has seen in 16 years, fully waded into the issue of race. White upset the Perry campaign when, according to The Dallas Morning News, he said in southern Dallas on Tuesday, ‘We need a governor who’s a servant, as opposed to Rick Perry, who wants to be treated as master.’ Perry campaign manager Rob Johnson said White’s comments to an African American audience in Dallas were ‘insensitive’ and ‘racially motivated.’”

• In my print column this morning, I discuss how a group of U.S. Sen. John Cornyn’s allies in Texas have assumed leadership of, and revitalized, the Associated Republicans of Texas. “By 2009, Democrats were within two Texas House seats of a majority, and the party’s two biggest Texas names — Gov. Rick Perry and U.S. Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison — were fighting for the governorship. Many in the Republican establishment spotted ART as a good vehicle to prepare for life after the Perry-Hutchison primary and help the GOP push back against recent Democratic gains. Operatives and donors with ties to Cornyn saw this opening and assumed a larger role. Todd Olsen, who worked for Cornyn during his Senate re-election in 2008, is the group’s main consultant, while Dallas investor George Seay III, the grandson of former Gov. Bill Clements and a key member of Cornyn’s 2008 finance team, became one of ART’s key fundraisers. Karl Rove, the former adviser to George W. Bush, has also taken a renewed interest.”

• From Dave Michaels at the Dallas Morning News: “Jeb Hensarling was a career political aide when he decided it was time to leave politics for business. Fresh from eight years with Sen. Phil Gramm, Hensarling quickly landed a job with a hedge fund managed by Sam and Charles Wyly , the Dallas brothers and loyal GOP donors. The young politico hitched his financial future to the entrepreneurial duo, investing his own wealth in the hedge fund and several other Wyly-owned companies. Despite a working relationship that spanned nearly a decade, Hensarling has rarely touted his work for the Wylys. The relationship was mostly a profitable one for Hensarling, whose experience with the Wylys helped him launch a consulting business and achieve a level of corporate success that would make him an attractive candidate when he ran for Congress in 2002. But those ties may become a liability for the Dallas congressman. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission accused the Wylys on July 29 of insider trading and using offshore entities to hide $550 million in trading profits that should have been disclosed to investors.”

• Interesting story in the student newspaper at St. Edward’s University: “St. Edward’s University released a statement Wednesday explaining its decision to say no to a White House request to consider the campus as the venue for President Barack Obama’s speech in Austin earlier this week.”

• Houston Chronicle: “Homing in on what he sees as a potential Rick Perry weakness, Bill White unveiled an ethics-reform package on Wednesday that he said would clean up the appointments process, place a two-year prohibition on lobbying by former government employees and increase financial disclosure from the governor and his senior staff.”

• Texas Tribune: “Democratic gubernatorial candidate Bill White is again attacking his Republican opponent, incumbent Gov. Rick Perry, for accepting campaign contributions from political appointees — but the former Houston mayor is no stranger to the practice, according to a Texas Tribune analysis of campaign and city records. White has raised nearly $2 million over his years in public life from people he appointed to boards and commissions. In numerous instances, he would have exceeded the limits his own campaign recommended in a proposal unveiled on Tuesday.”

Countdown

66 days until the first day of early voting.

82 days until Election Day.

Everything else

Austin weather from News 8 Austin’s Maureen McCann: Partly sunny, hot, and humid. Slight risk of a brief afternoon shower. High of 101.

Yankees 7, Rangers 6

Saw the first five minutes of the season premiere of “Hard Knocks,” this year starring the New York Jets. And now I get why everyone loves head coach Rex Ryan.

Send me an e-mail at jembry@statesman.com if you want a link to First Reading as soon as I post it. Also, you can follow me on Twitter for news updates around the clock.

Get more Legislative coverage inside the Virtual Capitol

Permalink | Comments (29) | Post your comment