Austin news, sports, weather, Longhorns, business
EDUCATION

State education board approves science standards

New standards remove specific references to age of the universe.



AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF



The State Board of Education on Friday passed science curriculum standards that members described as a compromise between those who are critical of teaching evolutionary theories without scrutiny and those who feared attacks on evolution would lead to the teaching of creationism in Texas schools.

After the 13-2 vote, it was social conservatives on the board who were doing most of the celebrating while scientists expressed concerns.

The new standards remove current requirements that students be taught the "strengths and weaknesses" of scientific theories. Instead, teachers will be required to have students scrutinize "all sides" of the theories.

The new standards will determine what will be included in science textbooks in Texas. Because of its size, Texas could influence what publishers print in books used in other states. Friday's adoption comes after many months of debate over drafts for the standards, which were last revised in 1998.

On the one hand, the standards encourage questions about certain evolutionary concepts, satisfying those who are critical of the theory. But those supportive of evolution were partly mollified because calls to teach "insufficiencies" or "weaknesses" of the theory were rejected.

The Discovery Institute, which encourages teaching that the universe is the product of an intelligent designer, called the vote "a huge victory for those who favor teaching the scientific evidence for and against evolution."

By requiring students to evaluate the evidence for major evolutionary concepts such as common ancestry, natural selection and mutations, the institute said in a statement, "Texas today moved to the head of the class."

"Texas has sent a clear message that evolution should be taught as a scientific theory open to critical scrutiny, not as a sacred dogma that can't be questioned," said John West, a senior fellow at the institute.

Even though initial pushes to include teaching the "insufficiencies" of evolution were rejected, board Chairman Don McLeroy, R-College Station, said the new wording still gets the point across in that it requires students to analyze and evaluate evolution's explanation for both the complexity of cells and the sudden appearance and lack of change in species in the fossil record. "I think the standards that were adopted are better than what I proposed," McLeroy said.

Bob Craig, R-Lubbock, one of the board members who was against McLeroy's "insufficiencies" proposal, agreed that the board ended up with a better document than it started with Friday morning. "It removes some of the controversial language but still encourages students to think critically, which is something I think we could all agree on," Craig said.

Officials from the Texas Freedom Network, a group that calls itself a mainstream voice to counter the religious right, said they were less satisfied. Network President Kathy Miller said the standards are now "a road map that creationists will use to pressure publishers into putting phony arguments attacking established science into textbooks."

The curriculum "still has plenty of potential footholds for

creationist attacks on evolution to make their way into Texas classrooms," Miller said.

The "all sides" standard was proposed by Republican member Cynthia Dunbar, who represents part of Austin.

Before the final vote, numerous changes to the draft standards were proposed. Mary Helen Berlanga, D-Corpus Christi, and Rene Nuñez, D-El Paso, consistently voted against rewrites proposed by members critical of evolution and also voted against final adoption of the standards.

The full impact of the vote won't be felt until 2011, when new textbooks will be chosen.

Ronald Wetherington, an anthropology professor at Southern Methodist University who supports evolution, said the removal of words like "insufficiency" and "weaknesses" will make it harder for the state board to reject texts that discuss evolution uncritically.

However, Wetherington said the inclusion of requirements that students consider that science can't entirely explain the complexity of cells could open the door to publishers pushing pseudo-science. "The battle has been largely won today, but we are nowhere near winning the war."

lheinauer@statesman.com; 445-3694