Lawmaker causes stir with bid to kill Austin’s bag ban
By Laylan Copelin

American-Statesman Staff

A first-time state lawmaker who lives some 260 miles outside Austin said Wednesday that he’s getting a positive response to his legislation to bag Austin’s plastic bag ban.

“Nine out of 10 people I’ve talked to in the city of Austin can’t stand it,” said Rep. Drew Springer, a Republican from the tiny town of Muenster, between Wichita Falls and Denton. “They think the council is nuts.”

Springer’s “Shopping Bag Freedom Act,” which bars Texas cities from prohibiting businesses from giving customers single-use plastic or paper bags, was filed just days after Austin’s ban went into effect. Springer said the ban risks people’s health, doesn’t protect the environment, ships jobs to China and penalizes the poor.

The Legislature has a history of second-guessing the city of Austin’s policies and it doesn’t always go over well.

Austin City Council Member Mike Martinez said he hopes Springer’s concern for the poor extends to the legislative debate over expanding Medicaid coverage.

“The people of Austin are doing just fine deciding what’s best for our community,” Martinez said. “If his concerns are shared by the people he represents up in Northwest Texas, I’d suggest he bracket his bill to apply (just) to the constituents he represents.”

Austin is not alone in banning plastic bags. Brownsville, South Padre Island and Fort Stockton also have their own local rules.

Springer disagrees that a bag ban is a local issue.

“They’re not talking about a street sign and whether we should put a stop sign on this corner,” he said. “They are talking about affecting commerce that affects the entire state.”

Just this week, Springer said, Austin’s bag ban affected some of his constituents from his 22-county, rural district that surrounds Wichita Falls.

“They come in and buy souvenirs,” he said. “They try to spend money here in Austin. They aren’t given bags” for their purchases.

Springer said his constituents’ comments only reinforced his thinking on the issue.

“This act is just the latest example of government elites trying to step between the business and consumer in an attempt to push forward a misguided nanny-state agenda,” he said.

Springer said the ban is misguided, even potentially life-threatening.

“It is all for show, plastic bags make up just .6 percent of Austin’s litter and in San Francisco, litter from bags actually increased after enacting their ban,” Springer said in his news release.

He cited an on-line survey by the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, a Chicago-based group, that found that only 15 percent of the respondents washed their reusable bags, a problem that Springer said has led to spikes in E.coli poisoning in places such as San Francisco and Washington D.C.

“They can’t expect everyone will wash their bags regularly,” Springer said. “This policy puts uninformed populations at risk of serious illness and even death. Even if bag hygiene was realistic, why mandate people to waste more water on laundry in a time of severe drought in the region and state?”

He estimated Austinites would use an additional half-billion gallons of water washing their reusable bags each year.

Springer argued that forcing people to buy reusable bags penalizes the poor, wastes energy and hurts American jobs.

“Jobs in Texas are now going to be shipped to China because the reusable bags are all manufactured in China,” he said. “They use immensely more energy to produce those.”

But Springer said he’s especially worried about what’s next: “If a municipality can ban bags, what is to say they won’t mandate how large a soda can be or how much salt one can put on their food.”

Where does the controversial bag ban leave Austin-area lawmakers?

Sen. Kirk Watson, a former mayor, saw an opportunity to raise his name identification.

He is distributing red-white-and-blue reusable bags emblazoned with his name, title, Twitter handle and Facebook ID.

Rep. Dawnna Dukes, D-Pflugerville, whose district includes parts of Austin, wasn’t aware of Springer’s bill until Wednesday.

“I guess we’ll have to wait and see what people say now that it’s gone into effect,” she said of the local ordinance.

But she said history might be on Springer’s side.

“In the Legislature, a bill that is filed to roll back something in Austin?” Dukes said. “History shows they usually do (pass).”