Austin news, sports, weather, Longhorns, business
Commenting is open from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. M-F

The entry titled "Indiana official: Voter ID did not hurt turnout."

If you use an RSS reader, here is feed for Postcards: XML . Learn more about RSS.

Home > Postcards > Archives > 2011 > January > 25 > Entry

UPDATE: A top Indiana elections official told Texas senators that a voter ID law enacted by the Hoosier State has been found to not a hamper turnout or prevent legal voters from casting their ballots.

A Texas voter ID law being debated today in the State Senate is patterned after the Indiana law.

Jerry Bonnet, chief legal counsel for the Indiana Secretary of State’s Office, answered questions for nearly an hour from Republicans who support the bill and Democrats who oppose it.

Most questions from Republicans concerned how the Indiana law has been upheld by various courts, and how there has been no finding that it disadvantaged minority or elderly voters — as critics have charged the Texas bill will do.

He said exceptions for voters who do not have the required photo ID allow Indiana residents to cast ballots and then validate their registration within 10 days. The Texas bill contains a similar provision, allowing six days.

Sen. Leticia Van de Putte, D-San Antonio, questioned Bonnet about news reports that two groups of Indiana nuns were not allowed to vote. One group, women mostly in their 80s who lived in a convent, were turned away because they did not have required photo IDs, she said.

Bonnet said the reason was that they refused to present valid IDs. Hinting that the demonstration might have been a publicity stunt, he said that other high-profile cases had been discredited.

“So they were devious nuns?’ Van de Putte asked.

“Yes,” Bonnet responded.

EARLIER: As the politically charged debate began on a voter ID bill, Democrats in the Texas Senate this morning challenged the cost of implementing the controversial measure — at a time when the state budget faces a multibillion-dollar shortfall.

Sen. Kirk Watson, D-Austin, said a provision that would require the Texas Department of Public Safety to issue state identification cards for free to prospective voters was estimated two years ago to cost the agency $3 million a year.

An additional cost of $2 million would go for a public education program. Sen. Troy Fraser, R-Horseshoe Bay, said federal money through the Help America Vote Act would be used to cover the $2 million cost.

Sen. Tommy Williams, R-The Woodlands, challenged the $3 million cost to DPS, saying each state ID card costs the agency $1.67 to issue. “That’s a lot of ID cards at $1.67 each,” Williams said.

DPS charges $15 for each state ID card.

Watson responded: Voter-education funding has been cut from the secretary of state’s office budget in the draft Senate budget plan, and $350 million has been cut from the DPS budget.

“There are unintended consequences in this bill,” insisted Sens. John Whitmire, D-Houston, and Mario Gallego, D-Houston.

Get more Legislative coverage inside the Virtual Capitol

Permalink | Comments (80) | Post your comment Categories: Senate