Straus to be first Jewish speaker since statehood

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

State Rep. Joe Straus appears poised to become the first Jewish speaker of the Texas House since statehood.

"To the best of my knowledge, Mr. Straus would be the first," said Jimmy Kessler, founder of the Texas Jewish Historical Society and rabbi of Temple B'Nai Israel in Galveston.

Before Texas was a state, David S. Kaufman — namesake of the city and county of Kaufman — served as speaker of the House in the Congress of the Republic of Texas from 1839 to 1841. Though Kaufman was of Jewish descent, historians have found no evidence he was a practicing Jew and he did not receive a Jewish burial, said Hollace Ava Weiner, editor of "Lone Stars of David: The Jews of Texas."

Straus, R-San Antonio, is a lifelong member of Temple Beth-El, a Reform congregation just north of downtown San Antonio.

But the Straus family affiliation with Beth-El began long before the state representative was born.

Straus, whose family founded a saddle and harness manufacturing company in 1870, said his great-grandfather was president of the temple.

Straus' family members "are Texas Jewish pioneers," said Beth-El's rabbi, Barry Block.

"My faith is a personal thing for me and my family," Straus said.

He later added: "Yes, I'm Jewish, but my service has been more public service than it has been through the temple."

Leslie Selig Byrd, the current president of Beth-El and a Straus family friend, said that Straus and his wife, Julie, who is not Jewish, have instilled their values of community service in their daughters, Sara and Robyn.

"As Joe remains loyal to his own Jewish faith and our Temple, Joe is also supportive of Julie's and their daughters' Christian faith," Byrd wrote in an e-mail.

Block said congregants are thrilled that Straus is likely to preside over the House.

"A Jewish speaker — that's pretty exciting," Block said.

cmaclaggan@statesman.com; 445-3548

Additional information from staff writer Jason Embry