Austin news, sports, weather, Longhorns, business
POLITICS

Perry angers D.C. allies with broad rebuke

'Washington Republicans got us in this mess,' governor says.

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Gov. Rick Perry's broad criticism of Washington Republicans isn't sitting well with Washington Republicans.

In a closed-door meeting Thursday in Washington with Perry chief of staff Ray Sullivan, several top aides to Texas Republican U.S. House members expressed anger over the language Perry is using as he tries to fend off a challenge from U.S. Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison. Perry often criticizes Hutchison in code by complaining about Washington.

Stoking their anger was a Sept. 14 fundraising letter in which Perry contrasts Texas' relatively healthy budget climate with the Washington model of "more government, pork barrel spending and fiscal ruin."

But instead of just talking about Democratic congressional leaders or President Barack Obama, the letter calls out Republicans.

"Let's be frank," the letter says. "Washington Republicans got us in this mess."

Later in the letter, Perry writes, "If Washington Republicans hadn't spent like Democrats for 12 years, they might have maintained enough votes to actually kill Obamacare."

Hutchison's campaign sent the fundraising letter to Republican chiefs of staff on Capitol Hill.

According to two sources in Thursday's meeting who did not want to be named because they were not authorized to discuss the private meeting, Sullivan was unapologetic.

"He was nice, but he said, 'We're running against somebody from Washington, and that's the strategy,' " one source said.

Another said of Sullivan's reaction, "I think there was shock and awe with the arrogance of it all."

Part of the anger stems from the fact that many U.S. House members encouraged Hutchison not to run against Perry in 2006, giving him a clear path to the Republican nomination. Also, some members of Congress may pick up challengers next year from the Tea Party movement, a crowd that Perry has courted.

Perry spokesman Mark Miner said after the meeting, "The governor will continue to stand with the people of Texas by fighting the bad policies coming out of Washington and those who support them."

jembry@statesman.com; 445-3572