Travis voters approve $215 million in road, park bonds
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Travis County voters approved by comfortable margins two bond propositions that will give the county permission to borrow about $215 million in the next seven years for road, drainage and park improvements as well as land purchases to preserve open space.

The county estimates that for the owner of the average-value home of $273,000, property taxes will increase about $10 in 2013 to make debt payments as the county begins to sell the bonds and rise to a nearly $43 annual increase by 2019.

Proposition 1, with $132.8 million in spending, will authorize more than two dozen transportation projects to be built starting in 2013, including more than 20 miles of new or expanded roads.

Proposition 1 passed with 59.4 percent of nearly 50,000 votes cast — 8.72 percent turnout — according to a final count Tuesday night.

Proposition 2, $82.1 million of bonds, will go to eight park projects or land purchases. About half of that is targeted for two ventures: $22.2 million to buy nearly 800 acres for recreational use along the Pedernales River near Hamilton Pool and $16.6 million for up to 1,000 acres along Onion Creek, Gilleland Creek and other eastern Travis County waterways.

Proposition 2 passed with 59 percent of the vote.

"With the rate of development we have in unincorporated areas, we really have to do a better job of improving county roads and constructing new ones," Travis County Judge Sam Biscoe said Tuesday night. "Proposition 1 addresses that."

The Proposition 1 projects include six new roads and the design of a seventh; widening of seven roads, typically from two lanes to four; rehabilitation of three aging bridges; and raising other roads and low-water crossings to make it less likely that water will overtop the pavement.

The proposition also includes $5 million to repave or improve various county roads.

The new or widened roads in each case will have sidewalks and bike lanes added to them. Those bike lanes will typically be 5-foot-wide "improved" or wider shoulders.

About 94 percent of the Proposition 1 spending will go to road and bridge projects, including $15.3 million to widen Cameron Road from Howard Lane to Texas 130 and $3.3 million for bicycle safety projects throughout the county.

The largest share of the Proposition 1 spending, about 39 percent, will be in Precinct 1, in the county's northeastern quadrant, an area that is seeing rapid growth along the Texas 130 tollway corridor. Precinct 2 (north central and northwestern) and Precinct 3 (southwest) will each get 15.6 percent. Precinct 4 (southeast) will get 12.6 percent of Proposition 1 spending.

Biscoe said that the land purchases in Proposition 2 will allow the county "to get out ahead of development," paying far less for parkland and open space than would be possible once the Texas 130 corridor fully blossoms.

Proposition 2 will also fund $6.9 million for Northeast Metro Park, about half of it to build a southwest entrance road to the park. The rest of that money will go to several other improvements, including a cricket field.

The bonds will also pay for $9.4 million in improvements at Arkansas Bend/Dink Pearson Park on Lake Travis, including boat launch and camping facilities.

The propositions were supported by a group called Travis Two-Step, which raised about $100,000, according to campaign manager Katherine Haenschen.

That money paid for mailings and robo-calls to voters with a history of voting in the generally low-turnout state constitutional amendment elections in November of odd-numbered years, she said, as well as for nine organizers stumping door-to-door for the propositions.

Campaign finance reports showed that much of the money came from an unusual combination of engineering and construction firms and conservation groups.

bwear@statesman.com; 445-3698