County bond measure heavy on road spending
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Travis County voters, beginning today with the start of early voting for the Nov. 8 election, will be asked to approve almost $133 million for more than two dozen transportation projects, including more than 20 miles of new or expanded roads.

The bulk of that spending and new pavement will be in the rapidly developing northeastern part of the county near the 5-year-old Texas 130 tollway.

The county has approved plans for a number of subdivisions in that area.

"Precinct 1 is where most of the action is occurring, and it has the greatest need," said Steve Manilla , county executive for transportation and natural resources. "Typically what happens is that development moves in, they do minimal improvement to the roads and then all hell breaks loose. We're trying to get ahead of the game."

The bond projects, which would be built over the next seven years, include six new roads and the design of a seventh; widening of seven other roads, typically from two lanes to four; rehabilitation of three aging bridges; and raising several other roads and low-water crossings to make it less likely that water will overtop the pavement.

The bond proposition also includes about $5 million to repave or otherwise improve various county roads.

The new or widened roads in each case will have sidewalks and bike lanes added to them, Manilla said. The bike lanes will typically be 5-foot-wide "improved" or wider shoulders.

When the City of Austin had its own Proposition 1 transportation bond proposal a year ago (which passed), the mix was much different. Bicycle and pedestrian projects, depending on who was doing the counting, made up between 35 percent and 50 percent of that $90 million plan.

In the county's case, 3.7 percent of the work would be for bicycle safety projects, and 94 percent would be for roads and bridges serving vehicular traffic.

An additional 2.4 percent is classified as drainage improvement, but it also involve roads.

"That's where the need is," Manilla said.

Travis County Judge Sam Biscoe said he has received some emails from people concerned about the bonds' effect on their property taxes but is not aware of any organized opposition to Proposition 1.

Biscoe and the other four Travis County commissioners in February appointed a 15-member citizens committee to sift through 120 projects that totaled $638 million .

The target total for both Proposition 1 and Proposition 2, which involves park and open space expenditures, was $150 million.

However, the committee recommended projects totaling about $205 million .

In the end, the Commissioners Court decided to put $215 million on the ballot, about 62 percent of it in Proposition 1.

Approving Proposition 1 and its bonds would cost the owner of a $273,000 home — the average cost of a Travis County residence — about $6.50 in 2013 and a total of $132 by 2019. Coincidentally, that is about $1 per $1 million of spending.

The projects are not evenly divided among Travis County's four precincts. Precinct 1, essentially the county's northeast quadrant, would get the lion's share, 39 percent of the money.

Precinct 2 (north central and northwestern Travis County) and Precinct 3 (southwest) would each get 15.6 percent. Precinct 4, to the southeast, would get 12.6 percent.

An additional 11.5 percent would go to the widening of Cameron Road in Precincts 1 and 2, and 2.5 percent would go to road reconstruction work in Precincts 1 and 4.

bwear@statesman.com, 445-3698

Early voting begins

• Early voting begins today and continues through Nov. 4 on 10 state constitutional amendments, plus bond propositions for various cities, counties and school districts. Election Day is Nov. 8.

• See statesman.com/go/elections for early voting locations and for links and phone numbers to county clerks' offices.

Coming Tuesday

A closer look at Travis County's $82 million bond proposition for parks.