Austin ISD to launch pre-K for students ineligible for state programs
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

As the state cuts education funding, including reducing money for prekindergarten programs, Austin school district officials are hoping for a little financial boost with a plan to offer a tuition-based prekindergarten beginning in August.

Austin's full-day prekindergarten program — now offered for free to those learning English, those from low-income families or those with an active-duty parent in the military, among other state requirements — costs $18 million annually, with the state contributing $9 million for a half-day and state-funded grants, which are no longer available, covering another $4.6 million.

Under the new program, tuition for a student who doesn't meet the criteria for the state's free pre-K or the Preschool Program for Children with Disabilities would be $4,656 annually.

The district has received about 15 calls a day since announcing the program June 3.

As of Friday, 87 students had applied. The district expects to keep on pace with the calls by Wednesday, the deadline for students to be entered into a first-round lottery, though the district will continue to take applications throughout the summer.

The idea to start a tuition-based pre-K program came from the community, said Jacquie Porter, director of early childhood education. Several parents at different schools requested the program, and Superintendent Meria Carstarphen, an advocate of early childhood education, was receptive to the idea, Porter said.

Administrators say it's difficult to estimate how much money the program will generate. Some campuses will only have room for as few as six students, but others may take 20, depending on the number of prekindergarten classes the school currently offers, how many students enrolled under free programs and community interest. Students who don't get into the program initially will be put on a waiting list or given the option to attend a different school.

The district expects to earn money on the classes, and few new teachers will be hired because the tuition-paying students will fill seats in existing classes. However, if the community need warrants more classes, the district will be able to hire back some teachers who were laid off amid cuts in the spring, Porter said.

"We are so excited to offer this next year," Porter said. "It allows parents an additional option for quality early education."

Education experts tout the benefits of early childhood education, including stronger academic performance in grade school and higher rates of college attendance. Locally, the district has a lower incidence of misidentifying special-needs students and spends less money in tutoring and remediation for the students who attend prekindergarten, Porter said.

Austin will use state-certified teachers and a curriculum that's based on state guidelines intended to prepare students for the state's kindergarten curriculum. Pre-K students, who must be 4 years old on or before Sept. 1, will have a six-hour school day.

Prekindergarten "gets the child used to school very early. It gets them comfortable with the environment and allows them to experience that before they step into kindergarten," Porter said.

The Manor and Dripping Springs districts already offer fee-based pre-kindergarten, and Hutto will join Austin and the others in the fall — one of that district's revenue-generating ideas.

Manor, which has offered the program since the 2009-10 school year, charges $1,950 for a half-day program. The district previously offered a full-day program at two schools but in the coming school year will offer prekindergarten for only half a day to accommodate the state funding cuts.

Dripping Springs also concluded its second year. It offers a prekindergarten class for up to 18 students on each of its three elementary campuses for $5,200 annually.

Districts must ensure that students who are eligible for the free state program are served first before offering a tuition-based program. A district that offers a prekindergarten program on a tuition basis may not adopt a tuition rate for the program that is higher than necessary to cover the added costs of providing the program. The state also prohibits districts that provide tuition-based pre-K from charging more than needed to provide the program.