House, Senate leaders compete for conservative budget mantle
Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst listens to comments by Senate Finance Chairman Tommy Williams, center, during a meeting of the Legislative Budget Board on Thursday.

By Kate Alexander

American-Statesman Staff

Republican legislative leaders jockeyed at a budget meeting on Thursday to show which chamber would keep the tightest grip on state’s purse strings next year.

At a meeting of the Legislative Budget Board, Dewhurst and fellow Republicans from the Senate vowed that the upper chamber would keep spending well below the cap adopted by budget board on Thursday in advance of the 2013 legislative session.

The Senate promise answered calls from conservative leaders to ratchet down spending even as state revenue collections continue to exceed expectations. But it also created some friction with GOP House leaders who were quick to defend their own Spartan budget-writing.

“The House has had a very conservative record of fiscal policy and has historically been the floor in spending in the state and not the ceiling,” said House Ways and Means Chairman Harvey Hilderbran, R-Kerrville.

House Speaker Joe Straus, R-San Antonio, dismissed the Senate’s pronouncement as “early posturing.”

“Well, that would be a first in the history of the Legislature,” Straus said of the Senate’s effort to be the most conservative chamber in the Texas Capitol. “The House has developed in the last two sessions that I have been speaker budgets that have cut spending and I suspect we will continue to develop conservative budgets. But to go beyond that would be to step on the work of the members and some of the member who haven’t been sworn in yet.”

A large number of new House members, 43, were elected earlier this month and won’t be sworn in until January.

The Legislative Budget Board, which is comprised of the leaders of both chambers as well as top committee chairmen, agreed to set the rate of growth for the 2014-15 budget at 10.71 percent, which reflects a forecast of economic growth in the state over the two year period.

Dewhurst and Senate Finance Chairman Tommy Williams, however, said the Senate will produce a budget that does not exceed 9.85 percent, which is the rate of population growth and inflation.

The difference between the two numbers is about $600 million, which is a relative pittance a two-year budget that is currently more than $173 billion.

Talmadge Heflin of the Texas Public Policy Foundation welcomed the promise from the Senate, though he wanted a more concrete commitment.

“It’s important to have that mindset that just because we’ve had a run of good economic activity doesn’t mean that we should spend everything that comes in,” Heflin said.

State Rep. Sylvester Turner, D-Houston, urged his colleagues “not to be quick to write a budget around this table today and commit ourselves to a position that may not be in the best interest of the state of Texas.”

Dewhurst assured Turner that the state could pay for its priorities even at the lower spending limit.