Defendant reveals life before assassin sting
By Claire Osborn

American-Statesman Staff

By the time Manssor Arbabsiar moved to Round Rock in 2010, he told a court psychiatrist that his hard-partying days in Corpus Christi, where he said he “had a blast for 20 years,” were behind him because he was broke and his teeth hurt.

The court report detailing a series of jailhouse interviews Arbabsiar had with psychiatrist Dr. Gregory Saathoff paint the picture of a man who had fallen on hard times in the years before he plotted the assassination of Saudi Arabia’s ambassador to the United States.

The Iranian-American pleaded guilty in New York on Oct. 17 to two conspiracy charges and a murder-for-hire count after he hired what he thought was a Mexican cartel member for $1.5 million to carry out the attack with explosives at a Washington, D.C., restaurant.

During his time in Central Texas preceding his September 2011 arrest, Arbabsiar was spending a lot of time inside his Round Rock house with his gums too swollen to eat and unable to afford surgery to pull teeth and replace them with implants, he told court psychiatrists.

At the time of his arrest, his neighbors in Round Rock and restaurant owners in Austin described him as unfriendly and rude, a far cry from the lifestyle he professed to live in Corpus Christi.

Arbabsiar was a car salesman and a restaurant owner in Corpus Christi who had made so much money in the 1990s that he sent $100,000 home to Iran to invest in real estate, he told the psychiatrist.

“I was drinking, I had a Porsche 911, I had a Mercedes,” he said to the psychiatrist.

He also told the psychiatrist that bartenders called him “Jack” because his favorite drink was Jack Daniels whiskey and cola and he often left $25 to $30 tips for them.

“I have had so many girls,” said Arbabsiar, who moved to Round Rock with his third wife. “So many that you couldn’t count them. I never had one girl more than once — I learned that women like you for your expensive cars.”

“I have been caught by my wife sleeping naked with another woman in my own house,” said Arbabsiar. “The woman left and then my wife got the shotgun.”

Arbabsiar told the psychiatrist he was born in the city of Kermanshah in Iran. When he was a teenager, “he frequented brothels and worked for his uncle who would procure women for him,” he said to the psychiatrist. He was also a sergeant in the Iranian army for two years before coming to the United States on a student visa and earning a bachelor’s degree in 1984 from Southern University in Baton Rouge, La.

After graduation he worked in restaurants and sold cars until he went to Corpus Christi where he started Johnny’s Auto Sales around 1992, opened a restaurant called Gyros and Kabob, and also worked for a friend at a business called Import Auto, the court report said.

But when the recession hit in 2008, Arbabsiar started to struggle, he told his psychiatrist. He flew four times to Iran in 2010 and brought $8,000 to $9,000 back from each trip to support his family, the document said.

While nursing his dental infection, he spent time planting fruit trees at his Round Rock house or staying inside because the economic recession had left him unable to go to restaurants, he told the psychiatrist. His brother finally sent him money to take care of his teeth, according to the court document.

By May 2011 Arbabsiar began flying to Mexico to hire a man to kill the Saudi Arabian ambassador, according to a federal indictment. Arbabsiar thought the man was a member of a drug trafficking cartel, but the man was actually an informant for the Drug Enforcement Administration, according to the indictment.

Arbabsiar told U.S. officials that he was working with his cousin in Iran, a member of the Qods force, which is part of the Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps, according to a court document. Arbabsiar said the cousin had approached him about the bomb plot in early 2011 when he was in Iran and had given him money for expenses, the document said.

Two psychiatrists, hired by the defense, have interviewed Arbabsiar since he was in jail and reported that he has a bipolar disorder, according to court documents.

Saathoff, hired by the prosecutors, said Arbabsiar was not bipolar because he had never been treated for the disorder, had not displayed manic episodes and never displayed any symptoms while in prison, according to a court document.

Arbabsiar’s sentencing is set for Jan. 23. He faces up to 25 years in prison.