Governor's $10,000 bachelor's degrees a work in progress
Lara Fly first heard about it on the radio: a bachelor's degree with a four-year price tag of $10,000 for tuition and fees.

"At the time, I wasn't sure where I wanted to go to college," she said. "We — my parents and I — decided to jump on it."

Lara, a 17-year-old from Lubbock, will enroll as a geology major this fall at the University of Texas of the Permian Basin. She stands to save about $16,000 off the regular sticker price, provided she maintains a 3.0 grade-point average and graduates on time.

UT-Permian Basin is among several public universities in the state that have rolled out low-cost bachelor's degree programs in response to urgings from Gov. Rick Perry, who wants schools eventually to award 10 percent of their sheepskins under this approach.

But a review of the programs by the American-Statesman shows that price point depends on financial aid subsidies or requires students to earn a substantial number of community college credits, in some cases while still in high school.

The actual cost of instruction and materials has not been reduced.

Few of the programs include textbooks in the $10,000 price, even though that was part of Perry's challenge. What's more, the discount degrees tend to be limited in scope, with many having a strong workforce flavor, raising doubts about whether schools could meet the governor's goal and price 10 percent of their degree programs at $10,000.

Still, the cost-cutting effort has won praise from such organizations as the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, even as critics contend that cut-rate degrees threaten quality and are unlikely to serve more than a small slice of students.

With nearly 60 percent of students in the kindergarten-to-12th-grade pipeline coming from poor families, the state has no choice but to develop low-cost degrees, said Texas Higher Education Commissioner Raymund Paredes.

The average four-year charge for tuition, fees and books at public universities is currently $34,324, with books accounting for $4,740 of that sum, according to figures compiled by his agency, the Higher Education Coordinating Board.

"Obviously, the ways these (low-cost) programs have been pulled together limits their attractiveness to students and the number of students who can actually benefit," Paredes said. "But these are early iterations of what low-cost programs might look like. Nobody believes what we currently have is the final version."

Program 'constraints'

The current $10,000 degree offerings involve regional universities and, in some cases, community colleges with limited authority to grant bachelor's degrees.

The state's largest and most prestigious institutions of higher learning — the University of Texas at Austin and Texas A&M; University — have no $10,000 degree programs in the works.

"We have not developed anything similar at UT-Austin, in part, because of the constraints posed by these options," Steven Leslie, executive vice president and provost at the Austin campus, said in a statement. "It's obviously a closely watched topic in higher education, including by our own leadership."

Although the low-cost degrees seldom include the price of books, they do include the cost of community college credits.

In some cases, community colleges pick up the tab for tuition and books for students who are still in high school.

The $10,000 degree program at UT-Permian Basin in West Texas will begin this fall and is limited to math and certain science fields. The price for the "Texas Science Scholar Program," as it is being promoted, does not include books, but students who finish on time can get up to a $1,000 tuition refund.

Officials hope to enroll 100 students a year. To be accepted, a student must not need remedial, or developmental, training. As long as he or she maintains a 3.0, or B, average and earns 30 credits a year, the annual price for tuition and fees will be $2,500.

Failure to meet those academic standards will bump it up to $6,452.

UT-Permian Basin President W. David Watts said that with a new $54 million science building, the school is seeking to step up production of graduates in fields deemed high priority by the state.

"We've chosen to reshuffle our resources to support a number of fields defined by the coordinating board as critical fields, to reward students who are more likely to enter the program and complete the program on time," Watts said.

Texas A&M; University-San Antonio is rolling out a bachelor's degree costing slightly less than $10,000, not including books, that requires a heavy dose of community college credits. A student must first earn 60 such credits in high school through a "dual credit" or "early college" program offered by Alamo Colleges, a five-campus district. After high school, a student must earn 27 more community college credits.

The final 36 would be earned at A&M-San; Antonio.

It's a niche offering, focusing on information technology and security, a field that officials say has good job prospects in the San Antonio area. It remains to be seen how many high school juniors will enter the program this fall and eventually earn the degree.

Still another version of a low-cost degree is being offered by Sul Ross State University Rio Grande College, with campuses in Del Rio, Eagle Pass and Uvalde. Students can earn a bachelor's in biology, chemistry and math for $10,000, not including books, through a combination of "deferred" merit aid and community college credits. The "10 K Scholars Program" requires 30 credits in high school and 30 at Southwest Texas Junior College, which has several campuses.

The final 60 credits must be earned at Sul Ross Rio Grande, which will reimburse the student $2,122 — to keep the cost at $10,000 — by the time he or she graduates, provided that a 15-credit course load and a 3.0 average are maintained each term.

Coordinating board officials have high hopes for a bachelor's degree curriculum in organizational leadership that the agency is developing with Texas A&M; University-Commerce and South Texas College for a fall 2013 launch.

It's intended to be a model for reducing instructional and material costs and for attracting students from lower socio-economic backgrounds.

The program, focusing on business skills such as communication, finance and conflict resolution, received a $1 million grant last month from Educause, a nonprofit organization whose mission is to advance higher education by promoting "the intelligent use of information technology."

The group's financial backers include the Gates Foundation, whose co-chair Bill Gates, a co-founder of Microsoft Corp., inspired Perry's $10,000 degree initiative by asserting that Web-based instruction and other technology could drive academic costs down to $2,000 a year.

"We think it's very encouraging that states such as Texas are trying to challenge themselves," said Josh Jarrett, deputy director for post-secondary success at the Gates Foundation. "It's still too early to know what's going to work for which students at which price point."

A&M-Commerce; is a four-year university northeast of Dallas. South Texas College is a community college in McAllen, along the border with Mexico. Although the schools are about 600 miles apart, they have considerable experience in online education and are crafting a mostly online program intended to allow students to work at their own pace, earning credits by mastering subject matter — and proving it through testing — rather than having to spend time in class.

Students will be able to get credit for certain military or work experience. Tuition, fees, electronic textbooks and testing fees are expected to run $7,000 to $14,000 for the degree, depending on whether a student has already earned some college credit before enrolling.

"It is not the silver bullet, but it is a silver bullet," said Juan Mejia, vice president for academic affairs and chief academic officer at South Texas College.

Finding ways to deliver higher education more cheaply is urgently needed because tuition and other costs have been rising at the same time that states have been reducing appropriations, Jarrett said.

"So it's a compounding effect," he said. "Health care costs and other costs are going up, and they are crowding out higher education."

Competition expected

Perry's push to reduce academic charges comes as the state's allocation to higher education, including financial aid, has been cut by nearly $1 billion in the current two-year budget, which he signed.

No other state or governor has identified a particular price as a goal, according to leaders of national higher education groups.

On paper, Perry has no authority to demand programs at a particular price. However, he appointed all of the state's university regents to their unpaid positions, so it's no surprise that his challenge has gained some traction.

"The governor is very pleased with the results of his $10,000 degree challenge so far," Catherine Frazier, a spokeswoman for Perry, said in a statement. "The $10,000 price is a benchmark that he expects all institutions of higher learning to aspire to with the end goal of establishing degrees that are substantially more affordable than the traditional programs universities currently offer."

Perry's initiative is a savvy political response to a market reality, said Thomas Lindsay, director of higher education at the Texas Public Policy Foundation, a nonprofit group with ties to the governor. Lindsay said he expects growing competition among schools to offer low-cost degrees.

Molly Corbett Broad, president of the American Council on Education, questioned whether Perry's approach could serve more than a narrow segment of students in light of requirements in many programs to earn substantial community college credit, including credit in high school.

"It's a strategy that would require focus, determination and fire in the belly to complete a degree. I'm not sure how realistic it is to achieve the goal that Gov. Perry lays out," she said, noting that many students emerge from high school poorly prepared for college.

Others worry about maintaining quality.

"What are we doing to a university degree if we're making half of it into a high school degree?" said Peter Hugill, a professor of geography at A&M-College; Station and past president of the Texas Conference of the American Association of University Professors.

Contact Ralph K.M. Haurwitz at 445-3604

COST OF EDUCATION

$34,324: The current average four-year charge for tuition, fees and books at public universities

$4,740: The current average four-year charge for books at public universities

LOW-COST BACHELOR'S DEGREE PROGRAMS AT A GLANCE

Prices include community college charges, if any, but unless noted, do not include the price of books, which currently cost the average student $4,740 for a four-year degree program.

University of Texas of the Permian Basin

Bachelor's in math, chemistry, computer science, geology and information systems. Tuition and fees for $10,000 if a 3.0 grade-point average and a 15-credit load are maintained.

Texas A&M University-San Antonio

Bachelor of applied arts and sciences with an emphasis on information technology and security. A little less than $10,000 for tuition and fees. Eighty-seven credits must be earned through the Alamo community college district, 60 of them for free in high school.

Sul Ross State University Rio Grande College

Bachelor's degrees in biology, chemistry and math. Requires 30 dual high school credits, 30 at Southwest Texas Junior College and 60 at Sul Ross. Students who maintain a 3.0 GPA and a 15-credit load will receive deferred grant aid totaling $2,122 by the time they graduate, keeping the charge for tuition and fees to $10,000, including the cost of junior college credits.

Texas A&M University-Commerce and South Texas College

Bachelor's in organizational leadership, focusing on business skills. Substantially online. Students advance at their own pace as they master competencies. First-time students could finish in three years for about $14,000, including electronic texts and other course materials.

Tarleton State University

Bachelor's programs in business. About $10,000 in tuition and fees assuming a mix of credit for previous work experience or training, classes at Tarrant County College, a community college, and upper-division courses at Tarleton's satellite campuses in Fort Worth, Waco or Midlothian.

Texas A&M University-Texarkana

Bachelor's degrees in business administration and applied arts and sciences. As low as $10,605 for tuition and fees, assuming substantial coursework at Texarkana College, a two-year school, plus credit for certain work experience, corporate training or military training.

Midland College

Bachelor's in organizational management. About $10,000 in tuition, fees and books, assuming an associate degree is first earned in a lower-cost program such as criminal justice as opposed to one like information technology with higher fees.

Sources: Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board, colleges and universities