Perry: State ready to run health program without Planned...
Texas Governor Rick Perry and Texas Health and Human Services Commissioner Kyle Janek announced the state-funded Texas Women's Health Program is ready to begin providing preventative health services to low-income Texas women at a press conference at the Lone Star Circle of Care center in Georgetown, TX. Wednesday morning October 31, 12012.

By Chuck Lindell

American-Statesman Staff

Gov. Rick Perry announced Wednesday that Texas stands ready to launch a state-run Women’s Health Program — without the involvement of Planned Parenthood — as soon as federal officials cut financing for the contraceptive and preventive care program for low-income women.

That day won’t be Nov. 1, as had been anticipated, Perry said.

And, at least for the time being, Planned Parenthood will remain in the program thanks to a court order issued last week, health officials added.

Speaking at a morning news conference at the Lone Star Circle of Care health clinic in Georgetown, which will participate in the state-run Women’s Health Program, Perry said U.S. officials have given no firm date for cutting financing to the program beyond saying all money must stop flowing by Dec. 31.

Once the federal money stops, the Texas-run program will begin and Planned Parenthood’s involvement will end, Perry said.

“The Texas Legislature, as the elected representatives of the people of Texas, have made it crystal clear that this important program will not be used to give taxpayer dollars to abortion groups and affiliates like Planned Parenthood,” Perry said.

The federal government pays 90 percent of the program’s cost, estimated at $32 million this year. But U.S. officials determined last spring that the flow of money must stop because the state’s Planned Parenthood ban violates U.S. law, which they said requires women in the program to be able to choose their provider.

Perry said he still hopes to keep the federal money coming, with a court order if necessary. A pending state lawsuit, filed in federal court in Waco, argues that federal efforts to cut the financing were illegal and violated the U.S. Constitution.

If that fails, however, Texas has lined up enough health care providers to launch a state-run, state-financed program without disruption to patients, Perry said.

“I promised the women of Texas that they would continue to have access to this important health care, whether funded by the federal government or whether it was funded by the state. We’re here this morning to announce the new Texas Women’s Health Program is ready to go,” he said.

In the meantime, Planned Parenthood remains the largest provider serving Women’s Health Program patients after a Travis County judge last week issued a temporary restraining order barring Texas from excluding the organization. A Nov. 8 hearing will determine if the restraining order continues.

Perry warned that state law requires the Women’s Health Program to end if Texas is ordered to add Planned Parenthood to its list of qualified providers.

“Let me be clear. Texas will not allow a program that includes abortion providers, or their affiliates like Planned Parenthood, to be a provider. And if they file a lawsuit challenging the Texas program, and they were to prevail, they will kill this program, and they would be responsible for denying these important services for the low-income women of Texas,” Perry said.

Planned Parenthood officials have accused Perry of playing politics with women’s health and of improperly inserting the state into the doctor-patient relationship. The organization served 48,000 program patients last year, and its officials have expressed doubts that enough providers can be found to fill the gap.

Dr. Kyle Janek, head of the state Health and Human Services Commission, said Wednesday that his agency has lined up 3,000 providers — up 500 from last spring — to join the Texas-run program. Janek said he guarantees that women who qualify for the program, no matter where they live in Texas, will be able to find care.