Completing Texas-Mexico border wall would be daunting task
Close to the southern tip of Texas a border wall suddenly ends. Its final post sits in a dry cornfield half a mile from the nearest bend in the Rio Grande, the actual border with Mexico.

It would be easy to walk around it. The border wall in the Rio Grande Valley is actually a fragmented series of fencing, composed of enormous steel bars embedded in concrete close together. The thick, rust-colored bars rise 18 feet, forming teeth-like slats that split farmland, slice through backyards and sever parks.

There are miles of gaps between segments and openings in the fence. As a result of the Secure Fence Act passed in 2006, the government built about 650 miles of wall along the 1,954-mile U.S.-Mexico boundary. While 1,254 miles of that border is in Texas, the state has only about 100 miles of wall.

Republican presidential candidates insist they’ll finish it. But completing the Texas part of the wall would be a daunting task thanks to the border’s sheer length, the fact that it sits in the center of the snaking Rio Grande and because treaties with Mexico prevent either country from constructing within the river’s flood plain. And, unlike in other southwestern states, most border land in Texas is privately owned.

Finishing an entire border wall would be expensive. According to a 2009 Government Accountability Office report, pedestrian fencing, meant to keep out smugglers and migrants crossing on foot, has run anywhere from $400,000 to $15.1 million per mile, averaging $3.9 million. More recent construction has been even more expensive, with segments constructed in 2008 costing $6.5 million per mile. At that rate, the wall would cost nearly $10 billion to complete just for materials; challenging geography could push the cost much higher.

Officials overseeing the wall’s construction faced a legal and logistical nightmare from the start, according to emails obtained under the Freedom of Information Act and litigation by Denise Gilman, a University of Texas law professor.

Officials struggled to find places where construction could start fast to meet Congress’ deadline of building 255 miles by December 2008. They sought fencing that didn’t require "significant real estate acquisitions" or cut through sensitive wilderness, the emails show.

Wealthy landowners demanded more compensation or refused to allow the construction. Hundreds of property owners were sued just to build the existing chunks of wall. About 400 relinquished properties, ranging in size from a driveway to commercial farms, cost the government at least $15 million, according to an AP review of land cases in 2012.

Among the landowners affected was Eloisa Tamez, who refused to cede her three acres in San Benito, land that had been in her family for generations. A federal judge ruled in the government’s favor, and Tamez was compensated $56,000, with which she funded a scholarship at UT-Rio Grande Valley, where she works as a professor.

"It might be just a little piece of land," she said. "But to me it meant my life."

Some residents have found themselves cut off by the wall.

Pamela Taylor, who lives near Brownsville, originally fought the wall’s construction. Now her Texas home sits behind the wall on the side facing Mexico.

She still leaves coolers of water out for thirsty migrants, though she wishes more of them would come to the United States legally, the way she emigrated from England.

The wall "doesn’t do any good. It’s a waste of money," she said. But she’s gotten used to it.

Some locals say it’s better than nothing.

Othal E. Brand Jr., president of the Hidalgo County Water District 3, which supplies water to the McAllen area, pointed out where the fence separated a 20-acre reservoir from two pumping stations, which sit behind it along a bend in the Rio Grande. Brand said this land, adjacent to a wilderness reserve, was for years overrun by border crossers and that smugglers threatened and even shot at his employees.

"The wall is only part of the solution," he said, "but it’s an important part."