Bills would take Texas' illegal sodomy ban off books
By Ben Wermund

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

"Homosexual conduct" is still on the books as a crime in Texas eight years after the U.S. Supreme Court ruled the law unconstitutional.

But legislation to bring Texas law into line with the U.S. Constitution faces a rough ride through the Legislature , which traditionally has been reluctant to extend legal protections to people based on their sexual orientation.

Although Texas' so-called sodomy law cannot be enforced legally, civil rights advocates say it should be removed from the books because it creates a climate favorable to bullying, gay-bashing and hate crimes.

"By leaving it on the books, you create the potential for abuse," said Jim Harrington, director of the Texas Civil Rights Project , which is representing two gay men who were kicked out of an El Paso restaurant in 2009 for kissing in public.

In 2003, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that Texas could not stop people of the same sex from engaging in sexual activity. Today, the Texas Penal Code still states that it is a Class C misdemeanor to engage in "deviate sexual intercourse with another individual of the same sex" — just after a line explaining that the law is unconstitutional.

El Paso police cited the "homosexual conduct" wording when the two men were kicked out of a Chico's Tacos restaurant. The men refused to leave and called the police, assuming the restaurant staff was out of line with a city ordinance banning discrimination based on sexual orientation. Instead, an officer told the men it was illegal for two men to kiss in public and said they could be cited for "homosexual conduct."

At the time, El Paso Police Department spokesman Javier Sambrano described the officers involved as "relatively inexperienced."

Harrington said even though the men were not cited, the Chico's Tacos incident is about harassment.

That's why Texas needs to strip the language from the books, said State Rep. Jessica Farrar, D-Houston, who has sponsored legislation to do so.

"There is archaic language in our code that is used against our citizens today," said Farrar, whose colleague, Rep. Garnet Coleman, also a Houston Democrat, has filed an identical bill.

That two Houston lawmakers filed the same bill is not surprising. The city has the nation's sixth-largest gay population, according the U.S. Census Bureau. And in 2009, Houston became the first major American city (more than 1 million residents) to elect an openly gay mayor.

But gay rights legislation has often faced political hurdles in Texas. In 2005, voters overwhelmingly approved a constitutional amendment banning same-sex marriage. Gay rights legislation has long been a tough sell at the Legislature, too.

The James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act, which strengthened penalties for crimes against people based on race, religion and sexual orientation — categories used by the FBI for tracking crimes — endured a nearly decadelong fight before it was signed into law in 2001, spurred in part by Byrd's 1998 death.

State Sen. Rodney Ellis, the Houston Democrat who authored that legislation, said that even though the number of hate crimes in Texas based on sexual orientation was second only to the number based on race, sexual orientation became the "elephant in the room" that kept the act from passing for so many years.

Ellis said he tried to make the case to lawmakers opposing his bill that he was just trying to apply categories already used by federal law enforcement in the state.

"I hope (the code will be changed)," Ellis said. "But I'll believe it when I see it. I try to be an eternal optimist, but it's getting damn hard in this political environment."

As of January, Republicans hold 101 of the 150 seats in the Texas House , a supermajority that allows them to easily control legislation. Last session, the House was almost evenly divided between Republicans and Democrats.

The GOP domination is also reflected in the Criminal Jurisprudence committee, which would be the first to vote on Farrar's or Coleman's bill . A Democrat chairs the committee, but Republicans — including Wayne Christian, the most recent president of the Texas Conservative Coalition — outnumber them two-to-one.

Christian said he had not looked at the bills in detail, but that the time it would take them to go through committee probably would not be worth the outcome — especially in a session where lawmakers are wrestling with major issues like redistricting and filling a multi-billion-dollar budget hole.

"In this particular session, I'd be hesitant to do any changing," Christian said, adding that the law probably "better reflects the views of a lot of citizens" as it is .

Chuck Smith, deputy executive director of Equality Texas, said even that organization, the state's biggest lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender lobbying group, is not pushing too hard for rewording the penal code, because the makeup of the committee makes its passage such a long shot.

Other legislation that could potentially affect the GLBT community has already drawn fierce opposition this session. A bill filed by Rep. Mark Strama, D-Austin, which would allow school districts to discipline students who bully other students online, faced opposition when it came before the House Public Education Committee earlier this month.

Jonathan Saenz, legislative director of the conservative Liberty Institute, argued against the bill for reasons similar to those used against the hate crimes act in the '90s. Saenz told the committee he was worried that the bill could be changed back to its original form, which included wording about "perceived gender expression and identity." Such language, he said, would single out protections for specific groups of children. He said gay kids, or any other group, should not be singled out in legislation.

"It is about the gay rights, the homosexual community, the transgender community," Saenz said.

Earlier this month, Rep. Leo Berman, R-Tyler, brought up the bullying issue on KXAN-TV morning show when the host asked him for his position on legislation that would end the requirement for birth certificates to specify a female mother and a male father.

Berman said the bill, like Strama's cyberbullying bill, is "camouflaging an issue."

"This bullying issue in school, it's a GLBT issue. It's a gay, lesbian, bisexual, transvestite issue," Berman said.

After being corrected that the acronym stands for "gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender," Berman continued: "GLBT. I don't support their agenda at all."

Farrar said she knows her bill is unlikely to pass , but that she filed it to at least start the conversation. "If nobody files the bill, then nobody talks about, 'Gosh, in Texas something that is ruled unconstitutional is still on the books,'\u2009" Farrar said. "That's the value of filing bills that may be unpopular because over time you can change peoples' minds and their hearts."

bwermund@statesman.com; 474-2523