Cruz sworn in as Texas’ newest senator
By Jonathan Tilove

Ted Cruz was sworn in as Texas’ newest U.S. senator Thursday, the first Hispanic to represent the increasingly Latino state in the Senate. The Cuban-American Cruz promises to quickly make his mark as a silver-tongued member of the Republican Party’s tea party wing.

Cruz said that every time someone referred to him as “senator” Thursday, he kept “turning my head to find out who on Earth they were talking to.” But the Houston lawyer joins the Senate already possessing a national profile and conservative movement credentials, and he’s ready to do battle with the Obama administration on every issue from health care to the economy to guns.

Cruz said he planned to keep his campaign pledge to file, as his first bill, legislation to “repeal every syllable of Obamacare, though I think we know to a metaphysical certainty that the bill isn’t going to pass any time soon.”

In a conference call with Texas reporters, Cruz said “elections have consequences,” and the fact that Democrats still control the White House and Senate meant that he and others are going to have to find more “creative” ways to try to unspool the health care reform legislation.

The senator said he would have voted against the “fiscal cliff” deal, which he considered a bad bargain, and that President Barack Obama had the tactical advantage — and got the better of Republicans — because, in his view, the president was perfectly willing to see the federal government go over the cliff, triggering automatic tax increases. But Cruz said Republicans will gain the upper hand in the debate later this year on raising the federal debt limit, when he said they will be more ready than the president to risk a partial government shutdown.

Cruz, who replaces longtime Sen. Kay Bailey Hutchison, also said that however awful last month’s tragic school shooting in Newtown, Conn., was, it doesn’t justify efforts to curb Americans’ Second Amendment rights.

“I think every parent who saw what happened in Newtown was understandably horrified,” he said, but “I also think predictably and sadly, within minutes of that horrific crime we saw politicians out trying to exploit that tragedy and to push their gun control agenda.”

Cruz, a former solicitor general in Texas accustomed to arguing before the U.S. Supreme Court on contentious issues, won a coveted spot on the Senate Judiciary Committee, where he will join a fellow Texas Republican, Sen. John Cornyn, the former state attorney general elected to the Senate in 2002. Cruz said the Judiciary Committee could prove a decisive forum during the remainder of Obama’s term with the Supreme Court just “one justice away from a five-justice liberal majority that could overturn decades of precedent.”

Cruz was surrounded by family Thursday. He said his wife and daughters would continue to live in Houston.

“The entire day has been magical,” Cruz said. “I think back to 1957 and my dad showing up in Austin, at age 18, not speaking English, washing dishes, making 50 cents an hour. If someone had come to that teenage kid and told him, 50 years hence, his son would be serving in the United States Senate, that would have been something truly unimaginable, and yet there was my father looking down from the gallery, watching me be sworn into office.”