Capitol Digest: Parks and Wildlife readies for layoffs
COMPILED FROM STAFF AND WIRE REPORTS

State workers

Parks and Wildlife readies for layoffs

The Texas Parks and Wildlife Department will lay off more than 100 employees in coming weeks as the agency grapples with a 21 percent budget reduction in the next two years, said executive director Carter Smith.

The agency has about 3,000 employees statewide, 75 percent of whom work in the field outside Austin. Smith said roughly half of the lost jobs will be in Austin. Each of the employees affected by the layoffs will be granted 45 days of paid leave.

"We feel that is a way to provide some modicum of assistance to our affected colleagues," Smith said.

The agency was able to protect 60 park jobs that were slated for elimination by increasing user fees in parks, which could raise an estimated $3 million a year.

That move helps ensure that no parks will be closed because of the budget cuts. But it is a risk because park use — and thus park revenue — depends on unpredictable factors, such as the weather, Carter said.

Under the budget plan laid out to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Commission on Thursday, hunting and fishing license fees will not be increased.

Governor

Mixed messages in Perry letter

Gov. Rick Perry's state campaign team has sent out a fundraising letter that could be read in a couple of different ways by those trying to determine whether Perry is running for president.

The letter asks for donations to Texans for Rick Perry, which is a state committee. The money raised by that committee couldn't be used in a federal race for president. In addition, Perry has done a few fundraising events for his state account since the recent end of the moratorium on campaign fundraising during a legislative session.

On the other hand, the fundraising letter rather blatantly sets up a contrast between Perry and President Barack Obama. It says, "Gov. Perry has provided a clear blueprint that other states could follow, including an unshakeable commitment to doing the exact opposite of the job-killing, overreaching policies of President Obama."

Perry used the Texas-versus-Washington theme in his last gubernatorial campaign. Perry's team says he has not made up his mind about running for president. An announcement one way or the other is expected this summer.

Airport security

Simpson differs on pat-down issue

State Rep. David Simpson, R-Longview, is taking issue with House Speaker Joe Straus' assertion that one reason Simpson's bill to combat aggressive pat-downs in airports did not come up Friday was that Simpson was not willing to accept compromises.

Simpson had prepared an amendment on Friday that incorporated many of the changes suggested by Attorney General Greg Abbott in order to make the legislation defensible in court. Such changes were necessary because the conduct of federal employees at an airport is generally the purview of the federal government, not state government.

Simpson said he wanted to leave just one matter to the will of the House: the proposal to lower the standard for performing searches that touched private body parts from "probable cause" to "reasonable suspicion."

Straus was highly critical of Simpson's legislation, House Bill 41, as it was originally filed.

The House adopted those provisions on Monday and Simpson's bill passed. Ultimately, the Senate and House each passed their own pat-down measures, but nothing was passed into law.

Dallas

Exonerated man gets $1.4 million

A man imprisoned for nearly two decades for the killings of a grandmother and five children that he didn't commit has received $1.4 million in compensation that the state previously denied.

Anthony Graves received the money Thursday during a private meeting with Texas Comptroller Susan Combs. Combs later said she was "delighted" to pay Graves the money.

A 2009 Texas law gives exonerated convicts $80,000 for every year spent in prison. But Combs previously denied the compensation because the order clearing Graves lacked the phrase "actual innocence."

A law passed this year and signed by Gov. Rick Perry contained a provision addressing the Graves case.

Graves has said he's grateful for the money, but it "doesn't even come close" to making up for the time he spent in prison.