Blind trusts become campaign issue
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

The concept seems like a simple fix to an age-old problem: Politicians put their financial holdings into a blind trust so they don't know what is there, avoiding potential conflicts of interest that might make headlines.

Several Texas governors have had them: Bill Clements. George W. Bush. Rick Perry.

Now, questions once again are being raised about whether Texas' blind trust law might instead be thwarting public transparency and allowing officeholders to shield the conflicts of interest that the law was designed to curb.

"Blind trusts are a reform gone bad," said Tom Smith, director of Public Citizen of Texas, an ethics watchdog group.

"As a practical matter, the owner will still be in a position to benefit from holdings even in a blind trust. The normal checks and balances from full disclosure are broken."

Perry's blind trust has become an issue in the current governor's race, with Perry blasting challenger Bill White for not making public all of his tax returns. White counters that many of the details of Perry's own financial holdings also are not public, thanks to the blind trust he established in 1996.

"It violates the principle of transparency," White said recently. "People know a lot less about Rick Perry's income, assets and debts than they do mine. \u2026 As governor, I would not hide assets in a blind trust."

White has pledged that if he is elected, he will place his assets into index funds and mutual funds whose investments are fully and publicly disclosed.

Perry spokesman Mark Miner said White should take his own advice right now and release his income tax returns from when he was deputy energy secretary under Bill Clinton. As for blind trusts, he said, if politicians don't know about assets, "it removes any conflict of interest from the table."

"If Bill White had done the right thing and had his assets in a blind trust, he wouldn't have known he had interest in (a company that sold generators to hurricane victims) while he was mayor," Miner said of the former Houston mayor.

"There's nothing wrong with blind trusts. \u2026 It's the right thing to do, and that's why Rick Perry did it."

Under a 2003 Texas law, when Texas politicians place their holdings in a blind trust, they are not supposed to know what the trust holds or what assets are acquired or disposed of. Those decisions are left to a trustee, whom the politician selects.

Even before that, Republican Bill Clements of Dallas, an oilman-turned-governor who served 1979-1982 and 1987-1990, used a blind trust to separate his financial holdings from potential conflicts posed by his actions as the state's chief executive.

"What I did was establish an arm's-length trust and put all my assets in that trust so I had no business connections whatever, and that prevailed while I was governor," Clements said in 2002.

When he left office, the blind trust was disbanded and Clements retook control of his financial affairs.

"It had changed considerably," he said in 2002, estimating that as much as half of his assets had changed.

Bush also used a blind trust, but that didn't stop critics from complaining that it was not blind enough — that he had been kept abreast of some details of his holdings in the Texas Rangers baseball team.

State records show Perry put assorted financial holdings into a blind trust in September 1996, when he was agriculture commissioner.

In December 1998, Perry added to the trust a 60-acre plot in Austin and the next month added his ownership interest in MKS Consulting, a business he was in with former state Rep. Ric Williamson, with whom he had served in the Texas House and later appointed chairman of the Texas Transportation Commission, ethics filings indicate.

Both of those investments made headlines — the land because of its ties to sometimes-controversial Austin developer Gary Bradley, and the MKS partnership because of its interest in natural gas drilling in the Barnett Shale in North Texas, which is monitored by state environmental and energy regulators, critics of the blind trust point out.

White spokeswoman Katy Bacon said that because Perry knew what holdings went into the blind trust, some of its contents are not blind to him.

White cites Perry's interest in MKS, in the past one of Perry's principal sources of income, as an example of a potential conflict of interest.

"When he put that into the blind trust, we don't know how much money he'd make," White said. "You remember the dogged persistence of Mr. Williamson and Rick Perry in working as partners in a team to push this Trans-Texas Corridor. How could the governor exercise some independent judgment when he was financially dependent on an income from a partnership that Mr. Williamson had managed?"