Capitol Digest: TEA confirms layoffs coming; legal education waiver limited
COMPILED FROM STAFF REPORTS

EDUCATION

More school agency layoffs to come

The Texas Education Agency expects a second round of layoffs in the coming weeks, a spokeswoman confirmed Tuesday.

It is not yet clear how many jobs are to be eliminated or what the timing will be, said agency spokeswoman DeEtta Culbertson. But two people outside the agency who have been briefed on the layoff said the number will exceed 100 people.

The agency lost about 200 "full-time equivalent" positions in the upcoming two-year budget, which begins Sept. 1, but that does not necessarily translate to another 200 people being gone.

Culbertson said the layoffs were coming now so that the agency could reorganize with its lighter workforce before the next fiscal year begins. The first round of agency layoffs came in February, when more than 100 people were let go.

DATA SECURITY

Judge orders comptroller to court

State District Judge Rhonda Hurley of Austin has ordered Comptroller Susan Combs to submit to questioning by lawyers who are seeking information about a data breach at the agency that exposed personal information of 3.5 million Texans.

The judge also ordered a representative of Combs' office to under a deposition.

The lawyers, Chuck Herring and Jim Harrington, sought the depositions as a prelude to possibly filing suit on behalf of people whose names, address and Social Security numbers were placed on a publicly accessible server for more than a year.

Combs' office said the state plans to appeal the judge's decision.

The comptroller's office has spent $1.8 million so far on the security lapse, mostly to hire a company to send letters to people whose information was compromised and on credit monitoring services for them.

LAW

Legal education waiver limited

House-Senate negotiators removed a budget-bill provision that would have exempted every state-employed lawyer from having to take 12 hours of continuing legal education courses each year.

The exemption still would apply to lawyers employed by the state attorney general's office, which is how the bill was originally written in hopes of saving an estimated $430,500 in training-related costs. But when Senate Bill 1 was considered in the House earlier this month, Rep. Sylvester Turner, D-Houston, proposed an amendment expanding the exemption to cover all 3,000 or so state lawyers.

Turner said he wanted all state lawyers to be treated equally, and his amendment was accepted without opposition on the House floor. State Bar of Texas officials protested, however, saying the waiver could leave state lawyers ill-prepared in the ever-changing field of law.

The provision, included in the conference committee report on SB 1, directs the attorney general's office to prepare continuing education programs for agency lawyers.

Even with the waiver, those lawyers still must complete three hours of education in legal ethics each year.

Similar waivers are already in place for attorneys employed by the state Senate, House and other agencies, including the Sunset Advisory Commission and Legislative Budget Board.

POLITICS

Watson to lead Senate Democrats

State Sen. Kirk Watson of Austin was elected Tuesday as the new chairman of the Senate Democratic Caucus, a post that will give him increased visibility and additional clout in the Upper Chamber.

Watson replaces Sen. Leticia Van de Putte, D-San Antonio, who stepped down.

As caucus chairman, Watson will take a lead role in crafting Democratic strategy and serving as a spokesman for party members in the Legislature.

Watson has been one of the Senate's most consistent and outspoken critics of Republicans' handling of a budget shortfall this year.

Watson applauded Van de Putte's leadership, which has included successful efforts to block several of Gov. Rick Perry's appointments and a walkout by Democrats in 2003 over redistricting that brought the Legislature to a standstill.

Van de Putte is slated to become the Senate's next president pro tempore as the next Legislature convenes, and the two jobs were bound to present conflicts, she said.

What's next

Today is the last day of the special session. The House returns at 10 a.m. to give final approval to the school finance bill and possibly to consider airport security pat-down legislation. The Senate has adjourned for the session.