Business tax needs another look, key senator says
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Senate Finance Committee Chairman Steve Ogden on Tuesday continued his call to revisit the state's main business tax, signaling that a debate on whether to increase taxes could be coming in the final eight weeks of the session.

Led by Gov. Rick Perry and former Comptroller John Sharp , lawmakers rewrote the state's corporate franchise tax in 2006 to pay for a one-third reduction in property tax rates for school operations. That plan was meant to be a net tax cut, meaning the revamped business tax — known around the Capitol as the "margins tax" — would not raise as much money as the property tax cuts. But the tax has performed well below even those expectations, and that underperformance costs the state billions of dollars a year.

Ogden wants the state to revisit the tax, but many lawmakers have signed pledges saying they won't raise taxes, making them particularly nervous about doing so.

"Our system is out of balance, and we've got a significant structural deficit, which today we haven't really come out with any positive solutions yet to fix," Ogden, R-Bryan , said after Tuesday's Senate session.

He added: "The issue is not to single out businesses as some sort of villain. They already pay most of the taxes. The issue is having a tax system that, in my opinion, is uniform and equitable and as low as possible."

He said a Senate subcommittee that is looking at ways to raise revenue is looking at the business tax.

But there are considerable hurdles to doing so. Tax bills must start in the House, but House leaders have shown no interest in revisiting the business tax. Ogden has suggested, and he reiterated Tuesday, that lawmakers could work around that by pursuing a constitutional amendment that would be put before voters to clarify the constitutional ban on a personal income tax. Then the Legislature could turn to a tax on business income instead of the current margins tax, which critics say allows the state to tax a business even when it loses money.

Ogden said the problems with the business tax can be addressed during these final eight weeks of the legislative session.

Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst, who is considering running in a crowded Republican primary for the U.S. Senate next year, waited patiently, if nervously, while Ogden talked to reporters. The lieutenant governor eventually stepped in, sounding less certain that lawmakers should address the business tax this session.

Asked if the tax should be changed, Dewhurst said: "We will grow out of the structural shortfall over time, and if we don't tweak that tax, then it's going to take a little longer. If we do, then it will be shorter."

He also was vague about whether he would support a constitutional amendment.

"Ultimately that tax ought to be changed," Dewhurst said. "Whether it ought to be increased or not is a different subject. But to me it's always unfair if someone's losing money and they're paying tax. It's also unfair to startup companies that are oftentimes losing money but still have to pay a tax on their gross receipts."

At an event at the University of Texas on Tuesday, House Speaker Joe Straus expressed serious doubt about the prospects of revising the tax during the current legislative session.

"I don't think in the next 54 days there's much chance of that," Straus said. "It's not something you want to do hastily."

Still, he wouldn't entirely dismiss the possibility of revising the tax this session.

The business tax discussion persists because the state faces a huge budget shortfall. The Texas House approved a 2012-13 budget Sunday night that cuts overall spending by $23 billion, including billions of dollars in cuts to education and health care. Senators are working to ease many of those cuts, looking primarily at ways the state can create revenue without raising taxes, such as deferring payments into the opening days of the next budget cycle or making more state land money available for spending.

Perry has said lawmakers should not take any money out of the state's rainy day fund to balance the budget over the next two years, and enough House Republicans appear to agree with him to keep that from happening. But Dewhurst and Ogden — who will need at least a couple of Democratic votes to get a budget out of the Senate — are not ruling out trying to balance the budget with the help of rainy day dollars.

jembry@statesman.com; 474-2427

Additional material from staff writer Ralph Haurwitz.