Adding to Medicaid rolls won't be easy, Texas officials say
By and



AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

As Texas considers how to add 2 million people to Medicaid and CHIP over 10 years as part of the federal health care legislation heading to President Barack Obama, state health officials say that won't be easy.

The same enrollment system that is already struggling to enroll Texans in food stamps as quickly as the federal government requires would need to be ramped up soon to prepare for additions to Medicaid and CHIP that would start in 2014.

Health reform is a "hurricane heading our way in terms of what it would do" to the enrollment system, said Stephanie Goodman, a spokeswoman for the Health and Human Services Commission.

Meanwhile, GOP Gov. Rick Perry slammed the Democrat-backed legislation Monday, and state Attorney General Greg Abbott said that Texas will join other states in filing a lawsuit challenging what he described Sunday night on Facebook as a bill that is "unconstitutional and tramples individual and states rights."

Not everyone sees the impact on Texas as gloomy.

The Austin-based Center for Public Policy Priorities, which acts as an advocate for low- and middle-income Texans, said Texans "are among the biggest winners" in the health care reform.

"With more than one in four Texans currently lacking health care insurance and runaway premiums adding daily to that 6.1 million count, relief cannot come too soon for our overburdened health care system," the center said.

Of the 2 million people state officials expect to join Medicaid and CHIP, 1.3 million are adults who would be added to Medicaid, the federal-state health insurance program for low-income people and people with disabilities. Texas Medicaid now covers few adults who are not pregnant, elderly or disabled. The federal legislation requires states to cover people earning up to 133 percent of the federal poverty level, or $29,327 for a family of four.

Much of that Medicaid expansion would be paid for by the federal government.

The more expensive change for the state would be parents signing up their children for Medicaid and CHIP as health insurance becomes mandatory for U.S. citizens, Goodman said. That's because the state would have to pay a higher match for that than for the Medicaid expansion.

There are about 3.4 million Texans on Medicaid and CHIP. In the decade starting in 2014, population growth alone would push that to more than 4 million, according to the commission. With the legislation, the commission says, there would be more than 6 million people in those two programs.

To accommodate the growth, the commission would need more workers to enroll Texans in public assistance, Goodman said. The same enrollment system has been failing to process food stamp applications on time, leading to a backlog of 42,000 applications last fall.

Goodman has said the problem that started several years ago when the agency lost workers in advance of an outsourcing effort was complicated by a surge of applications after Hurricane Ike in 2008 and another surge last year as the economy soured.

Anne Dunkelberg, associate director of the Center for Public Policy Priorities, said that though it's important to make sure the enrollment system is running well and prepared for the extra load, "I think we've got time to get a grip on it" before 2014.

The commission expects the Medicaid and CHIP changes to cost $21.7 billion over 10 years, though some changes the Senate is considering could increase that to $24.3 billion.

But Dunkelberg said the state's estimate is inflated because, among other reasons, it counts enrolling already-eligible children in Medicaid and CHIP as a cost of health reform.

Although health reform would increase the Medicaid rolls, Dunkelberg said that twice as many people would be covered under the health insurance exchanges created by the bill. Altogether, she said, the federal legislation would provide coverage to 4.3 million to 4.6 million of the 6.1 million uninsured Texans.

It's still unclear how the exchanges — which would be created to allow individuals to buy coverage — would work.

Oklahoma Insurance Commissioner Kim Holland, who is also the secretary and treasurer of the National Association of Insurance Commissioners, said the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services will soon begin developing standards for the state-based health insurance exchanges.

Holland said that it is each state's prerogative to determine where the exchange will be housed. Exchanges could become separate agencies, or they might be rolled into state's departments of insurance, she said.