Contributions from Shami to Gilbert raise eyebrows
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Political contributions totaling $150,000 last month from a Democratic gubernatorial candidate to a Democratic candidate for agriculture commissioner have left a third candidate raising questions of a bribe.

According to campaign reports filed Friday, hair-care magnate and Democratic gubernatorial candidate Farouk Shami contributed $100,000 to Hank Gilbert's campaign for agriculture commissioner Dec. 7. Three days earlier, on Dec. 4, Gilbert had dropped out of the Democratic race for governor and announced that he would run for agriculture commissioner and was endorsing Shami. On Dec. 31, Shami gave another $50,000 to Gilbert's campaign.

Both contributions came out of Shami's own pocket, but both were technically filed as expenditures meant to assist Shami's own campaign, according to the filings at the Texas Ethics Commission. That means that contributions Shami raises through his campaign can be used to reimburse himself for those personal contributions to Gilbert's campaign.

Kinky Friedman, another Democratic candidate for agriculture commissioner, said the contributions are fishy, and he described them as a bribe.

They "raise some serious questions about judgment," said Friedman, who said Gilbert should give the money back. The Shami and Gilbert camps denied wrongdoing.

"There was no payoff to get out," said Gilbert staffer Trey McAtee , who said Gilbert decided to get out of the gubernatorial race because Shami and Houston Mayor Bill White had deeper pockets. "It's the dumbest story I ever came across. Money was neither solicited nor expected.

"Hank can run one hell of a campaign on chewing gum and baling wire," McAtee said. "He doesn't need a payoff for an endorsement."

The Shami camp also said the donation was on the up-and-up.

"Farouk gave him the donation because he thought he would be a great agricultural commisisoner," said Shami campaign spokeswoman Kelly Johnson. The timing of Gilbert's decision to drop out was "a total coincidence."

In December, the Statesman reported that at the time of Gilbert's announcement that he would drop out and back Shami, Gilbert's attack Web site, thescoop.hankgilbert.com , was still taking shots at Shami. It had an item saying that Shami, who has said he'll put $10 million of his own money into the primary, is trying "to buy his way" into winning the Democratic nomination.

McAtee also dismissed Gilbert's seeming about-face, saying Gilbert's earlier attacks on Shami amounted to "typical political crap."

In any case, bribery is hard to prove or prosecute. Individual contributions are essentially unrestricted in Texas, and if a political contribution is properly recorded in campaign finance reports, it is insulated from bribery charges, say campaign finance experts. Even if the money is not properly recorded, prosecutors need direct evidence of a quid pro quo, according to the Texas penal code.

In a release, Friedman said: "Farouk and I are old friends, but he'd never offer me a bribe because he knows I wouldn't take it."

Friedman himself has been the recipient of hair-care largesse. In April, John McCall, a business partner of Shami's, gave Texans for Kinky $50,000, according to finance records. At the time Friedman was running for governor. In December he dropped out of that race, citing his wealthier opponents.

According to the latest campaign filings, Texans for Kinky had $52,884 on hand at the end of 2009; Gilbert had $112,817.04.