EPA re-airs 1990s debate
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

In a letter dated Oct. 20, 1994, the director of a Texas environmental research group accused the state environmental agency of turning "Texas' well-established and fairly effective air quality permitting system upside down."

The adoption of a proposed flexible permitting program "could very well throw the whole air permitting and enforcement system into chaos," wrote Mary Kelly, executive director of the Texas Center for Policy Studies.

Only a couple of weeks later, George W. Bush was elected governor, and that spring, the flexible permitting program — which created overall emissions caps for regulated power plants and refineries, rather than caps on individual sources, such as a boiler, within facilities — was finalized at the state environmental agency.

Sixteen years later, the federal Environmental Protection Agency has said that it plans to take over portions of the program, which it says gives too much leeway to polluters. The action would be the first time that EPA has wrested control from a state of a flexible permitting law, environmental law experts say, and has led to outrage from Texas' top policymakers.

The EPA action would be a "less effective Washington-based, bureaucratic-led, command and control mandate," wrote Gov. Rick Perry in a letter Friday to President Barack Obama. Air quality has, in fact, improved overall in the state, but major cities, like those across the country, continue to fail federal clean air standards, which have gotten progressively tougher.

The current dispute with the EPA is, in a way, like a time capsule from the early 1990s. The anxiety about federal oversight and criticism of "command-and-control" methods echoes the rhetoric Bush used in 1994.

"The old command-and-control school of environmental policy is not what I am for," Bush, then a candidate, told the American-Statesman that year. "I am for setting standards and letting industry comply."

Texas policymakers had contemplated flexible permitting for several years by the time Bush took office.

The federal Clean Air Act allows states to have their own flexible permits, and in the early 1990s, industry groups began pushing for Texas to come up with its own permitting program.

The state environmental agency, then called the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, created a task force of environmentalists and industry representatives, but in 1994, task force members failed to come to a consensus.

Meanwhile, environmental regulation had become a campaign issue.

Property rights groups had fiercely battled against the federal listing of several species as endangered, which they worried would cut their land values.

Gov. Ann Richards had shepherded hazardous-waste reforms through the Legislature and had vetoed a bill that would have undermined Austin's Save Our Springs water-quality ordinance. She alienated some environmentalists, however, with a call to streamline permitting as part of an emphasis on "customer service."

When the Bush administration took office, it acted to loosen the rules and promote what Bush called in a speech last week in Dallas "reasonable permitting."

"We were trying to get away from what was called 'command-and-control' at the time," said Andy Barrett, who was Bush's senior aide on environmental matters and is now a lobbyist. "We wanted to set standards and let people be innovative about how they met them."

Barrett made trips to the state environmental agency "fairly often in those days, saying 'We like this, or we don't like that,' " he said.

"As long as the standards were met, and we were reducing pollution, we're better off," was the theory, Barrett said. "We didn't want to hamstring or handcuff the industry."

Environmentalists tell a different story.

Industry "didn't want scrutiny; they wanted to get their permits quick," said Neil Carman, air quality specialist at the Lone Star chapter of the Sierra Club. The flexible permit program "is like saying, 'As long as you go 55 miles per hour, on average, in a month, you can go 100 or 125 some days.' It allows excessive kinds of pollution if you play that game."

The state air permitting program at what is now the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality stands accused of allowing pollution caps that are too high and failing to require proper monitoring of facilities.

"Nobody knows, really, how much these companies are really emitting," said Ilan Levin, an attorney with the Environmental Integrity Project, which pushes for strict enforcement of environmental regulations.