From farm to politics, Perry follows in family's footsteps
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

If he wasn't your governor, chances are that Rick Perry would be spending his days in the left seat of a Boeing 737 cockpit as a Southwest Airlines pilot.

Before he was a politician, Perry worked on the family farm. And in 1978, life on the farm wasn't going well. So Perry, then in his late 20s, was within weeks of heading to Dallas to train for a career as a pilot with a nascent airline called Southwest.

Then the weather came. After months of drought, rain poured on the Perry farm in Haskell County — 30 inches in a day.

"There wasn't any big lightning strike or bubble above my head that said, 'Eureka, this is a sign from God that you must go back to farming,'" Perry said. "But we got real busy for one thing. That much rain in a 24-hour period of time does amazing damage to farming and ranchland. So I just made the decision that this is where I need to be."

Perry returned home, put in some time on the farm and, six years later, made his first run for office. Because that's what the people in Perry's family do. Politics, like farming, is a Perry family business.

Perry's great-great-grandfather, D.H. Hamilton, returned to East Texas after the Civil War, served a couple of years in the Texas House and headed west before settling in Paint Creek, named for its red clay banks.

Hamilton served as Haskell County judge, and Perry's great-grandfather would be county commissioner. Perry's father, Ray, served on the school board and was a county commissioner from 1968 to 1996.

Most boys in Paint Creek joined the Boy Scouts, and Perry spent many Saturdays on Scouting adventures. It was through the Scouts that Perry came to know Texas A&M; University. When he was 8 or 9 years old, Perry's scoutmaster, an A&M; graduate named Greg Overton, took Perry and some other boys to College Station for an Aggie football game against Southern Methodist University.

The young Perry was hooked.

After graduating from Paint Creek High School, he headed to A&M; and joined the Corps of Cadets. Perry quickly built a name for himself around campus, serving as the social secretary of his sophomore class and, in his junior year, becoming one of two junior yell leaders.

"Yell leader is the best position on campus as a nonathlete," said Ken Stevens, who was in the Corps with Perry.

He said that Perry "was just like he is today. He was a real outgoing guy. Leaders kind of boil to the top."

Although the anti-war sentiment that swept across many college campuses in the late 1960s and early 1970s was not as evident at A&M;, the school was changing.

More women and African Americans enrolled, and the Corps of Cadets sought to crack down on physical harassment of its young members.

And there were pockets of resistance to campus traditions, notably the massive bonfire that students built before the football team played the University of Texas on Thanksgiving. The Student Council on Pollution and Environment wrote in a November 1971 letter to The Battalion student newspaper, "There are families living in Bryan whose main source of fuel for heating and cooking is wood. Distributing cords of firewood to these people would be a constructive action rather than the destructive waste of logs on Nov. 24."

Perry stood firmly on the side of tradition. As a senior, he was in charge of the "stacking area" where the bonfire was built.

After A&M;, Perry joined the Air Force, rising to the rank of captain and flying C-130 tactical airlift aircraft in the Middle East and Europe. In 1977, he returned to Paint Creek and moved back into his old bedroom in his parents' house.

Perry was uncertain about his place in the world.

"Dad still thought I was there to do chores," the governor wrote in his 2008 book, "On My Honor." "I reminded him that I had just finished commanding a multimillion-dollar piece of government equipment and a number of grown men. He reminded me that the chores still needed tending to."

So he started flying again and talked to some friends about landing a job with Southwest. He was just weeks away from joining the young airline's pilot-training program when, in early August of 1978, the rain finally came.

Perry returned to the farm and things started to turn around. He and his father became partners and best friends, and Perry found his footing.

A few years later, he married Anita Thigpen, whom he had known since childhood, and they moved into a 600-square-foot house.

More severe weather — an arctic storm — hit Perry's corner of the world in late 1983, causing him to lose electricity and contact with the rest of the world.

When he finally made it into the nearby town of Haskell, he heard that state Rep. Joe Hanna had decided not to run for re-election. With politics already in his blood, Perry and his wife quickly decided that he would run.

Like most folks in rural Texas in those days, he would run, and win, as a Democrat.

Perry served three terms in the House, getting a first-hand lesson in how government works by serving on the House's most important panel, the budget-writing Appropriations Committee.

But there were a number of special sessions at the time, and Perry was spending considerable time away from his wife and two young children.

He made his egg money by buying and selling airplanes, so with light aircraft at his disposal, Perry would sometimes fly himself home twice a week during the legislative session.

The lifestyle persuaded him to leave the Legislature after three terms. "My wife was taking care of two children, and it wasn't fair," Perry said.

Seeing a coming trend, Perry switched to the Republican Party during his last term in the House.

"In order to continue to serve as a fiscal conservative, he needed to do it as a Republican," said David Weeks, the longtime producer of Perry's television ads who also switched parties around that time.

Perry considered working as a lobbyist or high-level Capitol aide. But instead, Weeks and others encouraged him to run for agriculture commissioner in 1990 against Jim Hightower, a popular liberal Democrat.

"I'll give David the bulk of the credit," Perry said. "He came and sat down with me and said, 'You ought to run for statewide office.'"

Perry beat Hightower in a close race, and his path to the governorship was set. He'd serve briefly as lieutenant governor before becoming governor in late 2000. He's won two terms and he's running for a third.

Because running for office, like working the land, is what the Perry family does. No wonder he never became a Southwest pilot.

jembry@statesman.com; 445-3572