Feds ask state to start winding down women's program
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Federal officials asked the state Thursday to start phasing out a program that provides health care for more than 100,000 low-income women.

The Women's Health Program, which is part of Medicaid and is largely paid for with federal money, provides Pap smears, breast exams, birth control and other services to poor, uninsured women between the ages of 18 and 44.

State officials want to bar the program from paying for care at clinics affiliated with abortion providers. Specifically, they are trying to stop women from seeking taxpayer-funded care at Planned Parenthood, even though participating clinics are legally separated from those that provide abortions and tax dollars cannot pay for abortions.

Federal law, however, says women should be able to select their own caregivers. So federal officials gave the state formal notice Thursday that funding for the program will end. They asked the state to submit a formal plan for phasing out the program so that services are not immediately cut off.

"Neither the federal government nor the state government are permitted to stop people from getting services from their trusted source of care, as long as the provider is qualified to provide the service and the provider participates in the Medicaid program," said Cindy Mann, director of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. "Texas has decided to implement a new rule which is contrary to this freedom-of-choice provision."

Numerous other clinics and providers treat women enrolled in the Women's Health Program. But almost half of all services under the program last year were provided by clinics that Texas now wants to exclude, Mann said in a letter to state officials.

The full phase-out of the Women's Health Program could last until the end of 2012. The state has until April 16 to submit a phase-out plan to the federal government. Then, for three months, the state would identify other Medicaid programs that participants may be eligible for and start the process of notifying patients and referring them to other providers.

The state could also use that three-month period to move to a new program that would be entirely state-funded. Gov. Rick Perry has said he supports a state-funded program if the current Women's Health Program disappears. (The federal government is scheduled to pick up about $30 million of the current program's costs this year, with the state paying about $3.3 million.)

If the state does not transfer the women to a state-funded program in that first three months, it would get another six months to stop enrollment and help existing clients find other care.

Perry has said he wants to look to other areas of the state's budget for health and human services to find the $30 million or so that the federal government now provides for the program.

"Texans send a substantial amount of our tax dollars to Washington, D.C., and it is unconscionable that the Obama administration has essentially told Texas it will send our tax dollars back to fund this program only if we violate state law and include its pro-abortion allies," Perry said Thursday.

If the state can find the money, it can easily transfer the services to its own program, said Stephanie Goodman, a spokeswoman for the Texas Health and Human Services Commission.

"We'll use all the same processes to enroll women, pay providers, etc.," Goodman said. "The source of the funding will just change from a mix of state and federal funds to all state funds. Making that change is really the easiest part of the process."

Perry says the fight over the Women's Health Program is an example of the Obama administration's overreach. But the federal law that says states can't exclude providers was in place during the George W. Bush administration.

State lawmakers passed a ban on tax dollars going to affiliates of abortion providers in 2005. But the state's Health and Human Services Commission didn't enforce that ban when the Women's Health Program began because, "based on previous statements and cases," it didn't think the Bush administration would allow it, Goodman said.

Some lawmakers wanted the ban enforced and asked Attorney General Greg Abbott to clarify whether it would conflict with federal law. Abbott said last year that the state law did not conflict with the federal one, meaning the state could enforce the ban on Planned Parenthood and similar abortion-affiliated providers when the program was renewed this year.

"We believe we're on firm legal ground," Goodman said. "Federal law gives states the responsibility of establishing criteria for Medicaid providers. Given that the state law is valid, we need to begin enforcing it."

But the Obama administration disagrees about the validity of that state law. "We have no choice but to not renew their program," Mann said.

State Rep. Garnet Coleman, D-Houston, said he hopes a compromise is reached during the phase-out. "By continuing the program beyond its unexpected end and allowing time to phase down, it gives state legislators time to work with the Obama administration on alternative funding to keep the program up and running," he said.

Contact Jason Embry at 445-3572