Change in 'sexting' bill adds education for teens' parents
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

A bill designed to curb the growing problem of "sexting" among teenagers texting nude photos of themselves could hold parents accountable as well, two state officials said Monday.

Attorney General Greg Abbott and state Sen. Kirk Watson, D-Austin, said wording has been added to Senate Bill 407 that would allow judges to order minors and a parent to participate in an education program about the detrimental social and criminal aspects of texting explicit images.

"This bill ensures that prosecutors — and, frankly, parents — will have a new, appropriate tool to address this issue," said Watson, the Senate sponsor of the legislation. "It helps Texas laws keep up with technology and our teenagers."

In November, Watson and Abbott announced plans for the new law to allow for prosecution of minors on a misdemeanor charge, a lesser charge than the third-degree felony count they can face now. But there was no mention at the time of holding parents responsible.

Watson and Abbott said the new provision covering parents is designed to allow parents to be involved in court-ordered programs about the dangers of sexting. Abbott said he suspects that most of the teenagers who are sending sexually explicit images "don't understand the consequences of what they're doing."

By sending explicit photos of themselves, he said, "they are exposing themselves around the world."

"We don't want to be putting teenagers behind bars and ruining their lives," Abbott said, noting that conviction on the current felony charges can send youths to a state prison and force them to register as sex offenders for the rest of their lives.

"The message to parents here is: Pay attention to the new technology," said Watson, a father of two.

Officials said the current law that covers sexting — possessing or trafficking child pornography — was enacted years ago to crack down on adults who possess child pornography. It carries a penalty of two to 10 years in prison and a fine of up to $10,000.

Abbott said he was unaware of any Texas teenagers being prosecuted under that law, but he said prosecution in other states has caused controversy.

The bill would also allow for teens to apply to have the sexting conviction expunged from their record.

Watson earlier cited a study showing that 1 in 5 teenagers has sent a sexually suggestive picture by text, and 1 in 3 has received such an image.

A 2008 study by the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy reported that 22 percent of teenage girls said they had been texted or posed for nude or seminude photos.

The bill would also require school districts to provide education for students on the dangers of sexting. Recognizing that impending state budget cuts will make it hard for districts to spend additional money on that, Abbott and Watson said the Texas School Safety Center at Texas State University will develop the program for school districts using existing resources.

mward@statesman.com; 474-2791