Perry's call for $10,000 bachelor's degrees stumps educators
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

When Gov. Rick Perry challenged the state's public institutions of higher learning this week to develop bachelor's degree programs costing no more than $10,000, including textbooks, Mike McKinney was stumped.

"My answer is I have no idea how," McKinney, chancellor of the Texas A&M University System, told the Senate Finance Committee. "I'm not going to say that it can't be done."

Tuition, fees and books for four years average $31,696 at public universities in Texas, according to the Higher Education Coordinating Board. Sul Ross State University Rio Grande College is the cheapest, at $17,532.

The governor's call for low-cost degrees comes as legislative budget writers and the governor himself have proposed deep cuts in higher education funding — cuts that would put pressure on governing boards to raise tuition, not lower it.

But officials of some university systems — whose governing boards are fully populated by Perry appointees — nevertheless struck an upbeat tone, or at least a neutral one. As McKinney, a former Perry chief of staff, put it: "If it can be figured out, we've got the faculty that can figure it out."

A spokesman for the University of Texas System said, "We look forward to reviewing details of the governor's proposal."

Perry was inspired by comments that Bill Gates, co-founder of Microsoft Corp. and co-chairman of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, made at a conference in California, said Catherine Frazier , a spokeswoman. A video posted on YouTube captured some of Gates' remarks.

"College, except for the parties, needs to be less place-based," he said. Web-based instruction and other technology could drive the price down to $2,000 a year, he said.

Perry wrote to university regents last week , urging them to develop $10,000 degree programs and to scale up those programs so at least 10 percent of the sheepskins awarded by their schools are based on this approach. He said programs could include online classes, classes at no-frills campuses, credit for prior learning, credit for Advanced Placement classes in high school and other elements.

"I don't know whether the $10,000 figure is practical reality or not," said Raymund Paredes, the state's higher education commissioner. "I interpret the governor's remarks as a call to be creative and find solutions to the spiraling costs of higher education."

Three community colleges — Midland College, Brazosport College in Lake Jackson and South Texas College in McAllen — offer a bachelor's in applied technology and come closest to Perry's goal, with tuition and fees for four years ranging from $9,168 to $10,440 and books adding anywhere from $3,000 to $5,000, school officials say. Those three schools would see their state funding for bachelor's degrees end under the House version of the proposed 2012-13 state budget, although South Texas College President Shirley Reed said she's "very optimistic" that won't happen.

Could the cost be reduced to meet the governor's goal? "You can do it, but there's no free lunch," Reed said. "One option is to reduce the number of hours in degree programs. But will the students actually have the competencies that the employer is looking for?"

Shifting instruction online wouldn't save money, she said. The school offers 13 associate degree programs online but has found costs to be pretty much the same as the classroom version because faculty members — whose salaries are the largest expense — must still be actively involved, developing courses, responding to students' e-mails, engaging in online discussions and evaluating student work.

Tuition, fees and books aren't the only costs of an education, of course. Room and board, transportation and personal expenses add considerable sums. At UT-Austin, the total cost of a bachelor's degree averages $96,664, assuming a student finishes in four years, according to coordinating board data. That's more than double the $41,168 price tag for tuition, fees and books.

"We're certainly interested in efficiency, but it's extremely unlikely that at a tier one university it's going to be possible to do something like (the governor's proposal) without the equivalent of a large subsidy," said Dean Neikirk , chairman of UT's Faculty Council and a professor of electrical and computer engineering. "You can make the charge to the student as low as you want if you can find dollars elsewhere to substitute."