New science textbooks face budget snag
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

The $1.4 billion price tag for new science textbooks and other materials has been causing sticker shock among state officials bracing for the upcoming budget shortfall.

So, the State Board of Education on Tuesday must decide whether to push ahead despite the cost or delay the textbooks for at least a year to save the state money in the 2012-13 budget.

Legislators are anticipating a budget shortfall of $15 billion to $18 billion when they return to Austin in January to write the next two-year budget.

The $1.4 billion total would pay for much more than science textbooks, including ongoing contracts for instructional materials and books for new students. But the state at this point has more flexibility on the science textbooks than the other materials.

One option the board will consider is keeping the existing textbooks for a little longer while providing students electronic supplements that would reflect the science curriculum standards approved by the board last year.

"It may be the best ugly solution out there," said board member David Bradley , R-Beaumont, who has been discussing the options with legislative leaders.

That approach would serve the dual purpose of winnowing down the price tag during the budget crunch while also providing the new material to students quicker, Bradley said.

Getting the updated material into the classroom is paramount, Bradley said, because students will be taking end-of-course exams based on the new science standards beginning in the 2011-12 school year.

Even under the current timeline, the new textbooks would not get to students until the 2012-13 school year.

Supplemental materials, however, can be produced faster than new textbooks. It is unclear how much this approach would save the state.

The education board is free to proceed with the full $1.4 billion plan, but there is no guarantee that the Legislature will appropriate all the money. The last time Texas faced a similar budget situation, in 2003, lawmakers opted to not buy the scheduled books.

The Permanent School Fund, an endowment overseen by the State Board of Education and sometimes called the textbook fund, is on course to produce more than $1 billion for the next two-year budget.

That money must be spent on public education, but the Legislature will decide whether to use it for textbooks.

kalexander@statesman.com; 445-3618