Perry supporters defend his remarks on N.Y. gay marriage law
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Some social conservatives are criticizing Gov. Rick Perry for saying he is "fine" with New York's new law allowing same-sex marriage, while some of the governor's supporters spent time Monday defending the governor's opposition to gay marriage.

Perry, who is considering a run for president, said at a Republican event in Aspen, Colo., last week that his support for states' rights led him to look tolerantly on New York's new law legalizing gay marriage.

"That is their call. If you believe in the 10th Amendment, stay out of their business," Perry told the crowd at Friday's event for GOP donors.

Those words set off a flurry of calls to social conservative leaders from people who wanted to know more about Perry's position on same-sex marriage.

Kelly Shackelford, president and CEO of the conservative Liberty Institute, said he heard from concerned conservatives around the country who wanted to know what to make of Perry's remark.

"He probably could have used a much better term," Shackelford said.

Shackelford, whose Plano-based group pushes for limited government and promotes Judeo-Christian values, said he has been telling callers that Perry has long favored an amendment to the U.S. Constitution that would define marriage as being only between a man and a woman.

Perry's remarks in Aspen riled former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, who is part of the group chasing the Republican nomination for president.

The online magazine Slate reported that Santorum sent out a critical message on Twitter about Perry's statement. Santorum tweeted: "So Gov Perry, if a state wanted to allow polygamy or if they chose to deny heterosexuals the right to marry, would that be OK too?"

Mark Miner, a spokesman for Perry, said the governor's social conservatism remains steadfast.

Miner said people who know Perry understand that two things he feels strongly about are states' rights and the institution of traditional marriage.

"Nothing has changed with the governor's philosophy here," he said.

Besides confirming Perry's support of a federal constitutional amendment defining marriage as a union between a man and a woman, Miner pointed to the governor's state record. Perry supported the Texas Defense of Marriage Act and a state constitutional amendment defining traditional marriage, Miner noted.

teaton@statesman.com; 445-3631