Penalty change for 'sexting' proposed
By

Moving to curb the growing scourge of "sexting" among teenagers texting nude photos of themselves and others two top state officials announced an effort Monday to change state law to better address the phenomenon.

Attorney General Greg Abbott and state Sen. Kirk Watson, D-Austin, said they are working together to allow the prosecution of minors on Class A misdemeanor charges instead of the third-degree felony charges they face now.

The felony charges can send youths to a state prison and force them to register as sex offenders for the rest of their lives.

"Sexting is real. ... It is morally hazardous," said Watson, who said he plans to file a bill making that change for consideration by the Legislature when it convenes in January.

"One study shows 1 in 5 teenagers has sent a sexually suggestive picture by text ... and 1 in 3 has received such an image," Watson said. "Our laws have not kept up with our technology."

A 2008 study by the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy reported that 22 percent of teenage girls said they had been texted or posed for nude or seminude photos.

Officials said the law that covers sexting was enacted years ago to crack down on child pornography in the possession of adults. It carries a penalty of two to 10 years in prison and up to a $10,000 fine.

Abbott said that in two cases in recent years, a 17-year-old boy was charged with a felony for texting an explicit photo of a 16-year-old girl and an eighth-grader was jailed overnight for texting suggestive photos. Abbott said he did not know whether either youth went to prison.

Both officials said the change in law would not go easy on sexting, but would instead focus prevention and education efforts on teenagers who might not otherwise know how dangerous and harmful the practice is.

Under the proposed change, Watson said the crime for minors would be punishable by a year in the county jail and up to a $4,000 fine. He and Abbott said probation and restricted cell phone use would be a key component for first-time offenders.

"Studies show that teenaged students are increasingly taking, sending and receiving explicit pictures of themselves on their mobile telephones," Abbott said. "This practice is not just harmful to young Texans; it is potentially illegal."

mward@statesman.com