Perry puts out call to action in 'Fed Up!'
By and



In his new book about states' rights, GOP Gov. Rick Perry celebrates the spirit of tea party activists and others who, in the name of the Constitution, he says, are mounting a revolution to save America from grave and imminent danger.

He blames what he sees as the invasive and corrosive nature of the federal government on everyone from President Barack Obama to Republicans who "capitulate" through compromise, including George W. Bush.

The "winds of change" that are blowing through the country are not just directed at Democrats, Perry argues, but also at Republicans who have not resisted efforts to expand federal power.

The book, "Fed Up! Our Fight to Save America from Washington," is an unabashed call to action by the Texas governor, who was decisively re-elected Tuesday.

"The American people have never sat idle when liberty's trumpet sounds the call to battle — and today that battle is for the soul of America," Perry writes.

The book's release date is Nov. 15, but it was on sale Tuesday at Perry's election night victory party, and by Wednesday it will be available online and in at least one Austin book store.

Perry kicks off his national book tour in New York today on the "Today" show and "Fox & Friends," followed by several other national television and radio appearances, according to a campaign spokeswoman.

On Monday, Perry will discuss his book on Jon Stewart's "The Daily Show," said the spokeswoman, Catherine Frazier.

Next week, he'll attend Texas book events, including one in the Austin area, scheduled for Nov. 11 at 6 p.m. at the Dell Diamond. And Perry plans to have book events in San Diego when he's there later this month for the Republican Governors Association convention, Frazier said.

Perry is quick to pre-empt criticism that he's using the book tour to test the waters for a White House bid.

"Cynics will say that I decided to write this book because I seek higher office," Perry writes. "They are wrong: I already have the best job in America."

He does, however, echo the tone of a favorite Republican president — Ronald Reagan — to argue that the country's best days could be ahead of it. But only if the states stand up to the "tyranny of an expansive and meddlesome federal government."

And Perry addresses those "who want to paint me as a backwards southern governor" by assuming that his support of states' rights implies that he doesn't think the Civil Rights Act should have been passed. "Wrong," he writes.

Perry tempers his criticism of Bush by saying his predecessor as Texas governor is a great American patriot and leader.

But he excoriates "compassionate conservatism," the signature of Bush's presidential campaign in 2000. It sent the wrong signal that unqualified conservatism was "somehow flawed and had to be rebranded," he writes.

He also chides Bush for presiding over an expansion of federal authority with unprecedented education mandates and the creation of a prescription drug benefit for elderly people.

Much of the book echoes some of Perry's central campaign themes: border security, the ineptitude of the federal government and the superiority of the Texas economic model.

"Washington could learn a thing or two from Texas," Perry writes, such as adopting a two-year budget process and setting constitutional spending limits on the federal budget.

Perry glosses over much of Texas' impending budget trouble, not mentioning that legislators could face a budget shortfall of more than $24 billion when they return to Austin in January.

As for fixing the federal government, Perry's No. 1 answer is to repeal health care reform legislation, which he says "represents the closest this country has ever come to outright socialism."

Health care should be paid for by the individual — through work, savings, charity and private insurance — not the federal government, he argues.

"The future of America depends on reversing this law," Perry writes.

He also recommends a series of amendments to the U.S. Constitution, including eliminating the income tax; setting limits on the lifetime appointment of federal judges, including Supreme Court justices, who "rule over us with no accountability;" and clarifying certain amendments that he says the courts have distorted.