Some minorities put back in social studies
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

After months of criticism, the State Board of Education made a concerted effort Thursday to counter concerns that important minority historical figures were being left out of Texas' new social studies curriculum standards.

Some of the board members' first votes in this lengthy process were aimed at adding to the standards such people as Richard Allen, a founder of the African Methodist Episcopal Church; the first Latina astronaut, Ellen Ochoa; and the Tejanos who died at the Alamo.

Including the names of those Alamo fighters "would make Texas history very exciting at the fourth-grade level because (the students) might even see a name very similar to theirs," said board member Mary Helen Berlanga, D-Corpus Christi.

The teachers who had helped draft the revised standards over the past year had dropped many names because they said the standards were too full.

But the board disregarded much of that work, prompting board member Pat Hardy, R-Weatherford, to worry the board was "choking our kids with a list of names."

The board members stayed late into the night and trudged through 88 pages of proposed standards for history, government, economics and more. The standards will serve as the framework for textbooks and lessons for Texas' 4.7 million public school students.

"I know this will be a long and laborious process," Chairwoman Gail Lowe, R-Lampasas, said as the board kicked off its discussion Thursday afternoon.

Indeed, discussions of some potentially contentious subjects, such as U.S. history and government, were not completed Thursday night and will be continued today.

A preliminary vote will be taken on the complete standards, and a final decision will be made in March.

The board did settle some conflicts that had bubbled up over the past several months as the standards have gone through rewritings.

Last summer, a controversy ensued when Christmas and Rosh Hashanah were replaced as examples of significant religious holidays in the standards for the sixth-grade world cultures course. The board made clear that those holidays would be put back in - and they were.

But on Thursday, a majority of the board had to beat back an effort to remove important religious observances from Islam and Hinduism.

To remove those holidays, including Diwali, would exclude a significant portion of the world in a world cultures course, Hardy said.

"If we're going to teach our kids about a global society, ... they should learn about all the different holidays. It is only fair," added board member Rene Nuñez, D-El Paso.

Many of the additions emphasized citizenship, political accountability and capitalism.

kalexander@statesman.com; 445-3618