Shrinking the state budget easier said than done
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Many Texas lawmakers have offered voters election-year platitudes when asked about fixes for next year's budget shortfall - expected to be more than $11 billion .

They promise that the state will tighten its belt, trim the fat and scrub the budget of all nonessentials - just as they did in 2003 when the state was in a $10 billion fiscal pickle.

It will take political will and some discipline, many Republican leaders say, but it will not take new taxes.

But fulfilling that promise could be a formidable task, if the state's recent budget experience is any indication. The most touted budget-shrinking initiatives have rarely lived up to the political hype of providing better state services for less. And the promised savings have often proved elusive.

Consider, for example, the 2005 legislation that mandated the consolidation of 27 agency data centers that house mainframes and servers. The data center consolidation was sold as a money-saver - $178 million over seven years - that would also improve operations and security.

The project, which is being run by IBM Corp. under an $863 million contract, has been mired by delays, equipment failures and service complaints. The contract is being amended, and IBM is said to have asked for as much as another $500 million to complete the task.

Then there is the sweeping 2003 legislation that aimed to save $1.1 billion in health and human services spending in 2004-05.

About half of the actual $927 million in savings from that legislation came from policy changes that trimmed the rolls of health care programs, including the Children's Health Insurance Program.

"The last time when we cut the budget, we did not do it by operating a more efficient government. We did it by not offering services," said Eva DeLuna Castro , a budget analyst with the Center for Public Policy Priorities , which advocates for low-income Texans.

But it was the administrative reorganization that merged 12 agencies into five that was heralded as the exemplar of streamlining in tough budget conditions.

"In 2003, Texas embarked on one of the most ambitious transformations of state government in U.S. history," the Health and Human Services Commission wrote in a 2009 update on the initiative.

The administrative changes aimed to reduce bureaucracy and improve operations. Early estimates showed savings of $50.4 million in the first two years by combining jobs and office space and reducing management positions.

State officials also projected another $335 million to be saved from 2006 through 2009 from the continued consolidation and by simplifying how Texans are deemed eligible for food stamps and Medicaid.

Central to achieving those long-term cost savings, however, was an outsourcing deal with Accenture LLP to manage CHIP and run call centers enrolling Texans in the programs. The project was seen as a way to save $300 million more over five years .

That deal fell apart in 2007 after widespread complaints that eligible families could not get benefits. The promised long-term cost-savings went with it after having paid Accenture $243 million .

The Health and Human Services Commission has not determined what, if any, cost-savings were realized beyond the first two years, spokeswoman Stephanie Goodman said.

Talmadge Heflin , who was the House Appropriations Committee chairman in 2003, said the streamlining was good policy even if it didn't meet the projected cost-savings.

"Had we not done that, I think we would have seen the growth (in the bureaucracy) outstrip what we're seeing today," said Heflin, now with the Texas Public Policy Foundation, a think tank that promotes limited government.

There are potential savings to be had by streamlining state government, but the amounts are relative chump change given the size of next year's budget gap.

The Texas Council on Competitive Government was founded by the Legislature in 1993 to seek ways for government to be more efficient and cost-effective. Its efforts produced almost $21 million in savings in 2009 by pooling the resources of several agencies to get better prices on services such as printing and fuel.

Heflin warned not to belittle relatively small opportunities in the mammoth budget.