Speaker candidates say no room for religion in speaker's race
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Two Republicans seeking to win the Texas House speakership now held by state Rep. Joe Straus distanced themselves Wednesday from Straus critics who have brought religion into the race.

Straus, who was elected to the leadership post in 2009, is the first Jewish speaker since statehood.

"There is absolutely no place for religious bigotry in the race for Texas Speaker, and I categorically condemn such action," speaker candidate Rep. Ken Paxton , R-McKinney , said in a statement.

Rep. Warren Chisum , R-Pampa , also a candidate for speaker, told Straus in a letter that it had come to his attention that "some people outside the Legislature are insinuating that your or my faith is an issue in the race for Speaker of the House."

"I assure you that these sorts of attacks on a man's religion have absolutely no place in the race for Speaker," Chisum wrote. "We certainly have our differences, but they are differences of public policy and organization of the House."

This week, Harvey Kronberg of Quorum Report , an online political newsletter, reported that some conservative activists have called for a Christian speaker or drawn attention to the fact that Straus is not Christian. Some social conservatives are calling on House Republicans not to support Straus, R-San Antonio , saying that in light of the newly widened GOP majority, he is not conservative enough.

Kronberg's report included links to several e-mails, including some whose origins are unclear. In one whose source is clear, Hardin County Republican Party Treasurer Peter Morrison wrote that Straus "clearly lacks the moral compass to be Speaker." Morrison, writing in his e-mail newsletter for Texas conservatives, mentions Straus' rabbi's connection to Planned Parenthood.

"Both Rep. Warren Chisum and Rep. Ken Paxton, who are Christians and true conservatives, have risen to the occasion to challenge Straus for leadership," Morrison wrote.

When asked about the newsletter, Morrison said in an e-mail: "I was simply making factual statements about Rep. Chisum and Rep. Paxton. \u2026 My opposition to Speaker Straus is based on his liberal policy positions, not his religion."

Straus said in a statement that "it would be most unfortunate for anyone to suggest someone is more or less qualified for public office based on his or her faith."