Similar on issues, House candidates stress their connection to district
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Say you're one of the three Republicans fighting to represent southwestern Travis County in the Texas House.

Since Democrat Valinda Bolton won re-election in 2008 by a narrow margin — closer than any other Travis County House race and among the closest in the state — you think this could be the year for a Republican to win the seat again.

Before you have the chance to face Bolton in November, you must survive the GOP primary March 2. You and your primary opponents agree on a lot of issues, so your task is to show voters you have the strongest connection to the district.

If you're David Sewell , you're talking about going to church in the district, coaching youth sports in the district and sending your oldest (and only school-age) child to public school in the district. "I don't think the other candidates can match our investment in the district," said Sewell, 35 , a lawyer who has lived for a decade near what is now the Hill Country Galleria and said he plans to raise his four children in the area.

If you're Holly Turner, you're talking about all the area residents you've met as you've knocked on doors in the district (either she or her campaign team have knocked on 4,100 , she said). "I'd say I know the district pretty well," said Turner, 31 , a lawyer who grew up in Seguin and moved to the district last summer from Fort Worth, where she went to law school. "We've never claimed we've lived here the longest."

And if you're Paul Workman, you're emphasizing your quarter-century living in Travis County. "I know a lot of the issues Holly can't know and David may be just finding out," said Workman, 58 , founder of Workman Commercial Construction and director of development for T. Stacy & Associates.

Workman, who has crossed paths with his opponents at campaign forums, seems weary of hearing about all of Turner's door-knocking. He said he doesn't have time for that. "I've got a job," he said, adding that he prefers to get the word out about his campaign via signs and neighborhood coffees.

Workman, who lives in western Travis County, has secured the most political contributions: $75,500 as of late January, Texas Ethics Commission records show, including $10,000 from the political action committee of the Associated General Contractors Texas Building Branch (of which Workman is a former chairman). Plus, Workman loaned his campaign $15,000.

That put Workman significantly ahead of fundraising by Sewell, who had raised about $37,600 as of late January, including $10,000 from his father. Sewell, who specializes in Texas tax litigation at a law firm where he is a partner, came to Austin in 1993 from Lancaster (south of Dallas) to attend the University of Texas, where he also went to law school.

Turner, who lives in Oak Hill and has a son who attends private school, had raised $9,500 in contributions by late January. She also got $70,000 in loans from her parents.

Turner and her family drew criticism in Seguin when they made plans to develop land there and create a management district for the development, according to a March 2009 article in the Seguin Gazette Enterprise with the headline "Development plans concern area neighbors." Turner said the neighbors' fears — that their land would be annexed, that they would be taxed to provide services to the new development — were unfounded and that because of the economic downturn, her family has no immediate plans to develop the land.

Bolton, a consultant for nonprofits, has represented the swing district since 2007, after Republican Terry Keel stepped down. In 2008, with Barack Obama at the top of the ticket, Bolton narrowly won re-election, defeating Republican Donna Keel with 51.19 percent of the vote.

Early voting in the primary began Tuesday.

If you're Turner, Workman or Sewell, you know that your answers at a recent candidate forum in Lakeway sounded pretty similar. The three of you support requiring more photo identification at the polls, oppose having the state solicit federal funds for education and want to lower taxes.

So on that night and on other occasions, you have found more subtle areas to distinguish yourself.

If you're Turner, you're talking about how the district needs a more visible representative.

If you're Sewell, you're emphasizing how you'd repeal the revised business franchise tax.

If you're Workman, you're talking about how you'll fight Washington's interference with Texas' budget.

And in a three-way race where you'll need more than 50 percent to win, you're all bracing for the possibility of a runoff.

cmaclaggan@statesman.com; 445-3548