Sideshow takes center stage in social studies fight
By Kate Alexander

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

The actual debate over social studies curriculum standards at the State Board of Education on Wednesday could not compete with the sideshow.

A gaggle of television cameras, including several from Fox News and its affiliates, jammed into the meeting room to chronicle the Texas Textbook War, as the news network dubbed it.

The war pits defenders of traditional values who say American history is under attack by politically correct revisionism against board critics who are calling for a "smarter State Board of Education."

The news network has fanned the flames over the standards that will serve as the framework for the state's future history, government and economics textbooks and lessons.

As a result, the much-hyped meeting had become "probably one of the top news stories in the nation," state Rep. Dan Flynn, R-Van , observed.

Several board members seemed enamored by the attention, but the Texas Education Agency wasn't so pleased with the coverage from Fox News.

The agency issued an unusual news release Wednesday stating that Wednesday morning's "Fox & Friends" show "repeatedly broadcast highly inaccurate information" about the debate.

And it aimed to set the record straight: Christmas, Veterans Day and Independence Day are all in the standards; U.S. history before 1877 will, indeed, be taught; and Abraham Lincoln and George Washington have not been removed.

Prior to Wednesday, the board had received some 14,000 e-mails about the standards and had heard 17 hours of public testimony.

But the board caught some flack in January when it ended a public hearing before some speakers had their say, including several elderly military veterans. So board members spent all afternoon gathering public input before the board debate, which did not get started until early evening. The input echoed much of what's been said since November.

University of Texas history professor Emilio Zamora said the standards being considered do not reflect current historical research on the role of minorities and women in state history.

"It is a matter of time before this board will have to accept the current state of Texas history," Zamora said.

State Rep. Wayne Christian, R-Center , expressed concerns that the board has been pressured to "wash the (standards) clean of any references to Judeo-Christian faiths while promoting references to other religions."

Texas social studies standards "must neither trivialize nor censor the historical import of Judeo-Christian faiths," Christian said, reading a letter from Texas Conservative Coalition, a group of conservative lawmakers.

A group of University of Texas students marched toward the meeting Wednesday to ask "the far-right, conservative faction of the state board to not inject their political agenda into the social studies and history curriculum," said Garrett Mize, a senior government major.

The board is set to give preliminary approval to the standards this week and final approval in May. Members trudged through standards for the high school world history course for a few hours Wednesday before adjourning about 9 p.m. They return today to tackle U.S. government, economics and more.

Voters in last week's Republican primary handed defeats to two veteran conservatives, including former board Chairman Don McLeroy, who lost to a moderate GOP lobbyist. Two others — a conservative Republican and a moderate Democrat — did not seek re-election. All four terms end in January.

McLeroy, a 10-year board veteran, has been one of the most polarizing members. The devout Christian conservative has been a prolific amendment writer on several issues, including that the Christian influences of the nation's Founding Fathers are important to studying American history.

"I think there'll be lots of amendments ... a lot of media attention, and it's important," McLeroy said, adding that his lame-duck status won't affect his approach. "Our country is divided on how we see things, and these things really come into sharp focus, especially with history and how you present it to your children."

Aside from the Founding Fathers' beliefs, debate could flare over issues such as border security and how much children will study the effects of government regulation on the free enterprise system.

Additional material from The Associated Press.

kalexander@statesman.com; 445-3618