Skipping census costs Travis, residents told
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Every 10 years, the government mounts a colossal effort to count every single person in the United States. The snapshot of America that emerges produces a vast landscape of figures used to calculate political power as well as how much federal money flows back to local communities for everything from hospitals to schools to roads.

With so much riding on the national count, which will begin next month, it has become a focus of community leaders across the country. At a January gathering of Austin and Travis County residents working to get an accurate and complete census count on April 1, one figure leaped out: $235,980,000.

That's the amount of federal money city and county officials say was left on the table as the result of a 2000 census undercount of about 16,000 county residents. Although the figure had been reported before, it was stop-in-your-tracks news to many of the volunteers.

"That was really the only message I needed to hear tonight," Austin Area Interreligious Ministries Director Tom Spencer said. "The galling fact that $235 million was left on the table — that will be your best weapon, our best weapon."

Although $235 million is a substantial sum, for perspective, it is less than half the Travis County budget for 2010. Still, the figure created a buzz among volunteer committees that, with the Census Bureau's blessing, are working to reach out to key populations and institutions, including businesses, college students, homeless people, immigrants, Asian Americans, Latinos and African Americans. They vowed to use that nugget as a selling point.

If getting Americans to fill out the 2010 census questionnaire depends at least to some degree on appealing to "what's in it for me" sensitivities , it is because the stakes are high. The population data determine how more than $400 billion in federal funds flow each year to states and local communities for more than a hundred services, such as school lunch programs, senior citizen centers, new construction of highways and hospitals. Smaller counts mean smaller slices of the pie.

The census count also determines winners and losers in the arena of political representation. As the fastest-growing state in the nation — at least 60 percent of that growth was driven by Latino population gains during the past decade — Texas is expected to gain at least three congressional districts.

City of Austin demographer Ryan Robinson said the census will reflect robust growth during the past decade. Robinson projects a 2010 population of about 786,000, an increase of about 130,000 from 2000, though less than the 190,000 Austin gained in the 1990s.

The census is hardly perfect. According to Census Bureau estimates, the 2000 census missed 6.4 million people — disproportionately minorities, children and the poor — and counted 3.1 million people twice, largely white and affluent people. (Overcounts can occur among people who own more than one home and groups that have a higher percentage of children in college away from home.) State officials say that a census undercount in 2000 cost Texas $1 billion during the past decade.

According to an analysis of 2000 census data, more than a quarter of Texas' population lives in hard-to-count areas, which the Census Bureau designates as having low mail-in response rates and contributing factors such as minority language use, poverty, low education levels and unemployment, among other indicators. That rate put Texas behind only California among states with hard-to-count populations, according to the study by the Annie E. Casey Foundation. And the rate is even higher in Travis County, where virtually 30 percent of the 812,280 people tallied by the census in 2000 lived in hard-to-count areas; Travis ranked 37th among all U.S. counties with the highest number of people living in hard-to-count areas, according to the study.

Already, some analysts are questioning whether the 2010 census can improve its accuracy, even as the Census Bureau mounts an unprecedented $312 million communications campaign — part of a $14 billion total budget — for national advertising and for outreach in dozens of other languages. The census questionnaire itself will be available in five languages other than English: Spanish, Russian, Chinese, Korean and Vietnamese.

The Census Bureau says that an estimated 134 million U.S. households can expect to receive questionnaires in the mail beginning March 15. The bureau says the 10-question form is one of the shortest in its history and takes about 10 minutes to complete.

Gone is the old census long form, which asked dozens of questions, including ones about income and the number of bathrooms in a household, which some Americans considered invasive.

About 9,800 complete count committees across the country — 329 in Texas — are emphasizing the brevity of the questionnaire as part of a three-point census mantra: It's important, easy and safe. "You have to make sure the message is simple and it's credible," County Judge Sam Biscoe said last month at the opening of the Census Bureau's office in Southeast Austin.

The bureau's strategy to persuade Americans to fill out the census form apparently recognizes that, as Gabriel Sanchez, the bureau's regional director in Dallas, said, "There's a general mistrust whenever the government comes around looking for information."

Biscoe sought to put such fears at ease, emphasizing that the information gleaned from the census is confidential. "So if you have stuff in your background you're trying to hide — immigration status, problems with the criminal justice system — that's your personal business," Biscoe said.

"And we don't ask," Sanchez said.

Although the Census Bureau is spending record amounts for advertising and outreach, it is placing a premium as well on having local residents and familiar, trusted faces deliver the message that getting counted means the local community receives its fair share of money. "The complete count committees know their communities the best," census spokeswoman Jenna Steormann said.

But at a meeting this month, local committee members said they were frustrated that they didn't know enough about the work of about 400 organizations and institutions in Central Texas that have signed partnership agreements with the census to also deliver the "important, safe and easy" message to the people they know best. "They're doing it kind of in isolation," said Travis County Constable Bruce Elfant, a co-chairman of the city-county complete count committee. "It's not as organized as it could be."

Steormann, who was not at the meeting, said the Census Bureau could share the list of organizations with the city-county committee but not their contact information because it is considered personal. "The main thing to remember is that it's the same message," she said of the work of the census partner organizations and the complete count committee.

"Certainly, it would be helpful to have that list," Elfant said last week.

At the census office opening, Biscoe described the philosophy behind the city-county committee's work, saying that people who distrust government couldn't care less if elected leaders tell them it's important to fill out a census form. "You have to get friends, peers with whom they've developed good, close relationships, and have them help you get the message out," said Biscoe, who with Mayor Lee Leffingwell started the committee in 2009.

Among the ideas the committee has embraced: promoting the census at community events such as Republic Day of India and the Crop Hunger Walk; doing outreach to black churches, the Urban League and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and on community radio station KAZI; placing census fliers in grocery bags; holding a student rally at the University of Texas and block walks in the West Campus and Riverside Drive neighborhoods; enlisting business partners and chambers of commerce; using Facebook and other social media; and having religious leaders deliver the census message at worship services. None has seemed too novel or obvious.

"Each one reach one. That's really what it's all about," said County Court-at-Law 2 Judge Eric Shepperd, a committee co-chairman.

Later, Shepperd said social organizations that help homeless and homebound people with shelter, food and basic needs are perhaps best suited to spread the message among those traditionally hard-to-count populations.

"People trust you. You bring them food," Shepperd said.

Nehal Sanghavi, an attorney and president of the India Community Center of Austin, described the challenges of penetrating the city's diverse Asian-origin population. "Especially when it comes to languages, we're looking at 118 different languages in India alone, and we're not even including the Asian community as a whole," said Sanghavi, who is helping organize efforts to reach fast-growing Asian populations in Austin.

Trust and counting issues aside, Biscoe suggested that the census must overcome another obstacle: apathy.

"People say, 'I want to be left alone.' Well, complete that 10-question questionnaire, mail

it in and we'll see you 10 years later," Biscoe said. "You can't be left alone more than that."

Elfant said that according to the Census Bureau, 64 percent of Texas residents mailed in the questionnaire in 2000. The mail-in response was 67 percent in Travis County; officials hope to increase that rate to 75 this year. Paid census staffers visit households that don't return the completed forms.

jcastillo@statesman.com; 445-3635