Texas sues to stop EPA from regulating greenhouse gases
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Texas fired off another salvo in a struggle with Washington over environmental regulation Tuesday, filing a suit in federal court to prevent regulation of greenhouse gases.

Gov. Rick Perry and Attorney General Greg Abbott are trying to get the federal Environmental Protection Agency to back away from a finding last year that greenhouse gases are a threat to public health. The finding sets the stage for regulation of the gases, which scientists have linked to global warming.

The Texas officials say curbs on greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide could cost state businesses and homeowners and jeopardize jobs. Texas leads the nation in carbon emissions. And they argue that the EPA had based its finding on faulty science.

Carbon regulations would amount to "sweeping mandates and draconian punishments," said Perry, "undoing decades of progress, painting entrepreneurs as selfish and destroying hundreds of thousands of jobs in the process."

At least one other state — Alabama — has also filed suit in federal court, and Virginia is also asking the EPA to reconsider its stance. Some businesses and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce have filed similar suits.

Referring to recent controversies about findings by a U.N. panel of scientists, Abbott said the science on which the EPA based its finding was laced with "cover-ups, and the suppression and destruction of scientific evidence."

Among the controversies were e-mails from some climate scientists indicating that scientific journals that publish work by global warming skeptics should be shunned.

Abbott said that the international panel of scientists was "an unelected body pushing a political agenda," and in a petition for reconsideration filed with the EPA, says the "previously private e-mail exchanges among top (U.N.) climatologists reveal an entrenched group of activists focused less on reaching an objective scientific conclusion than on achieving their desired outcome."

On Tuesday, Texas also filed a similar petition for review with the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit.

Texas scientists have forecast longer, more severe droughts and flooding along the Gulf Coast as the climate changes. State climatologist John Nielsen-Gammon , a professor of meteorology at Texas A&M; University, said he was not consulted by the governor's office or the attorney general's office before the filing.

Environmental groups struck back.

Tom Smith , head of the Texas office of nonprofit watchdog Public Citizen, said the "overwhelming evidence" is that the globe is warming. (In a suit of its own, Public Citizen is trying to force Texas to regulate greenhouse gases.)

"There's always a debate about how fast, how soon, how bad," he said about climate science. But he said focusing on controversial scientists is "like saying that because a few kids fail school, the entire system is flawed."

Environmental groups say that a cap on carbon emissions would force states to invest in renewable power, such as wind and solar, creating new jobs.

The endangerment finding spun out of a 2007 U.S. Supreme Court ruling that the EPA had the authority to regulate greenhouse gases.

At least 16 states have banded together in a filing in support of the endangerment finding.

As he had done previously, Perry said Washington should look to Texas for ways to solve energy and environmental issues. He cited the state's "all-of-the-above approach," which encourages the construction of coal-fired power alongside wind turbines. Texas leads the country in wind power. About 6 percent of energy on the state electric grid last year was produced by wind, according to the Electric Reliability Council of Texas, which operates the grid.

Tuesday's actions are the latest sign of a profound rift between the Obama administration's EPA and Texas government officials and regulators about how to address environmental and energy issues.

Already, the EPA has threatened to take over the state's air permitting program that regulates emissions of industrial facilities. The federal agency has questioned whether the program has enough public participation and said it gives too much leeway to polluters.

asherprice@statesman.com; 445-3643