Texas' suit puts hold on $830M in education aid
By

Legal scholars say Texas will have an uphill climb to prevail in its effort to quickly secure $830 million in emergency education aid from the U.S. Department of Education.

But the challenge filed Thursday ensures that the money will not be diverted to other states while the case proceeds, increasing the likelihood that Texas will eventually get the money.

"That's what this lawsuit does. It keeps that money there," said Steve Bickerstaff , a University of Texas law professor.

Two weeks ago, the Education Department rejected Texas' application for the $830 million, part of a recently passed federal measure intended to help school districts protect teacher jobs, because Gov. Rick Perry did not make assurances that Texas would hold state education spending steady over the next three years. That assurance is required by a Texas-specific amendment authored by U.S. Rep. Lloyd Doggett, D-Austin.

Perry maintains that he cannot comply with the Doggett amendment without violating the state constitution because the governor cannot appropriate money nor obligate a future Legislature to a certain level of spending.

There was concern that, as of today , the Education Department could begin giving away Texas' share of the $10 billion education jobs money to other states, despite verbal guarantees from Education Secretary Arne Duncan and his deputies that Texas' money was safe.

"Filing a lawsuit is not the most productive way to resolve this right now," Education Department spokeswoman Sandra Abrevaya said. "We're eager to get this money working for schoolchildren and stand ready to work with the State of Texas to make that happen."

But Texas Attorney General Greg Abbott said the legal challenge was necessary "out of an abundance of caution."

"With $830 million in funding for Texas schools tied up by congressional discrimination, we are taking legal action to secure Education Jobs Funds for Texas children," Abbott said in a statement.

With the petition filed Thursday with the 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, Texas now has lodged 10 legal challenges against the Obama administration this year. They include opposition to the health care reform law and challenges to federal clean air requirements.

Abbott makes two arguments in the latest petition:

• The Education Department's rejection of Texas' application should be reversed because Texas has provided the required assurances "conditioned solely on the Texas governor's legal authority to make them."

• The Doggett amendment should be stricken because it "places unconstitutional conditions on Texas' — and only Texas' — participation in the Education Jobs Fund."

Scot Powe , a constitutional law expert at UT, said he sees little legal merit in the state's claims.

Congress has absolute authority to appropriate money as it sees fit, regardless of fairness or justification.

Powe cites as an example homeland security money that goes disproportionately to the home state of a key legislator rather than to states where the threat of terrorism is greatest.

"If Congress thought the Doggett amendment was inconsistent with the true objective of the legislation, they would have voted it down," Powe said.

Bickerstaff, from UT, said the key question to determine the amendment's constitutionality will be its "reasonableness."

"It is not a difficult standard for the government to meet, especially since the government is presumed to have acted reasonably," Bickerstaff said.

Texas will be able to make the argument that the alleged misdeed that prompted the Doggett amendment — Texas using stimulus money to offset state education dollars in 2009 — was also committed by many other states, Bickerstaff said.

But "I would be very, very reluctant to suggest that a court would find that the (Education) Department cannot show some reasonable justification for the amendment," he said.

The state can also refuse the funds, so the governor is not compelled to do anything that violates the Texas Constitution, Bickerstaff said.

Doggett, in a statement, dismissed the filing as "political theatre."

"The bottom line is this: Federal aid to education should actually aid education in our local Texas schools," Doggett said. "It is almost as if the Governor felt he was entitled to his own blank check federal bailout and now he has the lawsuit to prove it."

The delay will give Texas time to comply with the Doggett amendment. Texas should be able to make the required assurance next summer, once the 2012-13 biennial budget is approved, assuming lawmakers don't reduce the education dollars disproportionately.

kalexander@statesman.com;

445-3618