Texas senators ask Obama to help prevent border violence
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

Both U.S. senators from Texas wrote a letter to the president on Wednesday, asking him to meet them on Texas' southern border and assess the threat of violence that could spill over from Mexico's bloody drug trade.

Republican Sens. John Cornyn and Kay Bailey Hutchison also asked President Barack Obama to come up with a plan to deal with the threat of violence along the border and to ensure the safety of Americans. The letter came several days after hit men attacked two SUVs leaving a birthday party in Juárez, Chihuahua, across the border from El Paso. On Saturday, the shooters killed parents from two U.S. Consulate families in front of their screaming children.

"The latest killings in Juárez raise this specter of security of American citizens who are visiting Mexico," Cornyn said during a conference call with reporters.

In their letter, the senators said that they and their colleagues need to know what Congress can provide to keep the border safe for Americans.

"A credible plan must include immediate measures, including the temporary deployment of additional resources to help local officials better protect their citizens and communities as well as minimize disruptions to travel and trade," the senators wrote.

A White House official speaking on background said, "We will be responding to the Senators' letter, laying out the extensive and unprecedented steps we have taken — and continue to take — across the government to ensure the safety and security of border communities and to support the Mexican government's efforts against drug trafficking organizations."

The senators' letter came a week after Texas Gov. Rick Perry asked the U.S. Department of Homeland Security for additional unmanned surveillance aircraft along the border to prevent spillover violence.

Homeland Security Secretary Janet Napolitano didn't immediately give the governor what he sought. Instead, Napolitano's office released a statement that included a sentence that asserted that there was not any spillover violence on the border.

"DHS has received Gov. Perry's request and will review it accordingly. Drug trafficking organizations in Mexico are engaged in an armed, violent struggle to control shrinking drug routes and territories. They are targeting and killing rival cartel members, innocent Mexican civilians, police, and senior government officials, among others. We are not, however, seeing any indications of similar violence here in the U.S.," the statement said.

Official data from the state about border violence, particularly statistics detailing spillover bloodshed, are generally lacking. The Texas Department of Public Safety doesn't collect the numbers, agency spokeswoman Tela Mange said.

Perry's office released a statement Tuesday that said he ordered the activation of a state secret spillover violence contingency plan.

Napolitano's response to Perry drew criticism from Cornyn on Wednesday.

He said the secretary should have — but did not — consult with his office before responding to Perry.

Cornyn agreed with Napolitano, saying that the spillover violence has not been an issue in Texas.

"As far as the Texas border is concerned, to my knowledge, we have not had spillover violence, per se," Cornyn said on the conference call.

It's more like the threat of spillover violence, he later clarified.

Cornyn and Hutchison also asked Obama in their letter for an intelligence briefing about violence in Mexico. They said they want to gather representatives from the U.S. Northern Command, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the FBI and the CIA.

They also said they were eager to learn more about the recent murders of the U.S. citizens in Juárez.

Additionally, Cornyn said Wednesday that he joined Sen. Dianne Feinstein, D-Calif., to ask the Senate Judiciary Committee to hold hearings about violence in Mexico.

Specifically, Cornyn said, he would like to discover whether there were any actions Congress could take to help Mexican President Felipe Calderón control the cartels and to help keep Americans in Mexico safe.

teaton@statesman.com; 445-3631

Additional material from The Associated Press.