UT's Powers addresses tenure, fundraising, governance debate
By

AMERICAN-STATESMAN STAFF

William Powers Jr., president of the University of Texas, once said of Homer Simpson, the bumbling lead character in "The Simpsons," a TV show he admires:

"At the end of the day, you may notice that Homer, much as he just doesn't get it, chooses life and chooses his family. I find it uplifting. It is a very complex and interesting text, in my view."

Powers has found his own work complex and interesting lately. Just how uplifting it's been could depend on the outcome of a heated debate about the proper mix of research and teaching, the role of the university's governing board, faculty productivity and other matters.

The UT president addressed the debate, fundraising, legislative appropriations, tenure and other matters during a recent meeting with Statesman editors and reporters.

How did the university's budget fare during the state legislative session?

We're down about 16 percent of general revenue. It's always a good thing for institutions to focus on what's really important, to prioritize things. It's a painful process, but it's a useful process. We've tried to circle the wagons around teaching, but it hasn't been immune. Our budget's about 80 percent salaries. We will have a reduction in workforce.

Can you quantify that?

Over a couple-year period as this works out, something like a 600-person reduction in workforce. I want to be careful; those are average wages at average jobs. We have about 20,000 faculty and staff.

How is the $3 billion capital campaign going?

We've raised about $1.6 billion. But we're in the fifth year of an eight-year campaign, so we're a little bit behind. I'm actually confident we will get there. The last year of a campaign does well. There are some things in the works — I can't talk about them in specifics — but some things in the works that will add to that.

Has there been an increase in donations during the debate over higher education?

We have had people expressly say, "I want to show support with a gift." Whether there are also some people with big gifts saying, "I want to see how this sorts out," that may be going on too. We hear more about the former than the latter, but I think both are going on.

Do you see that debate as having been concluded?

No.

So how long will this go on?

I think that's unclear. There's a lot of agreement that UT, the system, higher ed across the state, across the country, need to reinvent ways of doing things, to do more with fewer resources, or flat resources, or whatever situation that we're in. We have to be very careful in making sure we're deploying our resources in the ways that really strategically further the most important things about our mission: teaching, research.

I think one of the real issues is we do have a research mission, and I think it's an extremely important and valuable mission for the state of Texas, for the economy, for sort of building democracy in a cultural and democratic way of life.

Is there a problem in the balance between teaching and research, or is it just a matter of you needing to defend what is going on?

I'm always reluctant to, sort of like Pangloss, say it's the most perfect of worlds. Our faculty spend a lot more time on their teaching than they do on their research. So the idea that people are just coming in and sort of making a wave at the teaching part and spending all their time on research just isn't the case.

Has this controversy impaired your ability to retain faculty members you want to retain and to recruit new ones?

Yes. In our recruiting we're getting a lot of questions. These are people that are either very accomplished, young, midlevel, midcareer people, or they're coming out of graduate school. They're making a long-term decision on where they want to do their professional work, and this debate has had a negative impact on that. And the same thing for people that are here. When that person calls from UCLA or Illinois or Princeton or wherever, anecdotally, we're getting the clear sense more people are saying, "Well, let's chat."

And they're worried about what? Commitment to research? Interference from the governing board?

It's also tied up in budget cuts. It's very hard to tease out all the variables. But the debate that you were referring to is a significant factor. People want to come to a place that in a reasonable way is going to support their teaching and research aspirations.