Carstarphen: Great teachers abound at Austin schools
When it comes to student achievement, the data support what many of us already know: Teacher quality is easily the most important school-based factor in determining student success. In the Austin school district, we measure the quality of our teachers by looking at the academic growth and achievement of their students.

That's why I was concerned with a recent study by the Association of Texas Professional Educators, a statewide teacher organization, and reported by the American-Statesman on Oct. 19, "Teacher Inequality Found." The study is problematic, particularly for confusing teacher qualifications with teacher quality, but also for the overall accuracy of its data, and the validity of its conclusions.

The study looked at certification, years of experience and whether a teacher was "out of field." By those measures, it concluded that the quality of teachers in East Austin is lower than in West Austin. Hardly.

Last year, for example, at Reagan High School, student test scores improved by 23 percentage points on the math Texas Assessment of Knowledge and Skills test, and 26 percentage points in science. At LBJ High School, there was a 20 percentage point improvement for math, and a 19 percentage point increase for science. These are real gains, without applying the Texas Projection Measure (TPM).

Studies like this perpetuate misconceptions about the quality of teachers from one part of town to another. The true variable is within schools. Teachers at affluent schools often appear high-performing, while their counterparts at less affluent schools appear low-performing. However, when we look at student academic growth, we find the distribution of quality teachers is essentially equal between our schools. There are great teachers throughout Austin.

The study appears to adopt the long-held notion that teachers who attend traditional, university-based programs are more effective than those who pursued alternative certification. That is flat wrong. Research, in AISD and nationally, shows virtually no difference.

The study identified any teacher who hasn't yet attained full certification as teaching "out of field." By this definition, a NASA engineer with an entry-level license is teaching science "out of field." It simply does not square with common sense or good policy. Where the study said Lanier High School had more than 24 percent of its teachers "out of field," the correct number is less than 1 percent.

Though the study said more than 19 percent of our teachers at Reagan were "out of field," the truth is that none of the teachers were. These same errors plague the report for every Austin high school.

Though AISD was not afforded an opportunity to meet with the study's author before publication, we immediately sought a meeting, at his earliest convenience, after release of the report. The goal of the meeting was to try to better understand the conclusions that he reached and discrepancies between his data on teacher experience and district data.

The study's author agreed on two significant points. First, even in Austin's lowest-performing high schools, "teacher quality" (largely a proxy for "teacher qualifications") was significantly greater than the "quality" of teachers in the highest-performing Texas districts, including Aldine, El Paso and Ysleta. Second, the study really examined average teacher qualifications by school, not teacher quality, because it did not link individual teachers with student achievement.

Too often, new teachers are given challenging assignments with very little support. Austin has made significant strides, giving these teachers the help they need, including content coaches and full-time experienced mentors. The study did not measure the impact of mentoring and coaching that Austin's novice teachers receive.

It is true that in AISD, teachers with a higher percentage of students in poverty have slightly less experience. But these differences are not as significant as the study suggests. At the secondary level, teachers at low-income schools have an average of 2.3 years less experience. At the elementary grades, the difference is 3.7 years. It would be challenging to find research suggesting that a teacher with five years of experience is less effective than one who has taught seven or eight years.

Austin is a very competitive market, and our work to recruit, develop and retain top teachers has never been more important. We recruit aggressively throughout the state and nationally. That includes working with colleges and universities, as well as with alternative certification providers.

Recently, AISD was awarded a $62.3 million grant from the U.S. Department of Education to expand our Strategic Compensation program. This program combines compensation with targeted supports and leadership opportunities for teachers, whose students show measurable academic improvement. We'll continue to target this work at our high-needs schools.

I want to ensure that we have an effective teacher in every AISD classroom, someone who will produce academic gains for students. That's our commitment, and my promise.