One candidate honest, the other manipulative
More than 25 years ago, Michael Morton was wrongfully convicted of the murder of his wife, Christine. Jana Duty has made the case her only issue in running for the office of district attorney. But the public hasn't been told the whole truth.

I was not the district attorney, nor even a prosecutor, when Michael Morton was tried for murder. I did not participate in the original trial.

A few years ago, after I became district attorney, we did receive a request from Morton's lawyers for DNA testing of a bandana found by a family member more than 100 yards away from the crime scene.

We informed Judge Billy Ray Stubblefield of serious problems related to the chain of custody and potential contamination of the evidence. Morton's own lawyers at the time of trial told him about the chain of custody problems and that those problems prevented admission of the bandana as evidence.

Based on those concerns, Stubblefield denied the request.

Morton sued the district attorney and sheriff over the DNA issue.

Duty, as the county attorney, represented us in that lawsuit. She told the judge that the sheriff and district attorney "take their constitutional duties very seriously and have acted diligently and prudently in the investigation and prosecution of Morton."

The judge dismissed the lawsuit.

Later, an appellate court held that DNA testing should take place. We immediately arranged for the testing and, when the results suggested a new suspect, joined in seeking Morton's release from prison, assisted in seeking compensation for his wrongful conviction and requested a special prosecutor to pursue charges against the new suspect.

I regret the delays associated with litigation surrounding the DNA testing.

Our litigation of the issues simply took too long.

I have offered my apology to Morton. And I will do everything within my power to make sure this never happens again. But the truth is that we made the best decisions we could with the information that was available to us at the time and followed the law as provided by our Legislature.

Duty, on the other hand, has lied. She neglected to tell the public that she defended our decisions as appropriate.

Instead, she has manipulated the facts for her own political gain and to distract the public from her professional problems.

The State Bar of Texas reprimanded Duty for professional misconduct. She then bragged that, if given the chance, she would do it all over again.

She also was sanctioned by a judge for hiding critical information in a lawsuit, deliberately destroyed public records and is using a lawsuit against the attorney general to hide a hateful letter she sent to a local judge.

As Williamson County district attorney, I have successfully protected this community for the last 10 years.

We have one of the lowest crime rates in Texas among counties with a population for 100,000 or more.

When I make a mistake, I fix the problem and make sure it doesn't happen again.

I have more than 20 years of felony prosecution experience and am board-certified in criminal and appellate law.

I teach and write on criminal law matters and have been recognized by both state and national organizations for my service to the legal community.

I regularly communicate with national, state and local media on criminal law issues. In 2009, my peers named me prosecutor of the year in Texas.

Duty has never prosecuted a single adult felony case. Instead, she spends her time using her office to attack political enemies.

She has never been board-certified in any field of law. She doesn't teach or write and has refused to communicate with the media during this campaign.

She has never satisfactorily explained to voters why she is qualified to prosecute felony cases.

Let's focus on what matters in choosing a district attorney: qualifications and experience.

I have provided you with an honest explanation of how the Morton case was handled.

Voters should re-elect an experienced prosecutor as district attorney.