Miller: Social conservatives on State Board of Education want to rewrite history to fit a political point of view
As the State Board of Education prepares for a final vote on proposed social studies curriculum standards for public schools, it's time to dispel a myth.

Some state board members and their supporters continue to insist that "leftist" social studies classes aren't teaching students about important founding documents, national heroes, patriotic symbols and holidays, and the role of religion in America.

It's as if they never have read the textbooks or met the teachers in their local schools. They should.

Even a quick review of those books shows that such claims are absurd. The books include numerous sections on primary documents like the Constitution, the Declaration of Independence, the Mayflower Compact, the Emancipation Proclamation and even President Bush's address to the nation after 9/11.

Students learn about important Americans from George Washington to Abraham Lincoln and Martin Luther King Jr. to Ronald Reagan. Features about the American flag, other patriotic symbols and holidays like Thanksgiving and Christmas explore the nation's rich cultural heritage. And students learn — on topics such as the Great Awakening, the abolitionist movement and the civil rights era — about the powerful influence of faith in our nation's history.

Despite all that, some board members say they want to bring "balance" to social studies classrooms. But that's just an excuse to rewrite history to fit a political point of view, not facts.

So over just a few days in January and March the state board made hundreds of changes to new standards that teachers and academic experts had carefully drafted over the course of the previous year. They refused to consult teachers or scholars as they made ill-considered deletions, additions and other revisions based on little more than their own personal knowledge — however limited — or what they could find in a Google search at their desks.

That's no way to prepare our kids for college or the jobs of the 21st century. So it's not surprising that the proposed standards now suffer from three major flaws.

First, teachers despair that the standards, rather than simply identifying major concepts students should master, are far too long and detailed. For example, a Houston school district analysis found that the board more than quadrupled the number of historical figures students must learn about. Historians have warned that such a "laundry list" approach is a lazy and ineffective way to teach and sets up our schools — and our children — to fail as they struggle through a blizzard of names and facts.

Second, in many places the standards reflect, rather than sound scholarship, the personal and political biases of whichever side had enough board votes to win the debate. For example, a majority of board members removed historical figures, such as civil rights leader Dolores Huerta from the third-grade standards, whose political views they didn't like. They added others, such as Phyllis Schlafly, whose politics they approved. Another newly revised standard suggests that Joseph McCarthy's witch hunts in the 1950s were somehow justified.

One board member sought to downplay the struggles for equal rights in this country. He argued that students should learn that women and minorities owe thanks to men and "the majority" for granting them civil rights. The board even removed the concepts of "justice" and "responsibility for the common good" from a standard about good citizenship.

Third, the board's social conservatives have used the standards to promote their contention that our nation's government should be based on the Bible.

In fact, they argue that the Constitution doesn't protect separation of church and state. They even rejected a proposed requirement that students learn government may not promote one religion over all others. And they removed Thomas Jefferson, who argued that a "wall of separation between church and state" is essential to freedom, from a proposed world history standard about influential Enlightenment thinkers.

In light of these problems, the board should delay final approval of the standards and ask a new panel of teachers and academic experts to review the many changes made in the last few months. That's the only way parents can be assured that social studies classrooms will focus on educating the next generation of Texas schoolchildren, not promoting the personal agendas of politicians on the State Board of Education.

Miller is president of the Texas Freedom Network.