Move that hurts women is political, not economical
Gov. Rick Perry's presidential campaign may be over, but his politically motivated war on women continues.

On Feb. 23, Texas' Health and Human Services commissioner adopted a rule in direct violation of a federal Medicaid requirement, effectively ending the Women's Health Program in Texas.

This step by the agency is a targeted effort to block Planned Parenthood's nonprofit health centers from participating in a vital and cost-saving program that provides not just birth control but also life-saving breast and cervical cancer screenings, HIV tests and basic health exams to uninsured, low-income Texas women.

Nearly 45 percent of the women who receive health screenings through this program do so at a Planned Parenthood health center.

With this political and unnecessary move, Texas will strip 130,000 of our state's most vulnerable women of their access to basic health care, ending the program not just for Planned Parenthood but for all providers in Texas.

Cervical cancer screenings, breast exams and birth control — gone for low-income women who are trying to responsibly plan and space their next pregnancies.

Perry may score political points in some circles when he cuts programs for women's health care, but let's be clear: This is not about abortion.

The Medicaid Women's Health Program does not fund abortion services, nor does it fund health centers that provide abortions.

If anything, elimination of this program will increase the number of abortions by closing health centers that provide affordable and accessible birth control to help prevent unintended pregnancies — the leading cause of abortion.

Per Texas law, Planned Parenthood health centers that provide safe, legal abortion services are separate, self-pay entities that are already precluded from participating in the Medicaid Women's Health Program.

A taxpayer-funded audit is conducted to ensure that funds are not used for this purpose. Any Texans concerned about taxpayer funding of abortion should rest assured — taxpayer funds cannot be used for this.

Texas already leads the nation with the highest percentage (24.6 percent) of people without health insurance, while the national average is 16.3 percent.

One in four women in Texas are uninsured. And women in Texas have the third-highest rate of cervical cancer in the country.

On March 14, 130,000 more women will be without a medical home in this latest attack in the war on women.

Despite Texas' budget problems, this is not really about money. Texas taxpayers save approximately $42 million annually through this program.

The federal government picks up 90 percent of the tab — $9 for every $1 Texas spends.

The program helps low-income women plan their pregnancies, saving Medicaid costs that cover the complications that accompany premature and low birth-weight babies as a result of closely spaced and unintended pregnancies.

More than half of the births in Texas are paid for by Medicaid and, without this program, that percentage will undoubtedly increase.

In addition, the Women's Health Program is a highly successful, cost-effective strategy for keeping women healthy through regular exams and screenings that help detect diseases early, before they become more costly and potentially fatal.

There is only one reasonable conclusion: This is all about politics.

The governor will spin this as Washington's fault. But let's examine the governor's track record. Perry boasted on the campaign trail about eliminating two-thirds of the funding for women's health last session. According to state health experts, this eliminates access to health care screenings and birth control for nearly 300,000 women this biennium.

The rule adopted by the health agency adds 130,000 more women to this number.

This isn't about Texas versus Washington; this is about Perry versus low-income, uninsured Texas women.

Naishtat, Dukes, Rodriguez, Strama and Howard represent Travis County in the Texas House of Representatives.