EDUCATION CODE CHAPTER 28. COURSES OF STUDY; ADVANCEMENT
EDUCATION CODE

TITLE 2. PUBLIC EDUCATION

SUBTITLE F. CURRICULUM, PROGRAMS, AND SERVICES

CHAPTER 28. COURSES OF STUDY; ADVANCEMENT

SUBCHAPTER A. ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLS; CURRICULUM

Sec. 28.001. PURPOSE. It is the intent of the legislature that the essential knowledge and skills developed by the State Board of Education under this subchapter shall require all students to demonstrate the knowledge and skills necessary to read, write, compute, problem solve, think critically, apply technology, and communicate across all subject areas. The essential knowledge and skills shall also prepare and enable all students to continue to learn in postsecondary educational, training, or employment settings. Added by Acts 1995, 74th Leg., ch. 260, Sec. 1, eff. May 30, 1995. Sec. 28.002. REQUIRED CURRICULUM. (a) Each school district that offers kindergarten through grade 12 shall offer, as a required curriculum: (1) a foundation curriculum that includes: (A) English language arts; (B) mathematics; (C) science; and (D) social studies, consisting of Texas, United States, and world history, government, economics, with emphasis on the free enterprise system and its benefits, and geography; and (2) an enrichment curriculum that includes: (A) to the extent possible, languages other than English; (B) health, with emphasis on the importance of proper nutrition and exercise; (C) physical education; (D) fine arts; (E) career and technology education; (F) technology applications; (G) religious literature, including the Hebrew Scriptures (Old Testament) and New Testament, and its impact on history and literature; and (H) personal financial literacy. (b) The State Board of Education by rule shall designate subjects constituting a well-balanced curriculum to be offered by a school district that does not offer kindergarten through grade 12. (b-1) In this section, "common core state standards" means the national curriculum standards developed by the Common Core State Standards Initiative. (b-2) The State Board of Education may not adopt common core state standards to comply with a duty imposed under this chapter. (b-3) A school district may not use common core state standards to comply with the requirement to provide instruction in the essential knowledge and skills at appropriate grade levels under Subsection (c). (b-4) Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, a school district or open-enrollment charter school may not be required to offer any aspect of a common core state standards curriculum. (c) The State Board of Education, with the direct participation of educators, parents, business and industry representatives, and employers shall by rule identify the essential knowledge and skills of each subject of the required curriculum that all students should be able to demonstrate and that will be used in evaluating instructional materials under Chapter 31 and addressed on the assessment instruments required under Subchapter B, Chapter 39. As a condition of accreditation, the board shall require each district to provide instruction in the essential knowledge and skills at appropriate grade levels and to make available to each high school student in the district an Algebra II course. (c-1) The State Board of Education shall adopt rules requiring students enrolled in grade levels six, seven, and eight to complete at least one fine arts course during those grade levels as part of a district's fine arts curriculum. (c-2) Each time the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board revises the Internet database of the coordinating board's official statewide inventory of workforce education courses, the State Board of Education shall by rule revise the essential knowledge and skills of any corresponding career and technology education curriculum as provided by Subsection (c). (d) The physical education curriculum required under Subsection (a)(2)(C) must be sequential, developmentally appropriate, and designed, implemented, and evaluated to enable students to develop the motor, self-management, and other skills, knowledge, attitudes, and confidence necessary to participate in physical activity throughout life. Each school district shall establish specific objectives and goals the district intends to accomplish through the physical education curriculum. In identifying the essential knowledge and skills of physical education, the State Board of Education shall ensure that the curriculum: (1) emphasizes the knowledge and skills capable of being used during a lifetime of regular physical activity; (2) is consistent with national physical education standards for: (A) the information that students should learn about physical activity; and (B) the physical activities that students should be able to perform; (3) requires that, on a weekly basis, at least 50 percent of the physical education class be used for actual student physical activity and that the activity be, to the extent practicable, at a moderate or vigorous level; (4) offers students an opportunity to choose among many types of physical activity in which to participate; (5) offers students both cooperative and competitive games; (6) meets the needs of students of all physical ability levels, including students who have a chronic health problem, disability, including a student who is a person with a disability described under Section 29.003(b) or criteria developed by the agency in accordance with that section, or other special need that precludes the student from participating in regular physical education instruction but who might be able to participate in physical education that is suitably adapted and, if applicable, included in the student's individualized education program; (7) takes into account the effect that gender and cultural differences might have on the degree of student interest in physical activity or on the types of physical activity in which a student is interested; (8) teaches self-management and movement skills; (9) teaches cooperation, fair play, and responsible participation in physical activity; (10) promotes student participation in physical activity outside of school; and (11) allows physical education classes to be an enjoyable experience for students. (e) American Sign Language is a language for purposes of Subsection (a)(2)(A). A public school may offer an elective course in the language. (f) A school district may offer courses for local credit in addition to those in the required curriculum. The State Board of Education shall: (1) be flexible in approving a course for credit for high school graduation under this subsection; and (2) approve courses in cybersecurity for credit for high school graduation under this subsection. (g) A local instructional plan may draw on state curriculum frameworks and program standards as appropriate. Each district is encouraged to exceed minimum requirements of law and State Board of Education rule. Each district shall ensure that all children in the district participate actively in a balanced curriculum designed to meet individual needs. Before the adoption of a major curriculum initiative, including the use of a curriculum management system, a district must use a process that: (1) includes teacher input; (2) provides district employees with the opportunity to express opinions regarding the initiative; and (3) includes a meeting of the board of trustees of the district at which: (A) information regarding the initiative is presented, including the cost of the initiative and any alternatives that were considered; and (B) members of the public and district employees are given the opportunity to comment regarding the initiative. (g-1) A district may also offer a course or other activity, including an apprenticeship or training hours needed to obtain an industry-recognized credential or certificate, that is approved by the board of trustees for credit without obtaining State Board of Education approval if: (1) the district develops a program under which the district partners with a public or private institution of higher education and local business, labor, and community leaders to develop and provide the courses; and (2) the course or other activity allows students to enter: (A) a career or technology training program in the district's region of the state; (B) an institution of higher education without remediation; (C) an apprenticeship training program; or (D) an internship required as part of accreditation toward an industry-recognized credential or certificate for course credit. (g-2) Each school district shall annually report to the agency the names of the courses, programs, institutions of higher education, and internships in which the district's students have enrolled under Subsection (g-1) and the names of the courses and institutions of higher education in which the district's students have enrolled under Subsection (g-3). The agency shall make available information provided under this subsection to other districts. (g-3) A district may also offer a course in cybersecurity that is approved by the board of trustees for credit without obtaining State Board of Education approval if the district partners with a public or private institution of higher education that offers an undergraduate degree program in cybersecurity to develop and provide the course. (h) The State Board of Education and each school district shall foster the continuation of the tradition of teaching United States and Texas history and the free enterprise system in regular subject matter and in reading courses and in the adoption of instructional materials. A primary purpose of the public school curriculum is to prepare thoughtful, active citizens who understand the importance of patriotism and can function productively in a free enterprise society with appreciation for the basic democratic values of our state and national heritage. (i) The State Board of Education shall adopt rules for the implementation of this subchapter. Except as provided by Subsection (j), the board may not adopt rules that designate the methodology used by a teacher or the time spent by a teacher or a student on a particular task or subject. (j) The State Board of Education by rule may require laboratory instruction in secondary science courses and may require a specific amount or percentage of time in a secondary science course that must be laboratory instruction. (k) The State Board of Education, in consultation with the Department of State Health Services and the Texas Diabetes Council, shall develop a diabetes education program that a school district may use in the health curriculum under Subsection (a)(2)(B). (l) A school district shall require a student enrolled in full-day prekindergarten, in kindergarten, or in a grade level below grade six to participate in moderate or vigorous daily physical activity for at least 30 minutes throughout the school year as part of the district's physical education curriculum or through structured activity during a school campus's daily recess. To the extent practicable, a school district shall require a student enrolled in prekindergarten on less than a full-day basis to participate in the same type and amount of physical activity as a student enrolled in full-day prekindergarten. A school district shall require students enrolled in grade levels six, seven, and eight to participate in moderate or vigorous daily physical activity for at least 30 minutes for at least four semesters during those grade levels as part of the district's physical education curriculum. If a school district determines, for any particular grade level below grade six, that requiring moderate or vigorous daily physical activity is impractical due to scheduling concerns or other factors, the district may as an alternative require a student in that grade level to participate in moderate or vigorous physical activity for at least 135 minutes during each school week. Additionally, a school district may as an alternative require a student enrolled in a grade level for which the district uses block scheduling to participate in moderate or vigorous physical activity for at least 225 minutes during each period of two school weeks. A school district must provide for an exemption for: (1) any student who is unable to participate in the required physical activity because of illness or disability; and (2) a middle school or junior high school student who participates in an extracurricular activity with a moderate or vigorous physical activity component that is considered a structured activity under rules adopted by the commissioner. (l-1) In adopting rules relating to an activity described by Subsection (l)(2), the commissioner may permit an exemption for a student who participates in a school-related activity or an activity sponsored by a private league or club only if the student provides proof of participation in the activity. (l-2) To encourage school districts to promote physical activity for children through classroom curricula for health and physical education, the agency, in consultation with the Department of State Health Services, shall designate nationally recognized health and physical education program guidelines that a school district may use in the health curriculum under Subsection (a)(2)(B) or the physical education curriculum under Subsection (a)(2)(C). (l-3)(1) This subsection may be cited as "Lauren's Law." (2) The State Board of Education, the Department of State Health Services, or a school district may not adopt any rule, policy, or program under Subsections (a), (k), (l), (l-1), or (l-2) that would prohibit a parent or grandparent of a student from providing any food product of the parent's or grandparent's choice to: (A) children in the classroom of the child of the parent or grandparent on the occasion of the child's birthday; or (B) children at a school-designated function. (m) Section 2001.039, Government Code, as added by Chapter 1499, Acts of the 76th Legislature, Regular Session, 1999, does not apply to a rule adopted by the State Board of Education under Subsection (c) or (d). (n) The State Board of Education may by rule develop and implement a plan designed to incorporate foundation curriculum requirements into the career and technology education curriculum under Subsection (a)(2)(E). (o) In approving career and technology courses, the State Board of Education must determine that at least 50 percent of the approved courses are cost-effective for a school district to implement. (p) The State Board of Education, in conjunction with the office of the attorney general, shall develop a parenting and paternity awareness program that a school district shall use in the district's high school health curriculum. A school district may use the program developed under this subsection in the district's middle or junior high school curriculum. At the discretion of the district, a teacher may modify the suggested sequence and pace of the program at any grade level. The program must: (1) address parenting skills and responsibilities, including child support and other legal rights and responsibilities that come with parenthood; (2) address relationship skills, including money management, communication skills, and marriage preparation; and (3) in district middle, junior high, or high schools that do not have a family violence prevention program, address skills relating to the prevention of family violence. (p-2) A school district may develop or adopt research-based programs and curriculum materials for use in conjunction with the program developed under Subsection (p). The programs and curriculum materials may provide instruction in: (1) child development; (2) parenting skills, including child abuse and neglect prevention; and (3) assertiveness skills to prevent teenage pregnancy, abusive relationships, and family violence. (p-3) The agency shall evaluate programs and curriculum materials developed under Subsection (p-2) and distribute to other school districts information regarding those programs and materials. (p-4) A student under 14 years of age may not participate in a program developed under Subsection (p) without the permission of the student's parent or person standing in parental relation to the student. (q) Repealed by Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 211, Sec. 78(b)(1), eff. September 1, 2014. (r) In adopting the essential knowledge and skills for the health curriculum under Subsection (a)(2)(B), the State Board of Education shall adopt essential knowledge and skills that address the dangers, causes, consequences, signs, symptoms, and treatment of binge drinking and alcohol poisoning. The agency shall compile a list of evidence-based alcohol awareness programs from which a school district shall choose a program to use in the district's middle school, junior high school, and high school health curriculum. In this subsection, "evidence-based alcohol awareness program" means a program, practice, or strategy that has been proven to effectively prevent or delay alcohol use among students, as determined by evaluations that use valid and reliable measures and that are published in peer-reviewed journals. (s) In this subsection, "bullying" has the meaning assigned by Section 37.0832 and "harassment" has the meaning assigned by Section 37.001. In addition to any other essential knowledge and skills the State Board of Education adopts for the health curriculum under Subsection (a)(2)(B), the board shall adopt for the health curriculum, in consultation with the Texas School Safety Center, essential knowledge and skills that include evidence-based practices that will effectively address awareness, prevention, identification, self-defense in response to, and resolution of and intervention in bullying and harassment. (t) The State Board of Education, in consultation with the commissioner of higher education and business and industry leaders, shall develop an advanced language course that a school district may use in the curriculum under Subsection (a)(2)(A) to provide students with instruction in industry-related terminology that prepares students to communicate in a language other than English in a specific professional, business, or industry environment. (w) In adopting the essential knowledge and skills for the health curriculum under Subsection (a)(2)(B), the State Board of Education shall adopt essential knowledge and skills that address the dangers, causes, consequences, signs, symptoms, and treatment of nonmedical use of prescription drugs. The agency shall compile a list of evidence-based prescription drug misuse awareness programs from which a school district may choose a program to use in the district's middle school, junior high school, and high school health curriculums. In this subsection, an "evidence-based prescription drug misuse awareness program" means a program, practice, or strategy that has been proven to effectively prevent nonmedical use of prescription drugs among students, as determined by evaluations that use valid and reliable measures and that are published in peer-reviewed journals. Added by Acts 1995, 74th Leg., ch. 260, Sec. 1, eff. May 30, 1995. Amended by Acts 1997, 75th Leg., ch. 1285, Sec. 4.02, eff. Sept. 1, 1997; Acts 2001, 77th Leg., ch. 907, Sec. 1, eff. June 14, 2001; Acts 2001, 77th Leg., ch. 925, Sec. 3, eff. June 14, 2001; Acts 2003, 78th Leg., ch. 61, Sec. 2, eff. Sept. 1, 2003; Acts 2003, 78th Leg., ch. 1264, Sec. 1, eff. Sept. 1, 2003; Acts 2003, 78th Leg., ch. 1275, Sec. 2(14), eff. Sept. 1, 2003. Amended by: Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 784 (S.B. 42), Sec. 1, eff. June 17, 2005. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 254 (H.B. 2176), Sec. 1, eff. September 1, 2007. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 856 (H.B. 1287), Sec. 3, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1377 (S.B. 530), Sec. 1, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 529 (S.B. 1344), Sec. 2, eff. June 19, 2009. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 773 (S.B. 891), Sec. 1, eff. June 19, 2009. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 895 (H.B. 3), Sec. 25, eff. June 19, 2009. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 1419 (H.B. 3076), Sec. 1, eff. June 19, 2009. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 1421 (S.B. 1219), Sec. 1, eff. June 19, 2009. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 91 (S.B. 1303), Sec. 27.001(5), eff. September 1, 2011. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 776 (H.B. 1942), Sec. 4, eff. June 17, 2011. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., 1st C.S., Ch. 6 (S.B. 6), Sec. 13, eff. July 19, 2011. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 211 (H.B. 5), Sec. 8(a), eff. June 10, 2013. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 211 (H.B. 5), Sec. 78(b)(1), eff. September 1, 2014. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 796 (S.B. 1474), Sec. 1, eff. June 14, 2013. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 861 (H.B. 462), Sec. 1, eff. June 14, 2013. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1026 (H.B. 2662), Sec. 1, eff. June 14, 2013. Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 89 (H.B. 440), Sec. 1, eff. May 23, 2015. Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 729 (H.B. 1431), Sec. 1, eff. June 17, 2015. Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1175 (S.B. 968), Sec. 1, eff. June 19, 2015. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1088 (H.B. 3593), Sec. 1, eff. June 15, 2017. Sec. 28.0021. PERSONAL FINANCIAL LITERACY. (a) The Texas essential knowledge and skills and, as applicable, Section 28.025 shall include instruction in personal financial literacy, including instruction in methods of paying for college and other postsecondary education and training, in: (1) mathematics instruction in kindergarten through grade eight; and (2) one or more courses offered for high school graduation. (b) Each school district and each open-enrollment charter school that offers a high school program shall provide an elective course in personal financial literacy that meets the requirements for a one-half elective credit under Section 28.025, using materials approved by the State Board of Education. The instruction in personal financial literacy must include instruction on completing the application for federal student aid provided by the United States Department of Education. In fulfilling the requirement to provide financial literacy instruction under this section, a school district or open-enrollment charter school may use an existing state, federal, private, or nonprofit program that provides students without charge the instruction described under this section. Added by Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 494 (H.B. 492), Sec. 1, eff. September 1, 2005. Amended by: Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 214 (H.B. 34), Sec. 1, eff. June 17, 2011. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 885 (S.B. 290), Sec. 1, eff. June 17, 2011. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1026 (H.B. 2662), Sec. 2, eff. June 14, 2013. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1026 (H.B. 2662), Sec. 3, eff. June 14, 2013. Sec. 28.0023. CARDIOPULMONARY RESUSCITATION AND AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR INSTRUCTION. (a) Repealed by Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1269, Sec. 3, eff. June 14, 2013. (b) The State Board of Education by rule shall require instruction in cardiopulmonary resuscitation for students in grades 7 through 12. (c) A school district or open-enrollment charter school shall provide instruction to students in grades 7 through 12 in cardiopulmonary resuscitation in a manner consistent with the requirements of this section and State Board of Education rules adopted under this section. The instruction may be provided as a part of any course. A student shall receive the instruction at least once before graduation. (d) A school administrator may waive the curriculum requirement under this section for an eligible student who has a disability. (e) Cardiopulmonary resuscitation instruction must include training that has been developed: (1) by the American Heart Association or the American Red Cross; or (2) using nationally recognized, evidence-based guidelines for emergency cardiovascular care and incorporating psychomotor skills to support the instruction. (f) For purposes of Subsection (e), "psychomotor skills" means hands-on practice to support cognitive learning. The term does not include cognitive-only instruction and training. (g) A school district or open-enrollment charter school may use emergency medical technicians, paramedics, police officers, firefighters, representatives of the American Heart Association or the American Red Cross, teachers, other school employees, or other similarly qualified individuals to provide instruction and training under this section. Instruction provided under this section is not required to result in certification in cardiopulmonary resuscitation. If instruction is intended to result in certification in cardiopulmonary resuscitation, the course instructor must be authorized to provide the instruction by the American Heart Association, the American Red Cross, or a similar nationally recognized association. Added by Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1371 (S.B. 7), Sec. 4, eff. June 15, 2007. Amended by: Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1269 (H.B. 897), Sec. 2, eff. June 14, 2013. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1269 (H.B. 897), Sec. 3, eff. June 14, 2013. Sec. 28.0024. SCHOOL-BASED SAVINGS PROGRAM. (a) A school district or open-enrollment charter school may establish a school-based savings program to facilitate increased awareness of the importance of saving for higher education and facilitate personal financial literacy instruction. A district or school may offer the program in conjunction with a personal financial literacy course under Section 28.0021. (b) A school-based savings program may, through partnerships with appropriate institutions, promote: (1) general savings, by offering savings accounts or certificates of deposit through partner financial institutions; or (2) savings dedicated for higher education, by offering through partner institutions the following accounts or bonds the primary purpose of which must be to pay expenses associated with higher education: (A) an account authorized under Section 529, Internal Revenue Code of 1986; (B) a Coverdell education savings account established under 26 U.S.C. Section 530; (C) a certificate of deposit; (D) a savings account; and (E) a Series I savings bond. (c) A district or school establishing a program under this section: (1) shall seek to establish partnerships with appropriate institutions that are able to offer an account or bond under Subsection (b); and (2) may seek to establish partnerships with public sector partners, private businesses, nonprofit organizations, and philanthropic organizations in the community. (d) A partnership established under Subsection (c) between a district or school and: (1) an appropriate institution may allow a student in the program or the student and an adult in the student's family jointly to have an opportunity to establish an account or purchase a bond under Subsection (b); and (2) an appropriate institution, public sector partner, private business, or nonprofit or philanthropic organization may provide: (A) a structure for the management of the program; and (B) incentives that encourage contribution to a school-based account or purchase of a bond under Subsection (b), including incentives that provide matching funds or seed funding. Added by Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1265 (H.B. 3987), Sec. 1, eff. June 20, 2015. Sec. 28.003. EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM ACCESS. (a) If the parents or guardians of at least 22 students at a school request a transfer for the same school year to another school in the district for the purpose of enrolling in an educational program offered at that school, beginning with the following school year the district shall: (1) offer the program at the school from which the transfers were requested; or (2) offer the program at the school from which the transfers were requested by teleconference, if available to the district. (b) In this section, "educational program" means a course or series of courses in the required curriculum under Section 28.002, other than a fine arts course under Section 28.002(a)(2)(D) or a career and technology course under Section 28.002(a)(2)(E). Added by Acts 1995, 74th Leg., ch. 260, Sec. 1, eff. May 30, 1995. Amended by: Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., 1st C.S., Ch. 6 (S.B. 6), Sec. 15, eff. July 19, 2011. Sec. 28.004. LOCAL SCHOOL HEALTH ADVISORY COUNCIL AND HEALTH EDUCATION INSTRUCTION. (a) The board of trustees of each school district shall establish a local school health advisory council to assist the district in ensuring that local community values are reflected in the district's health education instruction. (b) A school district must consider the recommendations of the local school health advisory council before changing the district's health education curriculum or instruction. (c) The local school health advisory council's duties include recommending: (1) the number of hours of instruction to be provided in health education; (2) policies, procedures, strategies, and curriculum appropriate for specific grade levels designed to prevent obesity, cardiovascular disease, Type 2 diabetes, and mental health concerns through coordination of: (A) health education; (B) physical education and physical activity; (C) nutrition services; (D) parental involvement; (E) instruction to prevent the use of e-cigarettes, as defined by Section 161.081, Health and Safety Code, and tobacco; (F) school health services; (G) counseling and guidance services; (H) a safe and healthy school environment; and (I) school employee wellness; (3) appropriate grade levels and methods of instruction for human sexuality instruction; (4) strategies for integrating the curriculum components specified by Subdivision (2) with the following elements in a coordinated school health program for the district: (A) school health services; (B) counseling and guidance services; (C) a safe and healthy school environment; and (D) school employee wellness; and (5) if feasible, joint use agreements or strategies for collaboration between the school district and community organizations or agencies. (d) The board of trustees shall appoint at least five members to the local school health advisory council. A majority of the members must be persons who are parents of students enrolled in the district and who are not employed by the district. One of those members shall serve as chair or co-chair of the council. The board of trustees also may appoint one or more persons from each of the following groups or a representative from a group other than a group specified under this subsection: (1) public school teachers; (2) public school administrators; (3) district students; (4) health care professionals; (5) the business community; (6) law enforcement; (7) senior citizens; (8) the clergy; (9) nonprofit health organizations; and (10) local domestic violence programs. (d-1) The local school health advisory council shall meet at least four times each year. (e) Any course materials and instruction relating to human sexuality, sexually transmitted diseases, or human immunodeficiency virus or acquired immune deficiency syndrome shall be selected by the board of trustees with the advice of the local school health advisory council and must: (1) present abstinence from sexual activity as the preferred choice of behavior in relationship to all sexual activity for unmarried persons of school age; (2) devote more attention to abstinence from sexual activity than to any other behavior; (3) emphasize that abstinence from sexual activity, if used consistently and correctly, is the only method that is 100 percent effective in preventing pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases, infection with human immunodeficiency virus or acquired immune deficiency syndrome, and the emotional trauma associated with adolescent sexual activity; (4) direct adolescents to a standard of behavior in which abstinence from sexual activity before marriage is the most effective way to prevent pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases, and infection with human immunodeficiency virus or acquired immune deficiency syndrome; and (5) teach contraception and condom use in terms of human use reality rates instead of theoretical laboratory rates, if instruction on contraception and condoms is included in curriculum content. (f) A school district may not distribute condoms in connection with instruction relating to human sexuality. (g) A school district that provides human sexuality instruction may separate students according to sex for instructional purposes. (h) The board of trustees shall determine the specific content of the district's instruction in human sexuality, in accordance with Subsections (e), (f), and (g). (i) Before each school year, a school district shall provide written notice to a parent of each student enrolled in the district of the board of trustees' decision regarding whether the district will provide human sexuality instruction to district students. If instruction will be provided, the notice must include: (1) a summary of the basic content of the district's human sexuality instruction to be provided to the student, including a statement informing the parent of the instructional requirements under state law; (2) a statement of the parent's right to: (A) review curriculum materials as provided by Subsection (j); and (B) remove the student from any part of the district's human sexuality instruction without subjecting the student to any disciplinary action, academic penalty, or other sanction imposed by the district or the student's school; and (3) information describing the opportunities for parental involvement in the development of the curriculum to be used in human sexuality instruction, including information regarding the local school health advisory council established under Subsection (a). (i-1) A parent may use the grievance procedure adopted under Section 26.011 concerning a complaint of a violation of Subsection (i). (j) A school district shall make all curriculum materials used in the district's human sexuality instruction available for reasonable public inspection. (k) A school district shall publish in the student handbook and post on the district's Internet website, if the district has an Internet website: (1) a statement of the policies adopted to ensure that elementary school, middle school, and junior high school students engage in at least the amount and level of physical activity required by Section 28.002(l); (2) a statement of: (A) the number of times during the preceding year the district's school health advisory council has met; (B) whether the district has adopted and enforces policies to ensure that district campuses comply with agency vending machine and food service guidelines for restricting student access to vending machines; and (C) whether the district has adopted and enforces policies and procedures that prescribe penalties for the use of e-cigarettes, as defined by Section 38.006, and tobacco products by students and others on school campuses or at school-sponsored or school-related activities; and (3) a statement providing notice to parents that they can request in writing their child's physical fitness assessment results at the end of the school year. (l) The local school health advisory council shall consider and make policy recommendations to the district concerning the importance of daily recess for elementary school students. The council must consider research regarding unstructured and undirected play, academic and social development, and the health benefits of daily recess in making the recommendations. The council shall ensure that local community values are reflected in any policy recommendation made to the district under this subsection. (l-1) The local school health advisory council shall establish a physical activity and fitness planning subcommittee to consider issues relating to student physical activity and fitness and make policy recommendations to increase physical activity and improve fitness among students. (m) In addition to performing other duties, the local school health advisory council shall submit to the board of trustees, at least annually, a written report that includes: (1) any council recommendation concerning the school district's health education curriculum and instruction or related matters that the council has not previously submitted to the board; (2) any suggested modification to a council recommendation previously submitted to the board; (3) a detailed explanation of the council's activities during the period between the date of the current report and the date of the last prior written report; and (4) any recommendations made by the physical activity and fitness planning subcommittee. (n) Any joint use agreement that a school district and community organization or agency enter into based on a recommendation of the local school health advisory council under Subsection (c)(5) must address liability for the school district and community organization or agency in the agreement. Added by Acts 1995, 74th Leg., ch. 260, Sec. 1, eff. May 30, 1995. Amended by Acts 2001, 77th Leg., ch. 907, Sec. 2, eff. June 14, 2001; Acts 2003, 78th Leg., ch. 944, Sec. 1, 2, eff. Sept. 1, 2003. Amended by: Acts 2005, 79th Leg., Ch. 784 (S.B. 42), Sec. 2, eff. June 17, 2005. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1377 (S.B. 530), Sec. 2, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 729 (S.B. 283), Sec. 1, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1235 (S.B. 736), Sec. 1, eff. June 17, 2011. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 892 (H.B. 1018), Sec. 1, eff. September 1, 2013. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1321 (S.B. 460), Sec. 3, eff. September 1, 2013. Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 181 (S.B. 97), Sec. 37, eff. October 1, 2015. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 211 (S.B. 489), Sec. 1, eff. May 28, 2017. Sec. 28.005. LANGUAGE OF INSTRUCTION. (a) Except as provided by this section, English shall be the basic language of instruction in public schools. (b) It is the policy of this state to ensure the mastery of English by all students, except that bilingual instruction may be offered or permitted in situations in which bilingual instruction is necessary to ensure students' reasonable proficiency in the English language and ability to achieve academic success. (c) A school district may adopt a dual language immersion program for students enrolled in elementary school grades as provided by Section 28.0051. Added by Acts 1995, 74th Leg., ch. 260, Sec. 1, eff. May 30, 1995. Amended by Acts 2001, 77th Leg., ch. 925, Sec. 1, eff. June 14, 2001. Sec. 28.0051. DUAL LANGUAGE IMMERSION PROGRAM. (a) A dual language immersion program should be designed to produce students with a demonstrated mastery, in both English and one other language, of the required curriculum under Section 28.002(a). (b) The commissioner by rule shall adopt: (1) minimum requirements for a dual language immersion program implemented by a school district; (2) standards for evaluating: (A) the success of a dual language immersion program; and (B) the performance of schools that implement a dual language immersion program; and (3) standards for recognizing: (A) schools that offer an exceptional dual language immersion program; and (B) students who successfully complete a dual language immersion program. (c) A school district may implement a dual language immersion program in a manner and at elementary grade levels consistent with rules adopted by the commissioner under this section. Added by Acts 2001, 77th Leg., ch. 925, Sec. 2, eff. June 14, 2001. Sec. 28.006. READING DIAGNOSIS. (a) The commissioner shall develop recommendations for school districts for: (1) administering reading instruments to diagnose student reading development and comprehension; (2) training educators in administering the reading instruments; and (3) applying the results of the reading instruments to the instructional program. (b) The commissioner shall adopt a list of reading instruments that a school district may use to diagnose student reading development and comprehension. For use in diagnosing the reading development and comprehension of kindergarten students, the commissioner shall include on the commissioner's list at least two multidimensional assessment tools. A multidimensional assessment tool on the commissioner's list must either include a reading instrument and test at least three developmental skills, including literacy, or test at least two developmental skills, other than literacy, and be administered in conjunction with a separate reading instrument that is on a list adopted under this subsection. A multidimensional assessment tool administered as provided by this subsection is considered to be a reading instrument for purposes of this section. A district-level committee established under Subchapter F, Chapter 11, may adopt a list of reading instruments for use in the district in addition to the reading instruments on the commissioner's list. Each reading instrument adopted by the commissioner or a district-level committee must be based on scientific research concerning reading skills development and reading comprehension. A list of reading instruments adopted under this subsection must provide for diagnosing the reading development and comprehension of students participating in a program under Subchapter B, Chapter 29. (c) Each school district shall administer, at the kindergarten and first and second grade levels, a reading instrument on the list adopted by the commissioner or by the district-level committee. The district shall administer the reading instrument in accordance with the commissioner's recommendations under Subsection (a)(1). (c-1) Each school district shall administer at the beginning of the seventh grade a reading instrument adopted by the commissioner to each student whose performance on the assessment instrument in reading administered under Section 39.023(a) to the student in grade six did not demonstrate reading proficiency, as determined by the commissioner. The district shall administer the reading instrument in accordance with the commissioner's recommendations under Subsection (a)(1). (d) The superintendent of each school district shall: (1) report to the commissioner and the board of trustees of the district the results of the reading instruments; (2) report, in writing, to a student's parent or guardian the student's results on the reading instrument; and (3) using the school readiness certification system provided to the school district in accordance with Section 29.161(e), report electronically each student's raw score on the reading instrument to the agency for use in the school readiness certification system. (d-1) The agency shall contract with the State Center for Early Childhood Development to receive and use scores under Subsection (d)(3) on behalf of the agency. (e) The results of reading instruments administered under this section may not be used for purposes of appraisals and incentives under Chapter 21 or accountability under Chapters 39 and 39A. (f) This section may be implemented only if funds are appropriated for administering the reading instruments. Funds, other than local funds, may be used to pay the cost of administering a reading instrument only if the instrument is on the list adopted by the commissioner. (g) A school district shall notify the parent or guardian of each student in kindergarten or first or second grade who is determined, on the basis of reading instrument results, to be at risk for dyslexia or other reading difficulties. The district shall implement an accelerated reading instruction program that provides reading instruction that addresses reading deficiencies to those students and shall determine the form, content, and timing of that program. The admission, review, and dismissal committee of a student who participates in a district's special education program under Subchapter B, Chapter 29, and who does not perform satisfactorily on a reading instrument under this section shall determine the manner in which the student will participate in an accelerated reading instruction program under this subsection. (g-1) A school district shall provide additional reading instruction and intervention to each student in seventh grade assessed under Subsection (c-1), as appropriate to improve the student's reading skills in the relevant areas identified through the assessment instrument. Training and support for activities required by this subsection shall be provided by regional education service centers and teacher reading academies established under Section 21.4551, and may be provided by other public and private providers. (h) The school district shall make a good faith effort to ensure that the notice required under this section is provided either in person or by regular mail and that the notice is clear and easy to understand and is written in English and in the parent or guardian's native language. (i) The commissioner shall certify, not later than July 1 of each school year or as soon as practicable thereafter, whether sufficient funds have been appropriated statewide for the purposes of this section. A determination by the commissioner is final and may not be appealed. For purposes of certification, the commissioner may not consider Foundation School Program funds. (j) No more than 15 percent of the funds certified by the commissioner under Subsection (i) may be spent on indirect costs. The commissioner shall evaluate the programs that fail to meet the standard of performance under Section 39.301(c)(5) and may implement interventions or sanctions under Chapter 39A. The commissioner may audit the expenditures of funds appropriated for purposes of this section. The use of the funds appropriated for purposes of this section shall be verified as part of the district audit under Section 44.008. (k) The provisions of this section relating to parental notification of a student's results on the reading instrument and to implementation of an accelerated reading instruction program may be implemented only if the commissioner certifies that funds have been appropriated during a school year for administering the accelerated reading instruction program specified under this section. Added by Acts 1997, 75th Leg., ch. 397, Sec. 2, eff. Sept. 1, 1997. Amended by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 396, Sec. 2.11, eff. Sept. 1, 1999. Amended by: Acts 2006, 79th Leg., 3rd C.S., Ch. 5 (H.B. 1), Sec. 3.05, eff. May 31, 2006. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1058 (H.B. 2237), Sec. 6, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1340 (S.B. 1871), Sec. 1, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 895 (H.B. 3), Sec. 26, eff. June 19, 2009. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1314 (S.B. 172), Sec. 1, eff. June 14, 2013. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 324 (S.B. 1488), Sec. 21.003(16), eff. September 1, 2017. For expiration of this section, see Subsection (e).

Sec. 28.0061. READING EXCELLENCE TEAM PILOT PROGRAM. (a) Using funds appropriated for that purpose, the commissioner shall establish a reading excellence team pilot program in accordance with this section. (b) A school district is eligible to participate in the pilot program if, as determined by the commissioner, the district has low student performance on: (1) a reading instrument administered in accordance with Section 28.006(c); or (2) a third grade reading assessment instrument administered under Section 39.023(a). (c) The pilot program must: (1) establish reading excellence teams composed of reading instruction specialists; (2) allow an eligible school district to request the assistance of a reading excellence team; and (3) provide a reading excellence team to a requesting eligible school district to: (A) review with the district the results of the assessments described under Subsection (b) to determine campuses and classrooms for kindergarten through third grade with the greatest need of assistance; and (B) work with teachers on campuses and in classrooms identified under Paragraph (A) to provide training necessary to improve student reading outcomes. (d) The commissioner shall adopt rules to administer this section, including rules establishing qualifications and criteria for selecting reading instruction specialists for a reading excellence team. (e) This section expires September 1, 2021. Added by Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 203 (S.B. 935), Sec. 1, eff. May 28, 2015. Sec. 28.007. MATHEMATICS DIAGNOSIS. (a) Using funds appropriated for the purpose, the commissioner shall develop and make available or contract for the development and dissemination of assessment instruments that a school district may use to diagnose student mathematics skills. In developing the assessment instruments, all assessment methods available through advanced technology, including methods using the Internet or other computer resources to provide immediate assessment of a student's skills, shall be considered. (b) The results of assessment instruments developed under Subsection (a) may not be used for purposes of appraisals and incentives under Chapter 21 or accountability under Chapters 39 and 39A. Added by Acts 2001, 77th Leg., ch. 834, Sec. 7, eff. Sept. 1, 2001. Amended by: Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 324 (S.B. 1488), Sec. 21.003(17), eff. September 1, 2017. Sec. 28.008. ADVANCEMENT OF COLLEGE READINESS IN CURRICULUM. (a) To ensure that students are able to perform college-level course work at institutions of higher education, the commissioner of education and the commissioner of higher education shall establish vertical teams composed of public school educators and institution of higher education faculty. (b) The vertical teams shall: (1) recommend for approval by the commissioner of education and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board college readiness standards and expectations that address what students must know and be able to do to succeed in entry-level courses offered at institutions of higher education; (2) evaluate whether the high school curriculum requirements under Section 28.002 and other instructional requirements serve to prepare students to successfully perform college-level course work; (3) recommend how the public school curriculum requirements can be aligned with college readiness standards and expectations; (4) develop instructional strategies for teaching courses to prepare students to successfully perform college-level course work; (5) develop or establish minimum standards for curricula, professional development materials, and online support materials in English language arts, mathematics, science, and social studies, designed for students who need additional assistance in preparing to successfully perform college-level course work; and (6) periodically review and revise the college readiness standards and expectations developed under Subdivision (1) and recommend revised standards for approval by the commissioner of education and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board. (c) The commissioner of education and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board by rule shall: (1) establish the composition and duties of the vertical teams established under this section; and (2) establish a schedule for the periodic review required under Subsection (b)(6), giving consideration to the cycle of review and identification under Section 28.002 of the essential knowledge and skills of subjects of the required curriculum. (d) The State Board of Education shall incorporate college readiness standards and expectations approved by the commissioner of education and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board under Subsection (b) into the essential knowledge and skills identified by the board under Section 28.002(c). The State Board of Education shall develop and by rule adopt a chart that clearly indicates the alignment of the college readiness standards and expectations with the essential knowledge and skills identified by the board under Section 28.002(c). (e) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the State Board of Education retains its authority under Section 28.002 concerning the required curriculum. (g) The agency shall coordinate with the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board as necessary in administering this section. Added by Acts 2006, 79th Leg., 3rd C.S., Ch. 5 (H.B. 1), Sec. 5.01, eff. May 31, 2006. Amended by: Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1058 (H.B. 2237), Sec. 7, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1014 (H.B. 2549), Sec. 1, eff. June 14, 2013. Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1036 (H.B. 1613), Sec. 1, eff. June 19, 2015. Sec. 28.009. COLLEGE CREDIT PROGRAM. (a) Each school district shall implement a program under which students may earn the equivalent of at least 12 semester credit hours of college credit in high school. On request, a public institution of higher education in this state shall assist a school district in developing and implementing the program. The college credit may be earned through: (1) international baccalaureate, advanced placement, or dual credit courses; (2) articulated postsecondary courses provided for local credit or articulated postsecondary advanced technical credit courses provided for state credit; or (3) any combination of the courses described by Subdivisions (1) and (2). (a-1) A program implemented under this section may provide a student the opportunity to earn credit for a course or activity, including an apprenticeship or training hours: (1) that: (A) satisfies a requirement necessary to obtain an industry-recognized credential or certificate or an associate degree; and (B) is approved by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board; and (2) for which a student may earn credit concurrently toward both the student's high school diploma and postsecondary academic requirements. (a-2) A school district is not required to pay a student's tuition or other associated costs for taking a course under this section. (a-4) A dual credit course offered under this section must be: (1) in the core curriculum of the public institution of higher education providing college credit; (2) a career and technical education course; or (3) a foreign language course. (a-5) Subsection (a-4) does not apply to a dual credit course offered as part of the early college education program established under Section 29.908 or any other early college program that assists a student in earning a certificate or an associate degree while in high school. Text of subsection as amended by Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 90 (H.B. 505), Sec. 1

(b) The agency shall coordinate with the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board as necessary in administering this section. The commissioner may adopt rules as necessary concerning the duties under this section of a school district. The Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board may adopt rules as necessary concerning the duties under this section of a public institution of higher education. A rule may not limit: (1) the number of dual credit courses or hours in which a student may enroll while in high school; (2) the number of dual credit courses or hours in which a student may enroll each semester or academic year; or (3) the grade levels at which a high school student may be eligible to enroll in a dual credit course. Text of subsection as amended by Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 988 (H.B. 18), Sec. 2

(b) The agency shall coordinate with the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board as necessary in administering this section. The commissioner may adopt rules as necessary concerning the duties under this section of a school district. The Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board may adopt rules as necessary concerning the duties under this section of a public institution of higher education. A rule may not limit the number of dual credit courses or semester credit hours in which a student may enroll while in high school or limit the number of dual credit courses or semester credit hours in which a student may enroll each semester or academic year. Text of subsection as added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 93 (H.B. 1638), Sec. 1

(b-1) The agency and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board jointly shall develop statewide goals for dual credit programs, including early college high school programs, career and technical education dual credit programs, and joint high school and college credit programs provided under Section 130.008, to provide uniform standards for evaluating those programs. The goals must address, at a minimum: (1) a dual credit program's achievement of enrollment in and acceleration through postsecondary education; (2) performance in college-level coursework; and (3) the development of an effective bridge between secondary and postsecondary education in the state. Text of subsection as added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 729 (S.B. 1091), Sec. 1

(b-1) The agency and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board shall coordinate as necessary to adopt rules for the implementation of Subsections (a-4) and (a-5). In adopting those rules, the agency and the coordinating board shall use the negotiated rulemaking procedures under Chapter 2008, Government Code, and consult with relevant stakeholders. (b-2) Any agreement, including a memorandum of understanding or articulation agreement, between a school district and public institution of higher education to provide a dual credit program described by Subsection (b-1) must: (1) include specific program goals aligned with the statewide goals developed under Subsection (b-1); (2) establish, or provide a procedure for establishing, the course credits that may be earned under the agreement, including by developing a course equivalency crosswalk or other method for equating high school courses with college courses and identifying the number of credits that may be earned for each course completed through the program; (3) describe the academic supports and, if applicable, guidance that will be provided to students participating in the program; (4) establish the district's and the institution's respective roles and responsibilities in providing the program and ensuring the quality and instructional rigor of the program; (5) state the sources of funding for courses offered under the program, including, at a minimum, the sources of funding for tuition, transportation, and any required fees or textbooks for students participating in the program; and (6) be posted each year on the district's and the institution's respective Internet websites. (c) The commissioner and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board shall share data as necessary to enable school districts to comply with this subsection. Each school district shall annually report to the agency: (1) the number of district students, including career and technical students, who have participated in the program and earned college credit; and (2) the cumulative number of courses in which participating district students have enrolled and college credit hours the students have earned. (c-1) The Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board shall collect student course credit data from public institutions of higher education as necessary for purposes of Subsection (c). (d) In this section: (1) "Career and technical student" means: (A) a secondary education student who has entered the first course in a sequence of two or more technical courses for three or more credits in a career and technical education program; or (B) a student who: (i) is enrolled in an academic or workforce course that is part of a sequence of courses leading to an industry-recognized credential, certificate, or degree; and (ii) has declared that sequence of courses as the student's major course of study. (2) "Sequence of courses" means career and technical education courses approved by the State Board of Education or innovative courses approved by the State Board of Education that are provided for local credit. Added by Acts 2006, 79th Leg., 3rd C.S., Ch. 5 (H.B. 1), Sec. 5.01, eff. May 31, 2006. Amended by: Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 763 (H.B. 3485), Sec. 2, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 1328 (H.B. 3646), Sec. 15, eff. September 1, 2009. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 369 (S.B. 149), Sec. 1, eff. June 17, 2011. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 369 (S.B. 149), Sec. 2, eff. September 1, 2011. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 369 (S.B. 149), Sec. 3, eff. September 1, 2013. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 369 (S.B. 149), Sec. 4, eff. September 1, 2013. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 1104 (S.B. 1619), Sec. 1, eff. June 17, 2011. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 213 (H.B. 842), Sec. 1, eff. June 10, 2013. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 424 (S.B. 435), Sec. 1, eff. June 14, 2013. Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 90 (H.B. 505), Sec. 1, eff. May 23, 2015. Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 988 (H.B. 18), Sec. 2, eff. June 19, 2015. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 93 (H.B. 1638), Sec. 1, eff. May 23, 2017. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 189 (S.B. 22), Sec. 2, eff. September 1, 2017. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 729 (S.B. 1091), Sec. 1, eff. June 12, 2017. Sec. 28.010. NOTIFICATION REGARDING COLLEGE CREDIT PROGRAMS. (a) Each school year, a school district shall notify the parent of each district student enrolled in grade nine or above of the availability of programs in the district under which a student may earn college credit, including advanced placement programs, dual credit programs, joint high school and college credit programs, and international baccalaureate programs. (b) A school district may provide the notification required by this section on the district's Internet website. The notification must include the name and contact information of any public or private entity offering a program described by this section in the district. Added by Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 973 (S.B. 282), Sec. 1, eff. June 15, 2007. Section effective beginning with the 2009-2010 school year.

Sec. 28.011. ELECTIVE COURSES ON THE BIBLE'S HEBREW SCRIPTURES (OLD TESTAMENT) AND NEW TESTAMENT AND THEIR IMPACT ON THE HISTORY AND LITERATURE OF WESTERN CIVILIZATION. (a) A school district may offer to students in grade nine or above: (1) an elective course on the Hebrew Scriptures (Old Testament) and its impact and an elective course on the New Testament and its impact; or (2) an elective course that combines the courses described by Subdivision (1). (b) The purpose of a course under this section is to: (1) teach students knowledge of biblical content, characters, poetry, and narratives that are prerequisites to understanding contemporary society and culture, including literature, art, music, mores, oratory, and public policy; and (2) familiarize students with, as applicable: (A) the contents of the Hebrew Scriptures or New Testament; (B) the history of the Hebrew Scriptures or New Testament; (C) the literary style and structure of the Hebrew Scriptures or New Testament; and (D) the influence of the Hebrew Scriptures or New Testament on law, history, government, literature, art, music, customs, morals, values, and culture. (c) A student may not be required to use a specific translation as the sole text of the Hebrew Scriptures or New Testament and may use as the basic instructional material a different translation of the Hebrew Scriptures or New Testament from that chosen by the board of trustees of the student's school district or the student's teacher. (d) A course offered under this section shall follow applicable law and all federal and state guidelines in maintaining religious neutrality and accommodating the diverse religious views, traditions, and perspectives of students in their school district. A course under this section shall not endorse, favor, or promote, or disfavor or show hostility toward, any particular religion or nonreligious faith or religious perspective. Nothing in this statute is intended to violate any provision of the United States Constitution or federal law, the Texas Constitution or any state law, or any rules or guidelines provided by the United States Department of Education or the Texas Education Agency. (e) Before adopting rules identifying the essential knowledge and skills of a course offered under this section, the State Board of Education shall submit the proposed essential knowledge and skills to the attorney general. The attorney general shall review the proposed essential knowledge and skills to ensure that the course complies with the First Amendment to the United States Constitution, and the board may not adopt rules identifying the essential knowledge and skills of a course offered under this section without the attorney general's approval under this subsection. (f) A teacher of a course offered under this section must hold a minimum of a High School Composite Certification in language arts, social studies, or history with, where practical, a minor in religion or biblical studies. A teacher selected to teach a course under this section shall successfully complete staff development training outlined in Section 21.459. A course under this section may only be taught by a teacher who has successfully completed training under Section 21.459. (g) For the purpose of a student earning credit for high school graduation, a school district shall grant one-half academic elective credit for satisfactory completion of a course on the Hebrew Scriptures, one-half academic elective credit for satisfactory completion of a course on the New Testament, and one-half academic elective credit for satisfactory completion of a combined course on both the Hebrew Scriptures and the New Testament. This subsection applies only to a course that is taught in strict compliance with this section. (h) If, for a particular semester, fewer than 15 students at a school district campus register to enroll in a course required by this section, the district is not required to offer the course at that campus for that semester. (i) This section does not prohibit the board of trustees of a school district from offering an elective course based on the books of a religion other than Christianity. In determining whether to offer such a course, the board may consider various factors, including student and parent demand for such a course and the impact such books have had on history and culture. (j) This section does not prohibit a school district from offering a course, other than the course authorized by this section, in the academic study of the Hebrew Scriptures, the New Testament, or both for local credit or for state elective credit towards high school graduation. Added by Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 856 (H.B. 1287), Sec. 1, eff. June 15, 2007. Amended by: Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., 1st C.S., Ch. 6 (S.B. 6), Sec. 16, eff. July 19, 2011. Sec. 28.012. INSTRUCTION ON INTERACTION WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT. (a) In this section: (1) "Board" means the State Board of Education. (2) "Commission" means the Texas Commission on Law Enforcement. (3) "Driver training school" has the meaning assigned by Section 1001.001. (b) The board and the commission shall enter into a memorandum of understanding that establishes each agency's respective responsibilities in developing instruction, including curriculum and instructional modules, on proper interaction with peace officers during traffic stops and other in-person encounters. The instruction must include information regarding: (1) the role of law enforcement and the duties and responsibilities of peace officers; (2) a person's rights concerning interactions with peace officers; (3) proper behavior for civilians and peace officers during interactions; (4) laws regarding questioning and detention by peace officers, including any law requiring a person to present proof of identity to a peace officer, and the consequences for a person's or officer's failure to comply with those laws; and (5) how and where to file a complaint against or a compliment on behalf of a peace officer. (c) In developing the instruction under this section, the board and the commission may consult with any interested party, including a volunteer work group convened for the purpose of making recommendations regarding the instruction. (d) Before finalizing any instruction under this section, the board and the commission shall provide a reasonable period for public comment. (e) Subject to rules adopted by the board, a school district or open-enrollment charter school may tailor the instruction developed under this section as appropriate for the district's or school's community. In tailoring the instruction, the district or school shall solicit input from local law enforcement agencies, driver training schools, and the community. Added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 513 (S.B. 30), Sec. 2, eff. September 1, 2017. Sec. 28.013. NATURE SCIENCE CURRICULUM PROJECT. (a) The State Board of Education shall assist in developing a nature science curriculum, in accordance with this section, the following entities, acting jointly: (1) the Outdoor School at Texas Tech University Center at Junction; (2) the Texas Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (T-STEM) Center of Texas Tech University; and (3) South Llano River State Park. (b) The nature science curriculum must: (1) be designed for instruction of students in grades six through 12; (2) provide for grade-level appropriate instruction in essential knowledge and skills identified by the State Board of Education under Section 28.002 for: (A) science; and (B) mathematics, social studies, and language arts, to the extent practicable and relevant to nature science studies; (3) through participation in outdoor experiential learning projects in state parks, provide for the scientific study by students of: (A) conservation, wildlife or aquatic biology, range ecology, or other areas of nature science; and (B) problems affecting nature, such as threats to the watershed, and possible solutions to those problems; and (4) be designed to: (A) be capable of implementation in any state park; (B) use state park resources in providing instruction; and (C) be presented by classroom teachers and state park employees. (c) The Texas Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (T-STEM) Center of Texas Tech University shall make the nature science curriculum available through the university's Internet website or through a separate Internet website developed by the center for that purpose. (d) The Texas Tech University Center at Junction, with assistance from South Llano River State Park, shall present to classroom teachers and state park employees staff development courses in providing instruction in the nature science curriculum. (e) The nature science curriculum project must be implemented and maintained using money appropriated for those purposes. Added by Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 300 (H.B. 1700), Sec. 1, eff. June 15, 2007. Sec. 28.014. COLLEGE PREPARATORY COURSES. (a) Each school district shall partner with at least one institution of higher education to develop and provide courses in college preparatory mathematics and English language arts. The courses must be designed: (1) for students at the 12th grade level whose performance on: (A) an end-of-course assessment instrument required under Section 39.023(c) does not meet college readiness standards; or (B) coursework, a college entrance examination, or an assessment instrument designated under Section 51.334 indicates that the student is not ready to perform entry-level college coursework; and (2) to prepare students for success in entry-level college courses. (b) A course developed under this section must be provided: (1) on the campus of the high school offering the course; or (2) through distance learning or as an online course provided through an institution of higher education with which the school district partners as provided by Subsection (a). (c) Appropriate faculty of each high school offering courses under this section and appropriate faculty of each institution of higher education with which the school district partners shall meet regularly as necessary to ensure that each course is aligned with college readiness expectations. The commissioner of education, in coordination with the commissioner of higher education, may adopt rules to administer this subsection. (d) Each school district shall provide a notice to each district student to whom Subsection (a) applies and the student's parent or guardian regarding the benefits of enrolling in a course under this section. (e) A student who successfully completes an English language arts course developed under this section may use the credit earned in the course toward satisfying the advanced English language arts curriculum requirement for the foundation high school program under Section 28.025(b-1)(1). A student who successfully completes a mathematics course developed under this section may use the credit earned in the course toward satisfying an advanced mathematics curriculum requirement under Section 28.025 after completion of the mathematics curriculum requirements for the foundation high school program under Section 28.025(b-1)(2). (f) A course provided under this section may be offered for dual credit at the discretion of the institution of higher education with which a school district partners under this section. (g) Each school district, in consultation with each institution of higher education with which the district partners, shall develop or purchase instructional materials for a course developed under this section consistent with Chapter 31. The instructional materials must include technology resources that enhance the effectiveness of the course and draw on established best practices. Added by Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1058 (H.B. 2237), Sec. 8(a), eff. June 15, 2007. Amended by: Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 895 (H.B. 3), Sec. 27, eff. June 19, 2009. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 211 (H.B. 5), Sec. 10(a), eff. June 10, 2013. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 842 (H.B. 2223), Sec. 2.01, eff. June 15, 2017. For expiration of this section, see Subsection (c).

Sec. 28.015. PUBLIC OUTREACH MATERIALS TO PROMOTE CURRICULUM CHANGE AWARENESS. (a) The agency shall develop uniform public outreach materials that explain the importance and outline the details of public school curriculum changes under Chapter 211 (H.B. 5), Acts of the 83rd Legislature, Regular Session, 2013, and subsequent associated decisions by the State Board of Education. The agency shall make the materials available to school districts. (b) The materials developed under this section must: (1) be available in English, Spanish, and Vietnamese; (2) be in a form that would allow school districts to mail the information to students and parents; and (3) include an explanation of: (A) the basic career and college readiness components of each endorsement under Section 28.025(c-1); (B) the curriculum requirements to gain automatic college admission under Section 51.803; and (C) applicable course, graduation plan, and endorsement requirements for financial aid authorized under Title 3, including curriculum requirements for: (i) the TEXAS grant as provided under Subchapter M, Chapter 56; and (ii) the Texas Educational Opportunity Grant Program as provided under Subchapter P, Chapter 56. (c) This section expires September 1, 2020. Added by Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 988 (H.B. 18), Sec. 3(a), eff. June 19, 2015. Amended by: Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 327 (H.B. 264), Sec. 1, eff. June 1, 2017. Sec. 28.016. INSTRUCTION IN HIGH SCHOOL, COLLEGE, AND CAREER PREPARATION. (a) Each school district shall provide instruction to students in grade seven or eight in preparing for high school, college, and a career. (b) The instruction must include information regarding: (1) the creation of a high school personal graduation plan under Section 28.02121; (2) the distinguished level of achievement described by Section 28.025(b-15); (3) each endorsement described by Section 28.025(c-1); (4) college readiness standards; and (5) potential career choices and the education needed to enter those careers. (c) A school district may: (1) provide the instruction as part of an existing course in the required curriculum; (2) provide the instruction as part of an existing career and technology course designated by the State Board of Education as appropriate for that purpose; or (3) establish a new elective course through which to provide the instruction. (d) Each school district shall ensure that at least once in grade seven or eight each student receives the instruction under this section. Added by Acts 2015, 84th Leg., R.S., Ch. 988 (H.B. 18), Sec. 4, eff. June 19, 2015. See note following this section.

Sec. 28.017. INSTRUCTION ON PREVENTION OF SEXUAL ABUSE AND SEX TRAFFICKING. (a) The commissioner, in cooperation with the human trafficking prevention task force created under Section 402.035, Government Code, and any other persons the commissioner considers appropriate, shall develop one or more sexual abuse and sex trafficking instructional modules that a school district may use in the district's health curriculum. The modules may include: (1) information on the different forms of sexual abuse and assault, sex trafficking, and risk factors for sex trafficking; (2) the procedures for reporting sexual abuse and sex trafficking or suspected sexual abuse or sex trafficking; (3) strategies for sexual abuse and assault prevention and overcoming peer pressure; (4) information on establishing healthy boundaries for relationships, recognizing potentially abusive or harmful relationships, and avoiding high-risk activities; (5) the recruiting tactics of sex traffickers and peer recruiters, including recruitment through the Internet; (6) the legal aspects of sexual abuse and sex trafficking under state and federal law; and (7) the influence of culture and mass media on perceptions of sexual abuse and sex trafficking, including stereotypes and myths about victims and abusers, victim blaming, and the role of language. (b) The module or modules developed under Subsection (a) must emphasize compassion for victims of sexual abuse or sex trafficking and the creation of a positive reentry experience for survivors of sexual abuse or sex trafficking into schools. (c) Before the beginning of each school year, a school district that elects to use a module developed under Subsection (a) in the district's health curriculum shall provide written notice to the parent of each student enrolled in the district that includes the following: (1) a statement that the district will provide instruction relating to sexual abuse and sex trafficking awareness to students enrolled in the district; (2) a description of the material that will be used in providing instruction to students; and (3) a statement that the parent has the right to review the material and remove the parent's student from the instruction. (d) If a school district does not comply with the requirements of Subsection (c), a parent of a student enrolled in the district may file a complaint in accordance with the district's grievance procedure developed under Section 26.011. Text of section effective on June 12, 2017, but only if a specific appropriation is provided as described by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 762 (S.B. 2039), Sec. 5, which states: This Act takes effect only if a specific appropriation for the implementation of the Act is provided in a general appropriations act of the 85th Legislature. Added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 762 (S.B. 2039), Sec. 1, eff. June 12, 2017. Sec. 28.018. ADVANCED COMPUTER SCIENCE PROGRAM. (a) The State Board of Education by rule shall develop and implement a program under which: (1) students in participating school districts may comply with the curriculum requirements for an advanced mathematics credit under Section 28.025(b-1)(2) or an advanced science credit under Section 28.025(b-1)(3) by successfully completing an advanced computer science course; and (2) participating school districts implement rigorous standards, as developed by the State Board of Education, for advanced computer science courses that are focused on the creation and use of software and computing technologies. (b) The commissioner shall adopt rules as necessary to administer this section. Added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 123 (H.B. 728), Sec. 1, eff. May 26, 2017. Sec. 28.020. MATHEMATICS INNOVATION ZONES. (a) The commissioner may: (1) on application of a school district or open-enrollment charter school, designate a campus of the district or school as a mathematics innovation zone; and (2) from funds appropriated or donated for purposes of this section, award a grant to support implementation of innovative mathematics instruction at the campus in accordance with this section. (a-1) The total amount of grants awarded under this section during the state fiscal biennium ending August 31, 2019, may not exceed $12.5 million. This subsection expires December 1, 2019. (b) A campus designated as a mathematics innovation zone must: (1) implement with fidelity an innovative mathematics instructional program approved by the commissioner for purposes of this section that addresses the essential knowledge and skills of the mathematics curriculum required by Section 28.002; (2) comply with objectives, metrics, and other mathematics innovation zone requirements imposed by the commissioner through rules adopted under Subsection (g); and (3) provide all data relating to the mathematics innovation zone requested by the agency. (c) A campus designated as a mathematics innovation zone is not subject to interventions under the state accountability system described by Section 39.107(a) or (e) for the first two years of the designation, provided that the campus implements the instructional program with fidelity and complies with each mathematics innovation zone requirement to the satisfaction of the commissioner. The period that a campus is exempt from interventions as provided by this subsection is not: (1) included in calculating consecutive school years under Section 39.107(a) or (e); or (2) considered a break in consecutive school years of unacceptable ratings for purposes of determining the need for intervention under Section 39.107(a) or (e). (d) The commissioner may revoke designation of a campus as a mathematics innovation zone and suspend associated grant funding if the commissioner determines that the campus has failed to implement the instructional program with fidelity or comply with any requirement imposed under this section. (e) A school district or open-enrollment charter school may use a pay for success program approved by the commissioner under Section 44.904 to pay costs associated with designation of a campus as a mathematics innovation zone. (f) The commissioner may accept gifts, grants, or donations from any public or private source for purposes of this section. (g) The commissioner may adopt rules as necessary to administer this section. (h) A decision or determination by the commissioner under this section is final and may not be appealed. Added by Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 424 (S.B. 1318), Sec. 1, eff. September 1, 2017. SUBCHAPTER B. ADVANCEMENT, PLACEMENT, CREDIT, AND ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT RECORD

Sec. 28.021. STUDENT ADVANCEMENT. (a) A student may be promoted only on the basis of academic achievement or demonstrated proficiency of the subject matter of the course or grade level. (b) In measuring the academic achievement or proficiency of a student who is dyslexic, the student's potential for achievement or proficiency in the area must be considered. (c) In determining promotion under Subsection (a), a school district shall consider: (1) the recommendation of the student's teacher; (2) the student's grade in each subject or course; (3) the student's score on an assessment instrument administered under Section 39.023(a), (b), or (l), to the extent applicable; and (4) any other necessary academic information, as determined by the district. (d) By the start of the school year, a district shall make public the requirements for student advancement under this section. (e) The commissioner shall provide guidelines to districts based on best practices that a district may use when considering factors for promotion. Added by Acts 1995, 74th Leg., ch. 260, Sec. 1, eff. May 30, 1995. Amended by: Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 895 (H.B. 3), Sec. 28, eff. June 19, 2009. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 307 (H.B. 2135), Sec. 1, eff. June 17, 2011. Sec. 28.0211. SATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE ON ASSESSMENT INSTRUMENTS REQUIRED; ACCELERATED INSTRUCTION. (a) Except as provided by Subsection (b) or (e), a student may not be promoted to: (1) the sixth grade program to which the student would otherwise be assigned if the student does not perform satisfactorily on the fifth grade mathematics and reading assessment instruments under Section 39.023; or (2) the ninth grade program to which the student would otherwise be assigned if the student does not perform satisfactorily on the eighth grade mathematics and reading assessment instruments under Section 39.023. (a-1) Each time a student fails to perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument administered under Section 39.023(a) in the third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, or eighth grade, the school district in which the student attends school shall provide to the student accelerated instruction in the applicable subject area. Accelerated instruction may require participation of the student before or after normal school hours and may include participation at times of the year outside normal school operations. (a-2) A student who fails to perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument specified under Subsection (a) and who is promoted to the next grade level must complete accelerated instruction required under Subsection (a-1) before placement in the next grade level. A student who fails to complete required accelerated instruction may not be promoted. (a-3) The commissioner shall provide guidelines to districts on research-based best practices and effective strategies that a district may use in developing an accelerated instruction program. (b) A school district shall provide to a student who initially fails to perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument specified under Subsection (a) at least two additional opportunities to take the assessment instrument. A school district may administer an alternate assessment instrument to a student who has failed an assessment instrument specified under Subsection (a) on the previous two opportunities. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a student may be promoted if the student performs at grade level on an alternate assessment instrument under this subsection that is appropriate for the student's grade level and approved by the commissioner. (c) Each time a student fails to perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument specified under Subsection (a), the school district in which the student attends school shall provide to the student accelerated instruction in the applicable subject area, including reading instruction for a student who fails to perform satisfactorily on a reading assessment instrument. After a student fails to perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument a second time, a grade placement committee shall be established to prescribe the accelerated instruction the district shall provide to the student before the student is administered the assessment instrument the third time. The grade placement committee shall be composed of the principal or the principal's designee, the student's parent or guardian, and the teacher of the subject of an assessment instrument on which the student failed to perform satisfactorily. The district shall notify the parent or guardian of the time and place for convening the grade placement committee and the purpose of the committee. An accelerated instruction group administered by a school district under this section may not have a ratio of more than 10 students for each teacher. (d) In addition to providing accelerated instruction to a student under Subsection (c), the district shall notify the student's parent or guardian of: (1) the student's failure to perform satisfactorily on the assessment instrument; (2) the accelerated instruction program to which the student is assigned; and (3) the possibility that the student might be retained at the same grade level for the next school year. (e) A student who, after at least three attempts, fails to perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument specified under Subsection (a) shall be retained at the same grade level for the next school year in accordance with Subsection (a). The student's parent or guardian may appeal the student's retention by submitting a request to the grade placement committee established under Subsection (c). The school district shall give the parent or guardian written notice of the opportunity to appeal. The grade placement committee may decide in favor of a student's promotion only if the committee concludes, using standards adopted by the board of trustees, that if promoted and given accelerated instruction, the student is likely to perform at grade level. A student may not be promoted on the basis of the grade placement committee's decision unless that decision is unanimous. The commissioner by rule shall establish a time line for making the placement determination. This subsection does not create a property interest in promotion. The decision of the grade placement committee is final and may not be appealed. (f) A school district shall provide to a student who, after three attempts, has failed to perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument specified under Subsection (a) accelerated instruction during the next school year as prescribed by an educational plan developed for the student by the student's grade placement committee established under Subsection (c). The district shall provide that accelerated instruction regardless of whether the student has been promoted or retained. The educational plan must be designed to enable the student to perform at the appropriate grade level by the conclusion of the school year. During the school year, the student shall be monitored to ensure that the student is progressing in accordance with the plan. The district shall administer to the student the assessment instrument for the grade level in which the student is placed at the time the district regularly administers the assessment instruments for that school year. (g) This section does not preclude the retention at a grade level, in accordance with state law or school district policy, of a student who performs satisfactorily on an assessment instrument specified under Subsection (a). (h) In each instance under this section in which a school district is specifically required to provide notice to a parent or guardian of a student, the district shall make a good faith effort to ensure that such notice is provided either in person or by regular mail and that the notice is clear and easy to understand and is written in English or the parent or guardian's native language. (i) The admission, review, and dismissal committee of a student who participates in a district's special education program under Subchapter A, Chapter 29, and who does not perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument specified under Subsection (a) and administered under Section 39.023(a) or (b) must meet before the student is administered the assessment instrument for the second time. The committee shall determine: (1) the manner in which the student will participate in an accelerated instruction program under this section; and (2) whether the student will be promoted in accordance with Subsection (i-1) or retained under this section. (i-1) At a meeting of the admission, review, and dismissal committee of a student under Subsection (i), the committee may promote the student to the next grade level if the committee concludes that the student has made sufficient progress in the measurable academic goals contained in the student's individualized education program developed under Section 29.005. A school district that promotes a student under this subsection is not required to provide an additional opportunity for the student to perform satisfactorily on the assessment instrument. (i-2) Not later than September 1 of each school year, a school district must notify the parent or person standing in parental relation to a student enrolled in the district's special education program under Subchapter A, Chapter 29, of the options of the admission, review, and dismissal committee under Subsections (i) and (i-1) if the student does not perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument. (j) A school district or open-enrollment charter school shall provide students required to attend accelerated programs under this section with transportation to those programs if the programs occur outside of regular school hours. (k) The commissioner shall adopt rules as necessary to implement this section, including rules concerning when school districts shall administer assessment instruments required under this section and which administration of the assessment instruments will be used for purposes of Section 39.054. (l) Repealed by Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1058, Sec. 17, eff. June 15, 2007. (l-1) The commissioner may adopt rules requiring a school district that receives federal funding under Title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 U.S.C. Section 6301 et seq.) to use that funding to provide supplemental educational services under 20 U.S.C. Section 6316 in conjunction with the accelerated instruction provided under this section, provided that the rules may not conflict with federal law governing the use of that funding. (m) The commissioner shall certify, not later than July 1 of each school year or as soon as practicable thereafter, whether sufficient funds have been appropriated statewide for the purposes of this section and Section 28.0217. A determination by the commissioner is final and may not be appealed. For purposes of certification, the commissioner shall consider: (1) the average cost per student per assessment instrument administration; (2) the number of students that require accelerated instruction because the student failed to perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument; (3) whether sufficient funds have been appropriated to provide support to students in grades three through 12 identified as being at risk of dropping out of school, as defined in Section 29.081(d); and (4) whether sufficient funds have been appropriated to provide instructional materials that are aligned with the assessment instruments under Sections 39.023(a) and (c). (m-1) For purposes of certification under Subsection (m), the commissioner may not consider Foundation School Program funds except for compensatory education funds under Section 42.152. This section may be implemented only if the commissioner certifies that sufficient funds have been appropriated during a school year for administering the accelerated instruction programs specified under this section and Section 28.0217, including teacher training for that purpose. (n) A student who is promoted by a grade placement committee under this section must be assigned in each subject in which the student failed to perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument specified under Subsection (a) to a teacher who meets all state and federal qualifications to teach that subject and grade. (o) This section does not require the administration of a fifth or eighth grade assessment instrument in a subject under Section 39.023(a) to a student enrolled in the fifth or eighth grade, as applicable, if the student: (1) is enrolled in a course in the subject intended for students above the student's grade level and will be administered an assessment instrument adopted or developed under Section 39.023(a) that aligns with the curriculum for the course in which the student is enrolled; or (2) is enrolled in a course in the subject for which the student will receive high school academic credit and will be administered an end-of-course assessment instrument adopted under Section 39.023(c) for the course. (p) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a student described by Subsection (o) may not be denied promotion on the basis of failure to perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument not required to be administered to the student in accordance with that subsection. Added by Acts 1999, 76th Leg., ch. 396, Sec. 2.12, eff. Sept. 1, 1999. Amended by: Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1058 (H.B. 2237), Sec. 9, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1058 (H.B. 2237), Sec. 17, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2009, 81st Leg., R.S., Ch. 895 (H.B. 3), Sec. 29, eff. June 19, 2009. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 91 (S.B. 1303), Sec. 7.006, eff. September 1, 2011. Acts 2011, 82nd Leg., R.S., Ch. 307 (H.B. 2135), Sec. 2, eff. June 17, 2011. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 211 (H.B. 5), Sec. 11, eff. June 10, 2013. Acts 2017, 85th Leg., R.S., Ch. 242 (H.B. 657), Sec. 1, eff. May 29, 2017. Sec. 28.0212. JUNIOR HIGH OR MIDDLE SCHOOL PERSONAL GRADUATION PLAN. (a) A principal of a junior high or middle school shall designate a school counselor, teacher, or other appropriate individual to develop and administer a personal graduation plan for each student enrolled in the junior high or middle school who: (1) does not perform satisfactorily on an assessment instrument administered under Subchapter B, Chapter 39; or (2) is not likely to receive a high school diploma before the fifth school year following the student's enrollment in grade level nine, as determined by the district. (b) A personal graduation plan under this section must: (1) identify educational goals for the student; (2) include diagnostic information, appropriate monitoring and intervention, and other evaluation strategies; (3) include an intensive instruction program described by Section 28.0213; (4) address participation of the student's parent or guardian, including consideration of the parent's or guardian's educational expectations for the student; and (5) provide innovative methods to promote the student's advancement, including flexible scheduling, alternative learning environments, on-line instruction, and other interventions that are proven to accelerate the learning process and have been scientifically validated to improve learning and cognitive ability. (c) Notwithstanding Subsection (b), a student's individualized education program developed under Section 29.005 may be used as the student's personal graduation plan under this section. (d) The agency shall establish minimum standards for a personal graduation plan under this section. (e) Repealed by Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 211, Sec. 78(b)(2), eff. September 1, 2014. (g) Repealed by Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 211 (H.B. 5), Sec. 78(b)(2), eff. September 1, 2014. Added by Acts 2003, 78th Leg., ch. 1212, Sec. 7, eff. June 20, 2003. Amended by: Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 763 (H.B. 3485), Sec. 3, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2007, 80th Leg., R.S., Ch. 1058 (H.B. 2237), Sec. 10, eff. June 15, 2007. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 211 (H.B. 5), Sec. 12(a), eff. June 10, 2013. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 211 (H.B. 5), Sec. 13(a), eff. June 10, 2013. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 211 (H.B. 5), Sec. 78(b)(2), eff. September 1, 2014. Acts 2013, 83rd Leg., R.S., Ch. 443 (S.B. 715), Sec. 19, eff. June 14, 2013. Sec. 28.02121. HIGH SCHOOL PERSONAL GRADUATION PLAN. (a) The agency, in consultation with the Texas Workforce Commission and the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board, shall prepare and make available to each school district in English and Spanish information t