Mission
The American Iron and Steel Institute’s Mission is to influence public policy, educate and shape public opinion in support of a strong, sustainable U.S. and North American steel industry committed to manufacturing products that meet society’s needs.

To achieve our mission, AISI:

Focuses on the advocacy of public policy issues central to the steel industry, issues where AISI can make an impact and issues where there is strong member alignment.

Informs and educates opinion leaders about the North American steel industry’s strategic importance to national and economic security.

Communicates the benefits that the industry’s technological advances are making to the health and safety of its workforce and to the environment.

Collects and provides industry data to policymakers, company personnel and the public regarding steel operations, production, energy efficiency, shipments, import/export levels and consumption.

Pursues technology advancements through Collaborative Research and Development.

Assists member companies in attracting and retaining talent.

Advances the competitive use of steel in traditional and growth markets.

The vision of the Institute and its members is for a sustainable North American steel industry strategically positioned for growth and innovation and as a leader in the global marketplace. The work of AISI and the Steel Market Development Institute (SMDI), a business unit of AISI, is focused on:

Making steel the material of choice in a growing number of applications, and to expand markets for steel.

Advancing the understanding of steel as a high performance, contemporary engineering material continuously being improved to meet new market demands.

Supporting and coordinating industry efforts to minimize CO 2 emissions through continuous development and deployment of new technologies.

emissions through continuous development and deployment of new technologies. Raising awareness about the fact that steel is the most recycled material in the world, more than all other materials combined.

As we pursue our mission, we aim to see: