Governor declares curfew in hopes of bringing order to Ferguson streets
FERGUSON • Some protesters defied a curfew that began at midnight this morning, as police tried to maintain calm on the city’s tense streets. Through the day and into the night Saturday, some protesters had vowed to ignore the curfew and be arrested.

Gov. Jay Nixon declared a state of emergency Saturday and ordered a curfew of midnight to 5 a.m. as a new peacekeeping strategy after protests the night before unraveled into looting and clashes with police.

The curfew has no expiration date. “If we’re going to achieve justice, we must have and maintain peace,” Nixon said. “We cannot allow the ill will of the few to undermine the goodwill of the many.”

Nixon’s order came during an awkward and contentious press conference Saturday hijacked by furious residents who lashed out with demands for justice for Michael Brown, an 18-year-old now known around the world after he was fatally shot by a Ferguson patrolman about noon Aug. 9.

The patrolman, Darren Wilson, 28, of Crestwood, is on administrative leave while parallel police and FBI investigations into Brown’s death march on and officials at various levels of government wage a delicate political fight to save face before an enraged public .

“It’s time to go home,” Missouri Highway Patrol Capt. Ronald S. Johnson said of the curfew Saturday. “It’s time to go home.”

Johnson, who was put in command of security in Ferguson by Nixon, did not say Saturday how police would enforce the curfew but promised softer tactics to defuse tension on the streets.

“We won’t enforce (the curfew) with trucks,” he said. “We won’t enforce with tear gas. We’ll communicate. We’ll talk.”

Friday night’s protests played out much like those the night before, with a party atmosphere along West Florissant, jammed parking lots, blaring horns and people riding on the hoods and roofs of cars. As the night wore on, the crowd grew younger, louder and aggressive. About midnight, near Ferguson Market and Liquor, where police say Brown swiped cigars and roughed up the owner just before his fatal confrontation with Wilson, agitated protesters battled police.

Johnson said at least two armored trucks pulled up, and three officers were hurt. Officers who found themselves trapped tossed flash-bang grenades, and Johnson said one officer who felt threatened made the decision to lob a can of tear gas. Three officers were injured in the conflict.

Police in full body armor and carrying shields then lined up across West Florissant in an hourlong standoff with protesters that included orders that protesters leave or face arrest.

Some St. Louis County officers said they felt slighted by St. Louis Police Chief Sam Dotson’s comments earlier in the week saying he didn’t support the county’s militarized police response.

Gabe Crocker, president of the county’s police union, also questioned Johnson’s style after Friday night’s violence because officials had characterized the Highway Patrol’s approach as gentler and more understanding of the community’s rage.

“It wasn’t peaceful, and there were officers injured,” Crocker said. “The Highway Patrol doesn’t want any documented incidents of looting or violence. They were critical of our use of tear gas and SWAT team and yet, last night, they were using tear gas and SWAT teams. I’m just looking for a little consistency.”

St. Louis County Police Jon Belmar has been silent about Dotson’s comments and Nixon’s transfer of authority.

Crocker also blamed Johnson for ordering police to ignore dozens of looters who ransacked stores along West Florissant after the confrontation with police.

Johnson acknowledged to NBC News on Saturday that he ordered officers to stand down, saying, “We lost some meat from a store, we lost some alcohol from a store, things that can be replaced, but we didn’t lose a life that we can’t replace.”

Kizzie Davis, owner of the Ferguson Burger Bar, which stayed open until 1 a.m. Saturday, said police should have done more to protect businesses. Her bar was spared any damage, though stores on both sides were hit.

“It’s like they had given up by the end of the night,” she said. “They tried a little to protect us.”

This week, Nixon stripped peacekeeping authority in Ferguson from Belmar after three nights of clashes with police. The decision handed Johnson the tricky task of restoring calm in Ferguson while protecting people’s constitutional right to assemble, protest and voice demands for justice in the case.

The FBI brought an additional 40 agents to Ferguson to flood the Canfield Green apartment complex where Brown was killed. They were knocking on doors searching for witnesses to the shooting, Johnson said Saturday.

Federal authorities opposed the release of surveillance video that showed Brown shoplifting Swisher Sweets cigars from a Ferguson convenience store shortly before he was shot, fearing the release of the video would incite more violence.

Ferguson Police Chief Thomas Jackson said federal investigators urged him not to release the video but he said he felt obligated to because, with Brown being the only suspect in the robbery, that investigation is finished and thus is an open record. Asked about criticism the video’s release could have inflamed tension, Jackson said, “If they’re trying to use this piece of evidence to justify the violence, then I think that’s weak.”

Jackson said he met with community leaders and will enroll his officers in diversity training.

Also Saturday, St. Louis County Prosecutor Robert McCulloch said that a grand jury will begin hearing evidence in the Brown shooting case next week.

“We are doing it as we go along” rather than wait to present an entire body of evidence to grand jury, McCulloch said.

In Saturday’s press conference, Nixon dodged questions about whether he had the authority to remove McCulloch from the investigation.

U.S. Rep. William Lacy Clay, D-St. Louis, however, said that while he tipping his hat to law enforcement for “toning it down, for pulling it back” in Ferguson, he questioned the prospect for justice in St. Louis County in a case that has become the America’s new narrative for race relations with law enforcement.

“You’re not going to get a fair trial in St. Louis County with this scenario,” Clay said.

On Saturday night, police stood guard in front of several businesses along West Florissant Avenue. Political groups, including members of the New Black Panther Party, formed a human shield between police and protesters. Earlier in the day, a biker gang showed its support by cruising through Ferguson’s streets.

As night took hold, lightning, thunder and steady rain sent demonstrators to the QuikTrip that was torched by looters six days earlier. People crowded under the canopies over the gas pumps to talk and stay dry.

And as the new midnight curfew closed in, Brown’s supporters marched on, crying out for justice.

Nicholas J.C. Pistor, Nancy Cambria, Jeremy Kohler, Paul Hampel, Chuck Raasch and Steve Giegerich, all of the Post-Dispatch, contributed to this report.