President Names 14 to Advisory Committee on Trade Policy and Negotiations

Sandler, Travis & Rosenberg Trade Report

President Obama has announced his intention to appoint the following individuals as members of the Advisory Committee for Trade Policy and Negotiations, most of whom are already serving in that capacity.

Jill Appell – past president of the National Pork Producers Council and the Illinois Pork Producers Association, member of the Illinois Attorney General’s Advisory Committee, member of the Department of Agriculture’s Agricultural Technical Advisory Committee for Trade of Animals and Animal Products

C. Fred Bergsten – senior fellow and director emeritus of the Peterson Institute for International Economics, former assistant secretary of the Treasury for international affairs, former assistant for international economic affairs to the National Security Council

Bill Frenzel – guest scholar at the Brookings Institution, former member of the U.S. House of Representatives, co-chairman of the Center for Strategic Tax Reform, the Bretton Woods Committee and the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget

Leo W. Gerard – international president of United Steelworkers, member of the AFL-CIO’s Executive Committee and chair of its Public Policy Committee, co-chairman of the BlueGreen Alliance and a founder of Apollo Alliance

Joseph T. Hansen – president of the United Food and Commercial Workers Union, president of Union Network International, vice president of the AFL-CIO and chair of its International Affairs Committee

James P. Hoffa – general president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters

Sandra Kennedy – president of the Retail Industry Leaders Association, former director of the Leadership Dialogue Series for Accenture and former senior vice president of membership services for the National Retail Federation

David H. Long – CEO and chairman of Liberty Mutual Insurance Group Inc. and member of the Business Roundtable

Wade Randlett – CEO of the transportation fuels division of General Biofuels and co-founder of Technology Network

Matthew Rubel – senior advisor at TPG Capital, chairman of the Footwear Distributors and Retailers of America, former chairman, president and CEO of Collective Brands Inc., former CEO of Cole Haan, former executive vice president of J. Crew Group

David H. Segura – CEO of VisionIT, member of the Information Technology Senior Management Forum and a founding architect and former vice chair of the Hispanic IT Executive Council

Dean C. Garfield – president and CEO of the Information Technology Industry Council, former executive vice president and chief strategic officer for the Motion Picture Association of America, former vice president of legal affairs at the Recording Industry Association of America

Harold McGraw III – chairman and previous president and CEO of McGraw-Hill Financial, chairman of the International Chamber of Commerce, the Emergency Committee for American Trade and the U.S. Council for International Business

Bob Stallman – president of the American Farm Bureau Federation and previously president of the Texas Farm Bureau