#StandWithDan Fact Check: HB 77

FACT CHECK: Put Alaska First PAC Ad: HB 77 & Hunting

Adam Peterson, of Anchorage, featured in Put Alaska First PAC’s ad “Never Forget” claims that Dan Sullivan’s efforts to help pass HB 77 will restrict his ability to hunt in Alaska:

"To be able to hunt in places like that is what Alaska is all about. But if Dan Sullivan gets his way, that all could change. You see Sullivan came up with this plan to give the government more power to take these public lands away with no input for you and me. I’ve hunted, these lands, I’m going to hunt these lands with my boys, and I’m never going to give it up." [YouTube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hlTzVjERXys&feature=youtu.be Accessed 5/19/14]

FACTS:

Both articles referenced in the ad “Never Forget” make NO reference to HB77 restricting hunting access

HB 77 as written does not restrict Alaskans’ access to state lands whatsoever.

HB 77 has no connection with the Alaska Department of Fish and Game’s regulatory authority.

HB 77 would not impact an individual’s right to moose hunt

Timeline/Dan’s Involvement with HB 77:

Dan Sullivan was Alaska’s Department of Natural Resources Commissioner (DNR) from December 2010 to September 2013. Early on in his tenure, Sullivan identified a growing backlog of DNR permits and authorizations. Working with other state resource agencies, Sullivan instituted a comprehensive strategy to reduce red tape and make the state’s overall permitting process more timely, efficient and certain. As a result, his department reduced a backlog of 2,500 state permits and authorizations by 40 percent.

Regulatory and statutory reforms were part of this comprehensive strategy. The Alaska Legislature passed several statutory changes during the 2012 and 2013 legislative sessions to further improve the state’s permitting system while protecting the environment.

HB 77 was part of this larger permitting reform strategy and was introduced during the 2013 Legislative session to increase the efficiency of DNR’s land and water-use authorization process.

Background on HB 77:

HB 77 was introduced by Governor Sean Parnell in 2013. The bill sought to improve DNR’s timeliness and efficiency in issuing land and water use authorizations. The bill focused on agency process and did not seek changes in environmental standards or laws protecting Alaska’s fish and wildlife habitat.