Gambling's value to Florida debated
A group representing the commercial casino industry says gambling is big business in Florida, even though the state ranks in the lower half of 23 states documented.

The American Gaming Association says Florida's pari-mutuel casinos fueled $1.2 billion of economic activity in 2013, and it all comes from South Florida: Broward and Miami-Dade counties are the only areas that can offer slots by law. The AGA commissioned a study by Oxford Economics, the research arm of the university in London, on gambling's economic effect.

The study notes that the casinos at South Florida's dog tracks, horse tracks and jai-alai frontons employed 3,452 and generated $358 million for the state last year. The $1.2 billion figure comes from wages, taxes, revenues and ancillary spending.

The AGA figures don't include revenues from the state's biggest player, the Seminole Tribe of Florida. The tribe earned $2.1 billion from gambling in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2014. It paid about $230 million to the state, and the Seminoles employ more than 10,000.

The AGA has been on a "Get to Know Gaming" campaign this year and released a national report in the fall saying commercial casinos fuel a $240 billion gambling industry that supports 1.7 million jobs and generates $38 billion a year in taxes. The AGA is now breaking down the figures state by state, and Florida's racino revenues are No. 17 in gambling generated revenue and No. 16 in state tax revenue of the 23 states that have casinos or racinos.

“This study shows that gaming is driving big results in Florida,” AGA CEO Geoff Freeman said. “However, our future success depends on strong partnerships with policymakers that allow us to innovate, reinvest and create more jobs.”

John Sowinski, president of No Casinos Inc., says that the revenues generated don't really have an effect on the state and that gambling is a "parasitic" business, meaning that the money spent on slots and casino restaurants would merely be spent elsewhere in the state — and the report doesn't take into account the social costs of gambling.

"The slot revenues run the state of Florida for about 18 hours," he says. "It is a blip on the screen, a rounding error.

"This is all to do about money that we'd spend anyway, and hopefully it's discretionary spending, not money that Floridians need to pay their bills. That's not really economic impact. It's redistribution backward."

Sowinski also questions repeated statements by pro-casino patrons who argue that Florida is the No. 4 state in gambling, so it's already here.

"First of all, we're No. 4 in population, so we're also probably the No. 4 state for shoe sales," he says. "But this shows why companies want to expand gambling here. It's an under-served market."

This is the first year the AGA has commissioned a report, and it's a year of uncertainty for the gambling industry in Florida.

The portion of the Seminoles' agreement with the state that allows the tribe to offer blackjack is expiring, and Gov. Rick Scott and the Seminoles were reportedly close to a deal in the spring. Full casino resort companies from Las Vegas and Asia are asking the Florida Legislature to expand gambling to include them; several Florida counties that currently don't offer slots have passed non-binding votes requesting more gambling; and the existing racinos want to offer blackjack and have the tax rate lowered from the current 35 percent on slot revenues.

But state legislative leaders aren't looking for expansion. Senate President Andy Gardiner said Florida's budget surplus means the state doesn't need the Seminoles' money for table games, for example. They also have pooh-poohed the idea of a gambling commission to set rules and take some control from the legislature. Thirty-six states have some form of commission.

Freeman spoke in Hollywood in January, telling the National Council of Legislators from Gaming States that the group "will be active in standing up for any misinformation put out there," and he named No Casinos as "spreading falsehoods about the industry."

"I guarantee Florida is one of those markets we'll be active in," he said. "No industry is as scrutinized as this one." He also spoke of cooperation with Indian tribes and others.

He described some gambling landscapes, like South Florida's, as a "circular firing squad," with pari-mutuels battling each other over the right to separate their racing businesses from their casinos and licensing privileges.

Nsortal@SouthFlorida.com