Leadership
Melanie Sloan is an attorney and is a nationally recognized expert on government ethics. From 2003 to 2014, Ms. Sloan served as the founding Executive Director of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (CREW), a government watchdog organization. Prior to starting CREW, she served as an Assistant United States Attorney in the District of Columbia from 1998 to 2003, focusing on sexual assault and other violent crimes.

Before becoming a prosecutor, Ms. Sloan served as Minority Counsel for the House Judiciary Committee, working on criminal and racial justice issues for Ranking Member John Conyers (D-MI). Ms. Sloan also served as Counsel to the Crime Subcommittee of the House Judiciary Committee, chaired by then-Representative Charles Schumer (D-NY), and as Nominations Counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee under then-Chairman Joseph Biden (D-DE). Ms. Sloan earned her B.A. and J.D. from the University of Chicago and has published in the Yale Law and Policy Review and numerous other publications.

Frequently called upon by news programs to provide analysis, Ms. Sloan has appeared on shows including: NPR's All Things Considered and Morning Edition, CNN's The Situation Room, MSNBC's Hardball, Fox News, NBC Nightly News, CBS Evening News, ABC World News, 60 Minutes and The Daily Show. Ms. Sloan also provides insight to media across the country including: the New York Times, the Wall Street Journal, the Washington Post, USA Today, Politico, Huffington Post and the Daily Caller. She has been profiled in: Ms. Magazine, Time Magazine, Parade and Mother Jones.

Ms. Sloan was named one of Washington, DC’s Top Grassroots Lobbyists by The Hill for six years running and was profiled in O Magazine as part of the “O Power List.” Rolling Stone Magazine included her as one of “100 Agents of Change,” and the National Law Journal listed her as one of "Washington's Most Influential Women Lawyers.”

Ms. Sloan is a member of the American Law Institute where she sits on the Board of Advisers for the Project on Government Ethics, and the Members Consultative Group for the Project on Sexual and Gender-Based Misconduct on Campus. She is admitted to the District of Columbia and California Bars.

Contact Summer Strategies: info@summerstrategies.com