Gulfstream races 150 yards – with 3 horses in Miami-Dade
In the remote southeast corner of Gulfstream Park Racing & Casino — as far away from the mall and casino as you can get — fewer than 20 people watched three horses race for about five seconds Monday morning.

And that race could eventually result in another casino coming to Miami-Dade County.

That's because this corner of Gulfstream's property juts into Miami-Dade County. And by holding a race that begins and ends in Miami-Dade — even if it's just one race, 150 yards, with only three horses — Gulfstream could argue that this particular racing permit is a window into building a slot parlor in Miami-Dade County.

There's still plenty of lawyering and legislating to do, but Gulfstream officials confirmed they could attempt to set up a casino on their own, sell the permit to some other casino group or simply wait to see what shakes out in the Florida Legislature. Two years ago, destination casino companies asked for the state to expand gambling, but the bill died in committee.

Gulfstream president Tim Ritvo was in Hong Kong on business Monday and could not be reached. Tallahassee lawyer Marc Dunbar, whom Gulfstream employs to work with the state's regulators, is on vacation and also could not be reached. Dunbar made news in recent years by successfully getting state approval for pari-mutuel barrel racing in Gretna — which in turn brought a poker room to the northwest Florida venue.

Bob Jarvis, a Nova Southeastern University professor who is an expert on gambling issues, said Gulfstream's look at Miami-Dade, coupled with the introduction of a new ship to Bimini by Genting this month and the pending opening of a casino at Hialeah Park, shows gambling expansion is still not done in South Florida.

"It shows, at least in the minds of gambling operators, they have not yet fully saturated this market," Jarvis said. "On the other hand, they always need to find a way to compete and take whatever share of the pie they can get, and build on it by stealing from their competitors."

Gulfstream employees smiled and shook their heads as they tried to treat this race like any other. Employees set up a metal scaffold along the backstretch on Friday and on Monday morning, workers came to set up cameras that recorded the race, as per state requirements. Gulfstream also had to bring a generator to provide the power for the cameras.

The race started a historic day in South Florida racing. On Monday afternoon, Gulfstream debuted summer racing — putting it in competition against Calder Casino and Race Course in Miami Gardens for the first time. Calder has traditionally held summer racing without local competition.

Monday's short race was via a second permit Gulfstream owns, in the name of the Gulfstream Park Thoroughbred Aftercare Program license. That's a nonprofit organization, with the horsemen holding a contract to share in all revenues. Gulfstream previously held it as a quarter horse license, but converted it to a thoroughbred license.

Jarvis said Gulfstream's argument that it could offer gambling in Miami-Dade "certainly isn't far-fetched."

"It will obviously be up to the regulators to decide — and they've looked askance when there's been such things as barrel racing — so by comparison, this seems very reasonable," Jarvis said.

But he does expect lawsuits.

"Someone is going to challenge it. Either someone who is anti-gambling or a competitor who finds someone anti-gambling," he said.

"But assuming they've crossed all their T's and dotted their I's and nothing in their license that says contrary, I'd say Gulfstream has a good shot," Jarvis said.

nsortal@SouthFlorida.com