Report: S. Florida counties among only 6 statewide to be served by 4 Obamacare insurers in 2017
As the number of insurers willing to sell health plans on the Affordable Care Act marketplace shrinks further in 2017, consumers in the tri-county region will still have choices — unlike in most Florida counties.

Broward, Palm Beach and Miami-Dade counties are among just six counties in Florida that will have a choice of four insurance companies on the Obamacare exchange in 2017, according to projections in a new report by the Kaiser Family Foundation.

The report's authors caution that the projections are based on preliminary information that is likely to change when plans are finalized before 2017 enrollment begins on Nov. 1.

Most counties lost choices they had for 2017 when UnitedHealthcare, Humana and Aetna announced they were sharply curtailing the number of counties where they planned to offer "on-exchange" plans. Broward, Palm Beach and Miami-Dade counties each had six insurers offering plans in 2016.

If Kaiser's projections are correct, the other three Florida counties with four insurers would be Hillsborough, Pinellas and Polk, home to Tampa, St. Petersburg, and Sarasota, the report said. Four counties with urban populations would have access to just three insurers: Duval (Jacksonville), Volusia (Daytona Beach), Osceola (Kissimmee) and Pasco (New Port Richey).

CAPTION Get job advice through Challenger, Gray & Christmas’ free call-in Dec. 27 and 28; local help available at CareerSource agencies. Get job advice through Challenger, Gray & Christmas’ free call-in Dec. 27 and 28; local help available at CareerSource agencies. CAPTION Get job advice through Challenger, Gray & Christmas’ free call-in Dec. 27 and 28; local help available at CareerSource agencies. Get job advice through Challenger, Gray & Christmas’ free call-in Dec. 27 and 28; local help available at CareerSource agencies. CAPTION By Christmas, prices in Florida should be on par with what they were last year — $2.32 a gallon — if they continue falling at a rate of about a penny a day, travel club AAA said. By Christmas, prices in Florida should be on par with what they were last year — $2.32 a gallon — if they continue falling at a rate of about a penny a day, travel club AAA said. CAPTION South Florida workers can expect a raise of 3 percent, or higher if their skills are in demand. South Florida workers can expect a raise of 3 percent, or higher if their skills are in demand. CAPTION Several South Florida companies earned perfect scores for LGBTQ equality in workplace. Several South Florida companies earned perfect scores for LGBTQ equality in workplace. CAPTION LatinoJobsOnline has been set up by an executive recruiter to help employ Puerto Rico evacuees in Florida following Hurricane Maria. LatinoJobsOnline has been set up by an executive recruiter to help employ Puerto Rico evacuees in Florida following Hurricane Maria.

Counties that would be served by only two insurers include Orange, the state's fifth-most populous county with 1.15 million people and the cities of Orlando, Winter Park, and Lake Buena Vista. Seven other counties would have access to just two insurance companies.

That would leave 49 of Florida's 67 counties with just a single insurer: Florida Blue, affiliate of national insurance giant Blue Cross Blue Shield. Last year, both Florida Blue and UnitedHealthcare offered plans in all 67 counties.

Those projected to have just one Obamacare insurer next year include all counties surrounding the tri-county metro region: Monroe (encompassing the Keys), Collier, Hendry, Glades, Okeechobee and Martin. They also include Leon County, where the state capital is located, and Alachua, home of University of Florida.

The situation is similar across the United States, as the number of counties with just one provider would increase from 225 in 2016 to 974 — or 31 percent — in 2017, the report said.

Mark Cherry, principal analyst with health care industry analyst Decision Resources Group, said insurers prefer to offer plans in highly populated counties with multiple hospitals that they can leverage against each other in rate negotiations. "Rural counties with only one hospital are not worth the trouble for some insurers," he said.

Marketplace or "on-exchange" plans refer to those eligible for federal tax credits. In the tri-county region, 783,846 people signed up for on-exchange plans during the last enrollment period. Of those, 92 percent qualified for subsidies averaging $386 a month and paid an average $84 a month.

Cynthia Cox, lead author of the Kaiser study and associate director of health reform and private insurance studies for the foundation, said the South Florida market attracts multiple insurers because it fits the criteria for a healthy insurance pool.

"Nearly everyone who could be signing up are signing up," she said. "That's a good indication they are a good mix of healthy and sick people."

For 2017, Florida Blue, Molina and Ambetter have confirmed they will offer plans in the tri-county region. Humana and Cigna filed for approval from state insurance regulators to sell plans in the state. However, Humana has not revealed whether it will offer plans in South Florida, and Cox said Kaiser's study assumed Humana's continued participation without confirmation from the company.

On Tuesday, a Cigna spokesman confirmed the company will not offer on-exchange plans anywhere in the state next year. The company pulled out of the state prior to 2016, saying it had been victimized by organized fraud and abuse. But some analysts had expected the company to return in 2017.

"Cigna discontinued its participation on the Florida public marketplace exchange for 2016 because we had experienced an exponential increase in fraudulent and abusive care delivery practices," Cigna spokesman Joe Mondy said in an email. "We continue to see these issues and other volatility in the market."

Mondy said Cigna will continue to offer plans "off-exchange" (and ineligible for federal subsidies).

Cliff Eserman, an independent insurance broker based in Wilton Manors, said he's concerned that a single insurer with sole control of the market in many counties will find it too easy to increase prices. But because most on-exchange consumers pay a small percentage of the premium out of their own pockets, large increases would be passed along to the government and barely noticed by most consumers, he said.

In addition, a lack of competition creates no incentive to contract with independent doctor offices, "which tend to be more costly to an insurer," he said.

But Florida Blue says it has succeeded in the Obamacare market because it anticipated a large number of sick people would be seeking care after going without for a long period. As a result, the company offered a variety of plans, including "low-cost, high-value plans" designed for people new to the health insurance market, as well as 20 retail centers to help guide consumers through the system, a Florida Blue spokesman said.

Cherry and Cox said the "Blues" are able to remain as sole insurers in rural counties in Florida and the United States because Blue Cross Blue Shield was strong in the individual insurance market well before Obamacare was created.

Its continued dominance in those rural swaths is an indication of the degree to which Obamacare struggles in one of its original missions: "to encourage competition in states that have lacked it," Cox said.

rhurtibise@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4071