City Council: No medical marijuana dispensaries in Boca Raton for another year
Medical marijuana dispensaries will have to wait another year before rolling into Boca Raton, the City Council decided late Tuesday.

In a unanimous move, the Council extended the city's 12-month moratorium on medical marijuana centers until October 2016. The moratorium halts cultivation, processing, distributing or selling marijuana or "related activities."

In October 2014, the Council unanimously passed Palm Beach County's first municipal moratorium on medical marijuana dispensaries. The vote came one week before Florida's medical marijuana amendment was defeated.

Although the amendment to legalize medical marijuana in Florida failed, specific marijuana dispensary organizations are authorized to operate in the state of Florida under the Compassionate Medical Cannabis Act of 2014.

For that reason, city employees on Tuesday recommended the Council extend the moratorium for another year to allow for more time to research the impact such a dispensary would have on the city.

The city's code does not currently contain land-development regulations that govern the use of property for medical marijuana dispensaries.

The additional year will allow employees to research, study and analyze the potential impacts of marijuana dispensaries on things such as traffic congestion and demand for city services, said Tamashbeen Rahman, senior planner for the city's Development Services Department.

Employees also will assess what zoning categories are best for medical marijuana dispensaries and how many parking spaces should be required.

Before voting, Deputy Mayor Robert S. Weinroth pointed out that much of the criteria for the extension were the basis for passing the moratorium a year ago. He asked Rahman if city employees had accomplished their goals in the past 12 months.

The answer was "No."

Mayor Susan Haynie said it would be prudent to have the moratorium in place while the Florida Department of Health decides which nurseries in Florida will become dispensaries. Rahman said a decision from the health department is expected within the year.

On Oct. 27, during the first of two public hearings on the matter, two residents came forward to oppose the temporary ban while another spoke in favor of the ordinance.

No one from the public commented on the matter at Tuesday's meeting.

emiller@tribune.com, 561-243-6531 or Twitter @EmilyBethMiller