Anti-medical marijuana group releases first ad of 2016
In its opening salvo of the 2016 campaign, Drug Free Florida claims the medical marijuana proposal on the November ballot is "still a scam to legalize pot."

The group, which successfully stopped a similiar amendment in 2014, released its first ad Monday under the banner of the 'Vote No on 2' campaign. It ties the proposed amendment to the permissive medical marijuana law in California.

Titled "Search," the video features a man snarkily commenting as he conducts an Internet search on California's dispensaries for medical pot. "Look at these names – seriously? Kush Mart?" he says. "They aren't even trying."

The video starts with a voice asking whether the 2016 amendment had fixed any of the loopholes it says made the 2014 amendment "basically pot for anyone, any time, anywhere."

While the voice never answers its own question, the group behind the proposal said the new amendment differs from the 2014 version in several significant ways.

"The biggest difference is we changed the definition of debilitating medical condition," said Ben Pollara, the campaign manager of People United for Medical Marijuana.

Florida voters overwhelmingly support legalization of medical marijuana, pollsters said Wednesday, and most also favor legalization of recreational pot use. Florida voters overwhelmingly support legalization of medical marijuana, pollsters said Wednesday, and most also favor legalization of recreational pot use. SEE MORE VIDEOS

The list of conditions that would qualify now include cancer, epilepsy, glaucoma, HIV/AIDS, post-traumatic stress disorder, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Crohn's disease, Parkinson's disease and multiple sclerosis. And a clause which allows for marijuana for similar diseases, now says they must be of the same "kind or class" as the listed ailments.

Both the 2016 version of the amendment and the 2014 one were stricter than California law, which allows medical marijuana for anorexia, chronic pain and migraines. Further, California users are not required to register with the state -- a significant difference from the proposed Florida amendment.

"California has probably the worst medical marijuana law in the country," Pollara said. "California was the first medical marijuana state, but it was really an outlier. There is not a single medical marijuana state in the country that looks like California."

Now, after 20 years of a largely unregulated medical marijuana industry, California will be putting in place rules for dispensaries and growers, which will take affect in 2018.

"We use the California reference because it's a comparably sized state, and their statewide referendum has similar loopholes and exemptions [as] Florida's proposed ballot," said Christina Johnson, spokesperson for Vote No on 2. "No doubt that Florida's estimated 400,000 users and 2,000 pot shops will make Florida the California of the East."

Those numbers come from Florida's Office of Demographic and Economic Research, which took the numbers from Colorado's medical marijuana program, scaled them to Florida, and estimated the number of dispensaries at 1,993 and the number of medical marijuana users at 440,552.

Last week, a Quinnipiac poll found that 80 percent of Floridians supported medical marijuana, with a slight majority – 56 percent – supporting legalizing possession of small amounts for recreational purposes. While the same polling firm in July 2014 found 88 percent supported medical marijuana, the initiative failed to get the 60 percent of the vote needed to pass. Just 57.6 percent of voters were in favor.

Drug Free Florida mounted tough opposition to the amendment in 2014, backed by $5.5 million from conservative megadonor Sheldon Adelson. According to the latest campaign finance reports, the group had less than $40,000 in the bank as of April 30.

But in 2014, Adelson didn't make his first contribution until May.

"I have been expecting this from Day One. They spent almost $7 million to defeat us in 2014," Pollara said. "I cannot imagine the people who spent that kind of money are going to sit back and watch it happen in round two."

dsweeney@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4605 or Twitter @Daniel_Sweeney