Video shows Lake Worth activist berating Gov. Rick Scott at Starbucks
Gov. Rick Scott walked into a Gainesville Starbucks and got an earful from a former Lake Worth city commissioner and self-described anarchist.

The governor left without his drink.

Cara Jennings, 39, said Wednesday she stopped at the coffee shop to do some work on her computer and joked that her encounter was "divine intervention."

Jennings wasn't shy when she saw Scott. Another customer captured her shouting down Scott on a video that quickly went viral.

"You're an a------!" she yelled at the two-term Republican governor, telling him he "doesn't care about working people."

"You cut Medicaid, so I couldn't get Obamacare," Jennings said. "You don't care about working people. You should be ashamed to show your face around here."

Carline Jean / Sun Sentinel Cara Jennings was a Lake Worth city Commissioner back in 2006. Cara Jennings was a Lake Worth city Commissioner back in 2006. (Carline Jean / Sun Sentinel) (Carline Jean / Sun Sentinel)

Scott responded that he had created a "million jobs," but it didn't appease Jennings, who went on to call him an "embarrassment to our state."

At a bill signing ceremony Wednesday in Boca Raton, Scott said he walked out of the Starbucks because Jennings "wasn't somebody you could talk to." He said he's probably shaken hands with more than 400,000 people in his five years as governor without incident.

In a statement, Melissa Sellers, a spokeswoman for the governor and his former chief of staff, went further, saying "people with radical views tend to not like civil debate."

"It's a free country, but it's not at all surprising that an anarchist prefers shouting over conversation," she said.

Jennings said she's upset because Scott signed a bill that bans state funding for clinics that perform abortions. She said she tried in the past to meet with Scott on immigration issues, but her requests were denied.

"He refuses to address the issue that women are upset about his efforts to defund Planned Parenthood," Jennings said. "Wanting safe, reliable health care for women is not a radical idea."

The law will make it harder for women to access birth control, preventive screenings and sexually transmitted disease treatment, Jennings said.

Because of the new law, a program that provides 2,000 teenagers in Palm Beach County with clinical exams, birth control and sexually transmitted disease counseling and treatment could be in jeopardy, along with money for breast and cervical cancer screenings for low-income women in Broward County, said Laura Goodhue, executive director of the Florida Alliance of Planned Parenthood Affiliates.

State funding of abortions was already prohibited in Florida.

The state only provided about $100,000 in funding to Planned Parenthood, and the budget includes $5 million for preventive health services at health departments and charitable clinics, Scott said, adding that he is "pro-life."

As for expansion of Medicaid, Scott said Wednesday the federal government should fund all of the program instead of the 90 percent it is offering under Obamacare.

Jennings has a history of political activism. She served on the Lake Worth City Commission from 2006 to 2010 and made headlines for her anarchist political beliefs. While in office, she was arrested in 2009 on a charge of resisting an officer without violence for refusing to move across the street of the Israeli Consulate during a protest in Miami.

During her campaign, she ran on a platform of stopping code crackdowns that resulted in evictions of immigrants living in Lake Worth. She pushed for an ordinance that would allow residents to keep backyard chickens.

The governor has been known to frequent Starbucks during his travels. In 2014, he stopped at a Starbucks in downtown Fort Lauderdale. He ordered a chai tea with soy milk. Scott said he likes to add cinnamon and the sweetener Truvia.

Asked what she likes to drink at Starbucks, Jennings said, "A cup of feminism."

sswisher@tribpub.com, 561-243-6634 or @SkylerSwisher