Planned Parenthood sues state over investigation
TALLAHASSEE The battle over Planned Parenthood in Florida is heading to court.

The organization, which has 16 clinics in the state that perform abortions, filed a lawsuit in Leon County Circuit Court Monday to stop the state from pursuing any action against three clinics it found to be in violation of their licenses.

Julie Gallagher, the attorney who filed the lawsuit, said there were no violations because these clinics, which have licenses to only perform abortions in the first trimester, carried out the procedure in the first 14 weeks after the woman's last menstrual period, which counterintuitively is the definition of the first 12 weeks of pregnancy. The definition was agreed upon by the state Agency for Health Care Administration and Planned Parenthood in 2006.

"AHCA knew exactly what the language meant for the last nine years," Gallagher said.

But in a recent investigation, AHCA defined the first 12 weeks of pregnancy as just that — 12 weeks, not 14. So any abortions performed at clinics with only a first-trimester license that fell within those two weeks was considered a violation. The investigation found 32 such violations in St. Petersburg, Fort Myers, and Naples.

The statewide investigations took place at the behest of Gov. Rick Scott after secretly taped videos showed national Planned Parenthood executives and doctors discussing the transfer of fetal tissue for medical research. The videos show these Planned Parenthood employees discussing the price for such transfer, which caused widespread outrage.

The investigation found no Florida Planned Parenthood clinic that engaged in the practice.

Selling fetal tissue is illegal under federal law, but donors of such tissue are legally allowed to charge for transportation and storage.

"Planned Parenthood has come under intense scrutiny nationally because of those videotapes," Gallagher said.

Gallagher is not only Planned Parenthood's lawyer in the lawsuit — for four years during the first term of former Gov. Jeb Bush, she was the general counsel for AHCA, the very organization now investigating Planned Parenthood.

"I don't remember any concerns on rules and regulations concerning abortion clinics while I was there," she said.

AHCA has not yet taken any action against the clinics it found to be in violation of the rules, but such action could include "fines, actions against the license, [or] a moratorium on procedures," according to Gallagher.

dsweeney@sun-sentinel.com, 954-356-4605 or Twitter @Daniel_Sweeney