State may pay school districts to require uniforms
Skinny jeans and graphic T-shirts. Or collared shirts and khaki pants.

For students in elementary or middle schools, fashion statements could be a thing of the past. The standard preppy look — polos and khakis — could become the new normal under a plan that would pay schools districts big bucks to push the clean-cut look.

But kids, it's not like state legislators didn't think hard about this.

Here's their reasoning: A school uniform policy "encourages students to express their individuality through personality and academic achievements, not outward appearances." It also enables students to "focus on academics, not fashion, because they are able to project a neat, serious, studious image."

A bill, unanimously approved by a House education subcommittee, would allocate $10 million so school districts that adopted standardized dress codes could receive up to $10 per student. That could mean more than $1.4 million for Broward County and $1.1 million for Palm Beach County.

Students would have to wear solid polo shirts with slacks, shorts or skirts, the standard attire for schools that now require uniforms. Parents could opt out for religious reasons or if their child has a disability.

The proposal affects students through the eighth grade but would not affect high schools, where students have been most resistant to uniforms, nor charter schools.

Supporters say uniforms reduce discipline problems because children don't get teased for the way they dress. They also say uniforms are affordable, with most polo shirts costing about $7.

Right now, seven school districts, all in central or north Florida, have countywide uniform dress code policies. South Florida districts leave it up to individual schools to decide. Broward and Palm Beach county school districts don't keep records on how many schools require uniforms, but anecdotally say it's prevalent in elementary schools, less popular in middle schools and rare in high schools.

Addison Mizner Elementary in Boca Raton has had a uniform policy since 2002. It's worked well and has been embraced by parents, Principal Kelly Burke said.

"I think it focuses the children on academics," she said. "It cuts down on discipline. There's no competition. Everyone is equal. No one knows who is wealthier than the others."

Like most schools, Addison Mizner keeps a supply of uniforms to provide to families that can't afford them. And if a student shows up without the proper attire, the school gives the child a uniform to wear that day.

Although Miami-Dade doesn't require schools to have uniforms, they've become the standard, even in high schools . School advisory councils at all but two of Miami-Dade's more than 300 district-run schools have approved a uniform dress code, Miami-Dade administrator Sally Alayon said.

"We've seen a lot of school spirit and collegiality," she said. "It gives students a sense of belonging and it's built self-esteem."

The research on school uniforms has been mixed. A 2013 University of Nevada-Reno study of one school that had recently switched to uniforms found discipline referrals dropped 10 percent during the first year of uniforms, and there was a 63 percent reduction in police referrals. Gang-related activities, fights, graffiti and property damage also declined, the study found.

But several other studies over the years have concluded uniforms have no impact on discipline, self-esteem or academic performance. A 2005 University of Missouri-Columbia study found they may even have a "small detrimental effect" on reading scores, the publication Education Week reported.

Not all schools see the need for uniforms. Students don't wear them at Virginia Shuman Young Elementary in Fort Lauderdale, consistently one of Broward's top-performing schools. The school offers a Montessori program, which encourages students to be self-sufficient, and that includes picking out their own clothes, PTA president Lynda Davey said.

"There's no telling how this would ultimately be received if there's a financial incentive," she said. "But I think the freedom of expression and independent decision-making are really important to the Montessori environment.''

Broward School Board member Robin Bartleman said some parents strongly support dress codes while others adamantly oppose them. She thinks those decisions are best left up to schools and is offended by the proposal to pay school districts for requiring uniforms.

"They know we're strapped for cash. If they have the money for that, they should just give us the money for children, period," Bartleman said. "Studies show teachers are the most important factor in a child's education. Why don't they give us money for teachers? It's ridiculous."

Palm Beach County School Board member Erica Whitfield supports uniform dress policies. Her daughter attends South Olive Elementary in Lake Worth, which has a standardized dress code.

"You don't have to spend time prioritizing what your child's going to wear. You just get dressed and go," she said.

Whitfield said she's hesitant to force it on schools, believing they have enough mandates already.

"But if there's money, it might be worth it to us," she said. "We will give it full consideration."

stravis@tribpub.com or 561-243-6637 or 954-425-1421