Chris Smith: GOP misses big opportunity on voting
We all are still haunted by the visions of the 2012 elections in Florida: Long lines, frustrated voters and late-night talk show jokes — again. In 2011 the Republican-led Legislature, over the objections of Democrats, passed sweeping elections reform which many have pointed to as the impetus for — once again —- our national election shame.

At the beginning of this year's legislative session I couldn't help but say "I told you so." But as the Republicans announced a willingness to revisit the changes they had passed and "reform" the elections system, I thought that at least out of shame the Legislature would fix everything it had broken in the previous years. This would be their opportunity to be magnanimous and encourage people to vote.

However in looking at Senate Bill 600 — the Republican rewrite of election laws — once again we have an opportunity lost.

This bill mandates only two things that will address concerns from the last election. It allows persons to correct an absentee ballot if they did not sign it and requires an extra two hours a day for early voting. Everything else in this bill is discretionary. Under SB 600, Broward, Dade, Palm Beach, Duval, Orange, Hillsboro, Jackson, Franklin, Dixie and all the rest of our 67 counties can do exactly what they did in 2012, with the exception of just two more hours per day for early voting.

Nothing else is mandated. Nothing else is changed.

Attempts by Democrats to fix this bill by allowing supervisors to place early voting sites anywhere they can put election day sites, mandating more voting locations, mandating more days, mandating fewer words in the amendments and mandating more early voting days were all rejected by the Republicans.

More than the opportunity lost, Republicans in the Legislature have found the need to further restrict an individual's ability to vote.

Placed in SB 600 now is a restriction on people getting assistance at the polls. Nonpartisan, Hispanic, Black and even religious groups are now limited on how many people they can assist at the polls.

Campaigns are now limited as to how many ballots they can turn in on behalf of voters who contact them. Many people in our communities routinely called groups and campaigns to turn ballots in on their behalf.

Now those organizations can only turn in ballots for two people.

Just for good measure the Republicans in the Legislature added a provision that allowed an appointed Secretary of State to fine and discipline Supervisors of Elections – Constitutional officers directly elected by the people – throughout the state.

I came into this legislative session thinking that my Republican brethren had learned the lessons of the past.

But the final view of Senate Bill 600 just leaves me with another sense of déjà vu all over again, and another opportunity lost.

Chris Smith is the Senate Democratic Leader for the 2012-2104 legislative term. His district includes Fort Lauderdale and parts of Broward County.