Lawmakers pass $429 million tax-cut package
TALLAHASSEE — Florida is shipping more than $400 million back to its citizens.

The House and Senate passed a $428.9-million tax-cut bill Monday morning that would lower the cost of cell phone and cable bills and offer a 10-day tax holiday on school supplies, beginning Aug. 7. During that time, purchases of clothes under $100, school supplies under $15 and the first $750 of the price of a computer will be tax free.

Other breaks include a yearlong sales tax holiday on college textbooks, the removal of sales taxes on gun club membership fees, and a $60,000 cap on taxes for boat repairs. Colleges will receive an exemption for the purchase of aviation fuel, and businesses will see cuts in the form of extended enterprise zones and tax credits for pollution cleanup and research and development.

The tax cut for cell phone and cable service would save Floridians about $20 a year on a $100 monthly cell phone bill but it alone would cost the state more than $200 million a year.

While Rep. Matt Gaetz, R-Fort Walton Beach, called it the "crown jewel" of the tax-cut package, Democrats said the savings were relatively insignificant.

"There's so much else that we could do with that money in this state," said Rep. Joe Geller, D-Aventura. "It's just not worth it."

Citing pressing needs in education and health care, House Minority Leader Mark Pafford, D-West Palm Beach, said he couldn't support the tax cuts.

"It's $400 million worth of money that the state is going to voluntarily give back. Part of that is tied up in rhetoric on smaller government and lower taxes," Pafford said. "There's a time and a place for that, but right now the need in Florida is critical."

The House's original version of the tax cut package called for just a three-day back-to-school tax holiday, along with a tax holiday for small businesses. But the Senate removed the small business tax holiday in favor of the 10-day back-to-school idea, the longest the Legislature has passed. It will cost the state $55.4 million.

The Senate also put a $60,000 cap on taxes for boat repairs, so any job that cost over $1 million would not be further taxed.

"I think it is something for the wealthy and the very wealthy and does nothing for the little guy," said Sen. Geraldine Thompson, D-Orlando. She and Jeff Clemens, D-Lake Worth, were the only two senators to vote against the cuts.

In supporting the cut, Sen. Jack Latvala, R-Clearwater, cited the depressed economic conditions of Riviera Beach and the boat repair industry there. "One of their biggest industries is a company that does yacht repairs," Latvala said. "It's about building up an industry … it's about jobs."

The cuts are far less than the nearly $700 million called for during the regular legislative session. But the need for additional health care funding has cut into the Legislature's ability to cut taxes. The federal government may not give Florida as much money as it has in the past for a program called the Low-Income Pool, or LIP. That program pays hospitals that treat people who cannot afford medical care.

The budget process is now nearly complete. The House and Senate still have to iron out a few differences, especially in education.

Lawmakers are expected to produce a budget Tuesday.

dsweeney@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4605 or Twitter @Daniel_Sweeney

WHAT'S AFFECTED

Communications Services Tax: This is a tax on the use of cell phones, cable and satellite TV. It appears on monthly bills. The rates will be lowered so that on each $100 monthly bill, a consumer would save $1.73, or about $20 over a year.

Agriculture-related exemptions: This adds irrigation equipment to the list of farm supplies that are sales-tax free, and adds repair of farm equipment as well.

Back-to-school holiday – 10 days: The sales-tax holiday takes place Aug. 7 to Aug. 16. It includes all clothes less than $100, school supplies less than $15, and the first $750 of a personal computer.

College textbooks – 1 year: Beginning on July 1, 2015, all college textbooks will be sales-tax free for one year.

Gun club membership fee: This creates a permanent sales tax exemption for gun club admissions and membership fees.

Boat repairs – The tax on such repairs can not exceed $60,000:

Motor vehicles/military deployed overseas: An active-duty member of the armed forces who buys a vehicle overseas and uses it for at least six months can import and title the vehicle tax free.

School concessions: Food and drinks sold by school support organizations such as booster clubs are exempt from sales tax if the organization paid sales tax on the food and drinks before reselling them.

Brownfield credits: One year increase to cover backlog: Brownfields are land polluted by hazardous substances. Corporations are granted a $5 million corporate income tax credit each year to clean the sites. But in an effort to clean up a backlog of sites, the credit will increase to $21.6 million for the next year only.

Research and development credits: Manufacturing, life sciences, information technology, aviation and aerospace, homeland security and defense, cloud information technology, marine sciences, materials science, and nanotechnology businesses can get a corporate income tax credit of up to 10 percent of the total cost of the research.

Higher Ed Exemption: Flight schools and colleges can get a sales-tax exemption on aviation fuel.

Enterprise Zone Extension: Florida's Enterprise Zone program allows areas in need of redevelopment to be declared enterprise zones. The designation comes with some sales and property tax exemptions. The program will be discontinued Dec. 31, 2015, but under this enterprise zone extension, businesses will be allowed to benefit from already-declared enterprise zones for three more years.

Appropriations: Slight changes in tax rates and tax holidays mean $300,000 in additional tax cuts.