Mayo: Some sex offenders get life, Epstein gets Paris
When it comes to South Florida sex offenders with a penchant for minors, the federal government usually drives a hard bargain.

For instance: Brian Martens, a Palm Beach County man who had nude photos of children on his computer and cut a deal to serve 10 years in federal prison. Or Eric Beasley, 25, a former biology teacher from Broward who expects a 20-year federal sentence after recently pleading guilty to repeat sexual encounters with a 14-year-old student.

Or James "Red" Mozie, who specialized in recruiting underage teen girls for his Oakland Park brothel known as "The Boom Boom Room." Federal prosecutors recommended life in prison after a jury convicted him in 2011, precisely what a judge handed down as Mozie's sentence.

But when it came to wealthy, well-connected Palm Beach financier Jeffrey Epstein, the feds went all soft.

Last decade, Epstein struck a secretive plea deal with federal prosecutors to settle allegations that he hired underage teen girls for massages and sex at his Palm Beach mansion. He pleaded guilty in 2008 to a single state felony charge of soliciting prostitution from a minor, served 13 months of an 18-month sentence at the Palm Beach County jail (sometimes he was allowed to make "work-release" trips to his office) and registered as a Florida sex offender.

He also was assured that the feds wouldn't prosecute him or "co-conspirators" for any related crimes.

The treatment seemed lenient, to say the least. Especially because about 40 girls told investigators about encounters that ranged from topless massages that ended with Epstein masturbating to forced intercourse.

The case hasn't gone quietly into the past.

Epstein, 62, has settled numerous civil suits with alleged victims, but now some want more than money.

They want an explanation from the feds about the plea deal. They want to know why Epstein escaped with mere months of imprisonment, not years or decades. They want to know why a hedge-fund manager who hobnobbed with the rich and powerful didn't get the same stern treatment as the guy who ran the Boom Boom Room.

Using provisions of a victims rights act, four alleged victims are suing the federal government. And one woman, a 31-year-old mother of three known as Jane Doe No. 3, has made sworn allegations in recent court filings that Prince Andrew of Great Britain and celebrity attorney Alan Dershowitz (who later was on Epstein's legal team) had sex with her when she was under 18 and traveled the world with Epstein.

Prince Andrew and Buckingham Palace have denied claims of any illegal conduct. Dershowitz has adamantly denied all the claims and filed a libel suit against the woman's attorneys, including Brad Edwards, of Fort Lauderdale. Edwards has filed a libel countersuit against Dershowitz in Broward Circuit Court.

There's no telling where all this might lead, besides the front pages of the British and New York tabloids.

Epstein apparently has gone on with his charmed life. On Florida's sex offender registry, Epstein lists five residences: Palm Beach, New York, Paris, New Mexico and the Virgin Islands.

Meanwhile, Mozie of the Boom Boom Room has only one: a cell in the maximum-security Tucson Federal Penitentiary in Arizona. For life.

Epstein's former teen workers deserve a fuller explanation for the disparity.

mmayo@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4508.