Wasserman Schultz slams Marco Rubio, says Republicans afraid to stand up to bigots in their own party
Debbie Wasserman Schultz said Friday that U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio, a possible presidential candidate, too often chooses political expedience and doesn't fight for the middle class.

The Weston congresswoman and chairwoman of the Democratic National Committee made her comments to reporters Friday in Fort Lauderdale — as Rubio gathered his "Team Marco" in Miami Beach amid stronger and stronger hint's he'll seek the Republican presidential nomination in 2016.

From Wasserman Schultz:

"Marco Rubio needs to first figure out which way the wind is blowing when it comes to committing on his position on any given issue. He was for immigration reform and a pathway to citizenship before he was against it. It is really unfortunate that he has chosen the most politically expedient path on issues that matter the most to people here in Florida.

"We need a United States senator and we will need a president in 2016 that fights for the middle class and helping people achieve their dreams. Having a United States Senator or a president like Marco Rubio certainly would not help them achieve either," she said.

Wasserman Schultz will be in Des Moines, Iowa, on Saturday for a press conference with that state's Democratic chairman across the street from Republican U.S. Rep. Steve King's "Freedom Summit" gathering of many prospective Republican presidential candidates. King is strongly critical of illegal immigration, and opposes comprehensive immigration reform. Iowa is a critical state because it hosts the first nominating caucuses in the presidential primary process.

"You have a whole stable full of Republican presidential hopefuls who are wiling to pay homage and appear on the stage with someone who actually labeled a young girl who was in the first lady's box in the State of the Union as a 'deportable,' a young dreamer, who has only known this country and none other, and whose family brought her here to make a better way of life for themselves.

"And he called her a 'deportable.' He's referred to undocumented immigrants as drug mules who have calves the size of cantaloupes. So it tells you all you need to know about the potential candidates for president on the Republican side who are willing to go and stand with this person who has really championed bigotry," she said.

"I'm going there to call on them to not stand with him, but renounce him. And to challenge them to embrace the idea that we have 11 million undocumented immigrants in this country and we need to make sure that we develop a pathway for them to remain in this country, be able to make that better way of life, acknowledge that they strengthen our economy and that they have been an important part of the fabric of America, and create a pathway for legal status for them….

"Instead the cavalcade of Republican potential candidates are going to stand with a guy who is an avowed bigot, who has truly embraced and expressed bigotry, and that is going to send a very strong signal to not only the Latino community but to so many immigrants and to the minority community when it comes time to voting."

Rubio and former Gov. Jeb Bush, another Republican presidential hopeful, are attending other political events and not going to King's gathering. Wasserman Schultz said that doesn't earn them plaudits.

"I'm certain that it's not that they're not going because of the content of the programming. I don't think it says anything about them. They both have embraced similar attitudes. Look, Marco Rubio went from supporting the legislation that passed the Senate to opposing it once his tea party supporters really gave him a backlash. And Jeb Bush has also been on both sides of the immigration issue. Can't pick a side. I don't blame them. It's really tough to be a Republican right now. They continue to be in the midst of a civil war."

Wasserman Schultz's colleague, U.S. Rep. Frederica Wilson, a Democrat who represents parts of Broward and Miami-Dade counties, greeted a possible Rubio candidacy much more warmly.

"I served with Marco for eight years in the Florida House. So that's exciting to me. That's something that is a privilege. And I think that if he runs, I think that he will do well," Wilson said.

aman@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4550.