Murphy worked as CPA in Florida, says former supervisor
The Senate campaign of U.S. Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Jupiter, continues to do damage control in the wake of a blistering report by CBS4, which accused the Democratic Senate candidate of lying about working as a certified public accountant and about being a small business owner.

The station's Jim DeFede noted that "despite working in Miami, Murphy has never held a CPA license in the state of Florida. Instead, he obtained a license in Colorado. And because the requirements are lower in Colorado, Florida does not accept the license as valid."

But the accounting firm Murphy worked for, Deloitte, did accept it, according to a statement from Courtney Connolly, one of Murphy's supervisors at the company from 2007 to 2009.

Connolly said that CBS4's "suggestion there's anything wrong with Patrick's credentials as an accountant and CPA are incorrect. After receiving his CPA license, Patrick was promoted from audit staff to audit senior, where he did important work, and the idea that Patrick exaggerated any of it is absurd."

All the currently open senior audit positions listed at Deloitte.com require the hiree to "have passed all four parts of the Uniform Certified Public Account Examination," thought the openings do not mention needing to be licensed in Florida.

It's common practice for the major accounting firms to hire people without them having passed the CPA exam, allowing them to assist CPAs until they pass the exam themselves, according to the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. But performing accounting work other than simple tax returns in Florida without a Florida CPA license would be highly unusual, even illegal in some cases.

"The auditors on our team, including Patrick, would even meet with the executive management of major companies to go through their financial statements," Connolly said. "Patrick is a licensed CPA who did valued accounting work in Florida."

Connolly had only a brief window to witness Murphy's CPA work -- according to her LinkedIn page, she left Deloitte in October 2009 to work for Burger King Corporation, where she is still employed. Murphy got his Colorado CPA license in September 2009.

And according to campaign finance records, Connolly donated $250 to Murphy's congressional campaign in 2011.

According to the Florida Department of Business and Professional Regulation website, to "perform audits, reviews and financial statements," "use the CPA designation" or "advertise or represent oneself as a CPA" requires an accountant to hold a CPA license in the state of Florida.