Reports of Hillary Clinton meeting 'a big fat lie,' Broward elections official says
Broward Supervisor of Elections Brenda Snipes says reports that she privately met with Hillary Clinton when the Democratic presidential candidate was in Broward County this week are "a big fat lie."

"If Secretary Clinton or Donald Trump called and said 'I'd like to speak to you about the operation that goes on in Broward County,' I would meet with them," Snipes added. "We run a nonpartisan office. I have not met with Secretary Clinton. I don't know where that [rumor] came from."

One person tending the rumor mill is South Florida's own Roger Stone, a self-described "dirty trickster" who is an unofficial adviser to Donald Trump.

In an appearance with conspiracy theorist and radio host Alex Jones, Stone said that Clinton "shows up in Broward County, slips into a private meeting with the woman who runs the board of elections."

Stone promised that photos of the meeting would be available on Jones' site, Infowars.com, "shortly," but a day after the Stone interview had been posted on YouTube, there were no photos on the website.

CAPTION Jim DeFede Takes A Look Jim DeFede Takes A Look CAPTION Jim DeFede Takes A Look Jim DeFede Takes A Look CAPTION Silva Harapetian Reports Silva Harapetian Reports CAPTION Jim DeFede Takes A Look Jim DeFede Takes A Look CAPTION Supporters watch election results at a Trump watch party in Elmhurst. Nov. 8, 2016. (Chris Walker / Chicago Tribune) Supporters watch election results at a Trump watch party in Elmhurst. Nov. 8, 2016. (Chris Walker / Chicago Tribune) CAPTION Trump was slightly ahead most of the evening, but the contest was so close news organizations didn't declare a winner even when results were in from 99 percent of the state's precincts. Trump was slightly ahead most of the evening, but the contest was so close news organizations didn't declare a winner even when results were in from 99 percent of the state's precincts.

The reports of a "short, two-person closed-door meeting," as Stone called it, come as a new AP poll shows 64 percent of Trump supporters will have serious doubts about the legitimacy of the election results if their candidate does not win.

Among supporters of Clinton, 69 percent said they would accept the results should Trump win the election.

dsweeney@sunsentinel.com, 954-356-4605 or Twitter @Daniel_Sweeney