Florida's low-wage jobs nothing to brag about
As Gov. Rick Scott beckons residents of other states to move to Florida, touting a growth in jobs and lower taxes, he ignores the fact that nearly half of those already living in the Sunshine State are barely making ends meet.

That's because jobs here pay wages so low that 45 percent of Florida households, according to a recent study, struggle to pay for basic necessities such as housing, food, health care, transportation and child care.

"Low-income jobs," says the Rutgers University report conducted for the United Way, "dominate the economy in Florida now and will continue to dominate in the future."

Researchers found that 54 percent of Florida jobs pay less than $15 per hour.

The report focuses on so-called ALICE households, a United Way acronym for households that are asset limited, income constrained and employed. These are households with working adults headed by both men and women. The majority, more than 79 percent, are white.

"A job is the most important thing we can do to change someone's life," Scott said during his second inaugural address this month. "If we can make Florida the worldwide leader for families who struggled like mine did, I will have been fulfilled in my job as governor."

The cost of basic necessities in Florida, according to the report, increased 13 percent between 2007 and 2012. And many of the 715,000 jobs the state added the past four years are in the low-paying service sector. That hardly qualifies Florida as a world leader for struggling families.

"Florida's cost of living," says the report, "is beyond what most jobs in the state can provide to working households."

That's no incentive for residents in other states to relocate here.

"Move to Florida," Scott told residents of New York, Pennsylvania, Illinois and California. "We want you to keep more of your money because we understand it's your money."

They need to first earn more money.

Scott's priority, though, has always been corporations not wage earners. He has helped businesses keep more of their money by reducing their tax burden. That will also be a priority of his second term.

The governor should at least insist that corporations pay livable wages in exchange for more tax cuts.

Rep. Cynthia Stafford, D-Miami and Sen. Dwight Bullard, D-Miami have filed legislation that would raise the state's minimum wage to $10.10 an hour. The measure faces an uphill climb in the Republican dominated Legislature. But as Rich Templin, legislative director of the AFL-CIO of Florida, points out it's an opportunity for lawmakers to do something for workers that also benefits the state economy.

"Job creators are not Wal-Mart. It's the people that shop at Wal-Mart that create jobs," Templin said. "We need money in the pockets of consumers. That is what drives the economy of Florida, and right now they don't have money to spend."

Reducing the number of households struggling to stay afloat, according to the Rutgers study, "requires a significant increase in the wages of current jobs or in the number of medium- and high-skilled jobs in both the public and private sectors in Florida."

It doesn't require another corporate tax break.

A measure that would ban discrimination against lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender individuals in the workplace would also make Florida a more attractive state for those considering relocating.

Three of the four states from which Scott wants to lure new Floridians have such a law. Though 29 Florida municipalities outlaw such discrimination, there is no statewide ban.

Sen. Joe Abruzzo, D-Wellington, and Rep. Holly Raschein, R-Key Largo, have filed legislation that would remedy that. The bipartisan measure, which would also ban discrimination based on sexual orientation in housing, restaurants, hotels and other public accommodations, has the support of several major businesses, including Walt Disney World Resorts, Florida Blue and Winn-Dixie.

Florida should be a leader in high quality jobs at companies that treat their workers fairly and pay them enough to be self-sufficient. You don't get bragging rights for an overabundance of low-paying jobs that leave workers with more bills than money.

Rhonda Swan is a former editorial writer for The Palm Beach Post. Reach her at thewordzlady@gmail.com