Scott on wrong side on health care
Gov. Rick Scott went to war last week — on the wrong side.

The governor should have been strong-arming House leaders, demanding that they expand health care coverage to nearly 1 million Floridians. Instead, Scott was threatening members of the Senate, which wants more Floridians to have insurance and is trying to save the state from Scott's failures.

For the legislative session to end on schedule Friday, the House and Senate would have to agree on a budget by Tuesday. Instead, they remain billions apart, because of differences on health care. The Senate budget includes $2.8 billion in federal money to expand Medicaid — without calling it Medicaid expansion — and another $2.2 billion from the federal Low Income Pool that goes to hospitals and other providers, also to cover Florida's working poor. The House includes none of that $5 billion.

We saw Tuesday the differences between the two chambers. In the Senate, they discussed policy in a public meeting. Speakers laid out for the Appropriations Committee the risk if the Low Income Pool money stopped coming. Over five years, economist Amy Baker said, Florida would lose 22,000 jobs, many of them high-paying. The economy would take a $10.69 billion hit. Fifty-three thousand people would leave the state.

Scott is to blame for putting the state at risk. Two years ago, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services told the governor that the state's program for Low Income Pool money was flawed. A year ago, the federal government extended the money for a year — so the state could craft a better program. Scott did nothing. On Tuesday, past Senate President Don Gaetz, R-Niceville, called that "malpractice."

Yet the governor ducks all blame. He threatened to sue the federal government, claiming that the Obama administration is withholding a decision on the Low Income Pool money — the budget year starts July 1 — to force Florida to expand Medicaid. He compared the president to Tony Soprano. He vowed to call a special session, which wouldn't help unless positions changed. He railed at the hospital industry, passing out sheets listing hospital profits.

Scott would note that Orlando Health, which happens to employ Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, made $231 million in 2013-14 and stands to lose $54 million from the Low Income Pool. Other numbers, though, undercut Scott's latest attempt at diversion.

Without that federal money, Broward Health would lose nearly $93 million — about three times the 2013-14 combined profit at the system's four hospitals. Memorial Regional in Hollywood would lose $62 million, more than wiping out a $16 million profit. UF Health Jacksonville would lose $95 million, and could close in 60 days. Northeast Florida would lose its only trauma center. That would mean people dying.

Also on Tuesday, the Senate heard about the benefits of expanding Medicaid under what the Senate calls the Florida Health Insurance Affordability Exchange Program. Roughly 950,000 working Floridians are eligible because they make too much to qualify for Medicaid and too little to buy private insurance, even with subsidies.

We're talking individuals who make $16,000 and parents who make a combined $33,000. The Senate estimates that the program could enroll 834,000 the first year using that $2.8 billion in federal money. Democrats would prefer a straight Medicaid expansion — as happened in Ohio, under Republican Gov. John Kasich — but they would accept the Senate plan as a compromise.

Meanwhile in the Florida House, on Tuesday they discussed ideology in a private meeting. GOP leaders oppose Medicaid expansion because they oppose the Affordable Care Act, through which the money would come. Like the governor, they believe — wrongly — that the Obama administration ambushed the state by linking Medicaid expansion and the Low Income Pool.

As Sen. Tom Lee, R-Brandon, pointed out, none of that was a surprise. House leaders agree with Scott that hospital finances and the Low Income Pool are linked. In fact, that was a discussion for last year. The House did offer to use $200 million in state money to offset the potential loss of low income pool money, but the Senate correctly rejected it.

The Florida Chamber of Commerce, Associated Industries of Florida and the Florida Hospital Association support the Senate's position. So do groups that advocate for low-income Floridians. That's a rare alliance. So why are Scott and House leaders resisting?

We hear that Americans for Prosperity, the group financed by Charles and David Koch, has threatened to finance challengers in the 2016 primary to any House Republicans who seem to accept the Affordable Care Act. AFP and similar groups could finance a 2018 run for the U.S. Senate by Scott. AFP ran radio ads last week urging the Legislature not to expand Medicaid.

If Scott cares so much about jobs, does he care about a $10 billion threat to the state's economy? If Florida House leaders care about the state, do they care about people dying needlessly? Or do they care more about outside groups with no stake in the outcome? Based on the events of the last two weeks, we know the answer.