Hammer's claims aside, open carry is a safety threat
The "open-carry" bills moving through the Florida Legislature are generating much buzz and controversy, but not many factual analyses.

Case in point: NRA lobbyist Marion Hammer's recent column, "The truth about 'open carry' and the 45 states that allow it." Hammer's claims are riddled with inaccuracies and, at times, dodge the issues. The proposals to allow concealed carry holders to openly carry their firearms are public safety threats and deserve honest answers.

While Hammer correctly asserts 45 states allow the open carrying of handguns, she neglects to mention restrictions adopted by other states. For example, Alabama and Texas require firearms to be carried in a holster. In Maryland, state police may limit the geographic area, circumstances or times in which a handgun carry permit is effective. By contrast, the Florida bills do not distinguish between crowded cities and rural areas and do not specify how firearms being carried openly ought to be secured.

Hammer believes we should feel reassured by the fact that the licensing process currently applied to concealed carry also would apply to open-carry. However, Florida has one of the weakest licensing systems in the country.

First, it is the Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services, not law enforcement, that is responsible for licensing. Secondly, the licensing requirement is minimal, requiring just a few hours of training in marksmanship, judgment and the law (i.e., when it is appropriate to use lethal force). In addition, unlike states like Minnesota, there are no annual background checks to ensure continuing eligibility of permit holders.

The result is predictable: A 2006 study by the Sun Sentinel found that people licensed to carry guns in the first half of that year included more than 1,400 individuals who had pleaded guilty or no contest to felonies and hundreds of others with outstanding warrants or active domestic violence injunctions against them.

Hammer fails to address how the bills would impede law enforcement. Currently, to ask to see a permit, police need only have reasonable suspicion that a person may be contemplating a crime. If police see a man lingering in front of a school, they could ask him why and if he was carrying a gun. However, this new law would require police to have probable cause to ask for the permit. This same man, now openly carrying a firearm near the school, would be off limits to police unless it was patently obvious he was about to commit a crime.

Furthermore, Hammer claims that "The open-carry laws are working. … Opponents have presented no evidence … that it isn't working in any state." We believe the onus is on the sponsors of open-carry to demonstrate that it will benefit Florida, not opponents to show it is not working elsewhere.

Research by John Donohue of Stanford University indicates right-to-carry laws tend to increase rather than reduce crime and are "associated with substantially higher rates of aggravated assault, rape, robbery and murder." In addition, surveys indicate that gun carrying tends to fuel rather than reduce public fears, which open carry will likely exacerbate.

Hammer claims posting signs prohibiting open carry in business establishments is a "simple solution" for owners uncomfortable with the practice and that "proper notification will stop citizens from even entering the establishment." The fact is we don't know whether businesses will have the right to ban those carrying guns openly. Also, will owners feel comfortable confronting armed individuals who do not see or defy these signs?

The potential impact on business is a major concern. The 100 million tourists visiting Florida each year are the state's bread and butter. Nobody knows how international visitors will react when they and their children see people "packing heat" as they stroll along International Drive in Orlando.

And the unknown is a concern, as these bills did not emerge from a public demand but from the gun lobby and its surrogates in the Florida Legislature. Given the potential economic impact and adverse effect on public safety, the burden ought to be on the sponsors of open carry to provide hard data on how these bills will improve the lives of Floridians.

So far, they have failed to do so and evidence supporting the bills is noticeably lacking.

Thomas Gabor is a Florida-based expert witness in the area of violence. Patricia Brigham is chairwoman of the Gun Safety Committee of the League of Women Voters of Florida.