Murphy trips over his padded resume
Everybody wants their resume to "pop." Sometimes that leads to a little exaggeration here, a smidge of embellishment there. But exaggerate too much, pile on too much embellishment, and the resume doesn't pop, it blows up.

That is what is happening to Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Jupiter. Murphy is running for the U.S. Senate seat held now by Republican Marco Rubio. To earn a place on the November ballot, Murphy must first defeat Rep. Alan Grayson, D-Orlando, in next month's primary.

Things had been going pretty well for Murphy. He has the support of prominent Democrats, including President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden. Grayson, the primary opponent, has some ethical and temperament issues. And the Republican field looked relatively weak.

And then the bad news hit.

Rubio decided to run for re-election, and initial polls showed Rubio defeating Murphy. Murphy's prospects soured even further when Jim DeFede of WFOR-CBS 4 Miami broadcast a couple of pieces that focused attention on nagging questions about Murphy's resume.

The combination was so damaging that the Washington Post's Chris Cillizza declared Murphy the winner (loser?) of his "Worst Week in Washington" feature.

Murphy is accused of padding his resume in three main areas — his academic record, his work record as a certified public accountant and his status as a small business owner. In addition to CBS-Miami, questions have been raised in reporting by the Miami Herald, The Tampa Bay Times and Politico Florida.

Murphy said he had two degrees from the University of Miami, one in accounting and one in finance. In fact, he has only one degree in business administration with a dual major in accounting and finance.

Murphy has emphasized he is a certified public accountant. It's true he passed (after multiple tries) the CPA exam for Colorado and was licensed in that state, but Murphy never was a licensed CPA in Florida. So although he worked in Florida for Deloitte & Touche, he could not have worked for them as a CPA.

Murphy said he was a small businessman whose company — Coastal Environmental Services — provided vessels that aided in the cleanup after the catastrophic 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill. But Coastal Environmental Services turns out to be affiliated with a business owned by Murphy's father. Further, the extent of its role in the cleanup is in question.

Murphy's folks have, of course, leapt to his defense. Conflating "dual degrees" and "double major" is an understandable mistake. He might not have "worked" in Florida as a CPA, but he is a CPA. Technically, Coastal Environmental Services qualified as a small business, and he was one of its corporate officers.

Sure. We get that if you stress technicalities and kind of squint at the facts, Murphy can sort of justify most of the material he has included on his resume. We get that he wants to stress his financial expertise and soft-pedal the extent to which his wealthy father has boosted his career.

But this kind of resume-padding is what you'd expect from the guy who wants to manage a dollar store. It's not what voters deserve from a man who wants to be their senator.

It's even more disappointing because we think Murphy has a lot to offer. His business and finance experience would be positives if he hadn't turned them into negatives via exaggeration. In the House, he has shown a streak of bipartisanship.

And which should be the bigger campaign issue, Murphy's resume or Rubio's awful attendance record?

Murphy's campaign called the recent CBS report "deeply false" and "misleading." Not really. There are some quibbles, but this clearly is a case of resume inflation by Murphy.

Murphy has given his political opponents a big stick to hit him with, and they already have started to flail away. We don't think this should be his campaign's defining issue. But it has made it harder for Murphy to add "United States senator" to his resume.