President Trump launches first campaign ad for 2020 election -- 1282 days away
The 2020 election season has officially begun.

President Donald Trump launched his first campaign ad for re-election on Monday, 1,282 days before the next presidential election. The 30-second commercial, paid for by Donald J. Trump for President Inc. and approved by Trump, focuses on his first 100 days in office.

"America has rarely seen such success," a narrator says in the video. "America is winning and President Trump is making America great again."

Images from Trump's inauguration, confirmation of Supreme Court Justice Neil Gorsuch, tax cut proposals, and boasts about "companies investing in American jobs again" highlight the spot.

"You wouldn't know it from watching the news," the clip adds, taking a shot at "fake news" personalities like CNN's Wolf Blitzer, MSNBC's Rachel Maddow, ABC's George Stephanopoulos and CBS' Scott Pelley.

A statement from Trump's campaign says the ad is "reaching out to the American people directly by highlighting his work over the first 100 days and fighting back against the continued media bias." It does not include any messages regarding Election Day 2020 -- Tuesday, Nov. 3, 2020 -- but Trump filed for re-election on his inauguration day and has already begun holding rallies for supporters.

The New York Times reported last month that Trump has already brought in $7.1 million for the 2020 race. The Republican Party raised an additional $23 million in the first three months of the year, according to Federal Election Commission filings.

Trump spent $1.5 million on his "First 100 Days" TV ad buy, according to his campaign.

He also published an editorial in The Washington Post on Monday, saying he's kept his promises to the people in his first 100 days.

No other candidates have officially entered the 2020 presidential race yet. Former Vice President Joe Biden sparked rumors of a bid by visiting New Hampshire over the weekend, but shut down speculation Sunday night: "Guys, I'm not running!"