Thrasher is choice for FSU, despite loud opposition
CLOSE John Thrasher voted the next president of Florida State University, students erupt in protest Sean Rossman/Democrat

State Sen. John Thrasher was chosen this afternoon to be the next president of Florida State University.

Buy Photo State Sen. John Thrasher was named FSU's new president today. (Photo: Glenn Beil/DEMOCRAT)Buy Photo

In the end, the voices of Florida State University's faculty and students failed to persuade the decision-makers.

By an 11-2 vote of the FSU Board of Trustees, John Thrasher was chosen as the university's next president. A motion to pick Thrasher was the only one considered by trustees after a day of interviews and public comment that was overwhelmingly opposed to the career politician and intense Seminoles advocate.

Members of the trustees, a majority with close personal and political ties to the Republican Thrasher, cited his leadership skills and gift for raising money before the final vote after 5 p.m. on Tuesday. Thrasher isn't likely to start until mid-November, pending confirmation by the Board of Governors at their Nov. 5 meeting.

"I think we made a good decision today and I think Florida State will be in good hands," said Allan Bense, chair of FSU's board. "Everything that John Thrasher has taken on, he's been successful at."

Thrasher, 70, was interviewed by the board for 75 minutes at 8 a.m. and did not return to the Turnbull Center following the vote. He told the Democrat that he hopes to meet with interim President Garnett Stokes, who had been provost for three years prior to Eric Barron's departure for Penn State April 2, as quickly as today. He said he wants to know what she would like to have happen.

"I'm ready to go. In the meantime I'm going to begin to prepare, to reach out to some folks who want to visit," Thrasher said. "There are a lot of people out there, faculty, students, administrators, anybody I can talk to. I want to have discussions about moving forward."

Before their vote, the trustees listened to almost two hours of public comment, almost all from professors and students opposed to Thrasher and in favor of the three traditional academics leaders the board had also interviewed earlier Tuesday: Richard Marchase, Michael Martin and Michele Wheatly. Students lined the perimeter of the conference room during the public-comment session and while the trustees deliberated, many carrying anti-Thrasher signs. Some erupted upon the final vote.

"FSU is not for sale," was one chant of dissent.

It was not clear immediately if the meeting had ended as security personnel ushered the trustees to a nearby room until most of the students left the meeting area.

"It's Florida State University and everybody wanted to exercise their First Amendment rights," Bense said.

Thrasher has said he will step down immediately as chair of Gov. Rick Scott's reelection campaign. There is also the matter of his seat in the Florida Senate, where he is up for reelection in November. Thrasher's campaign announced after the vote he intends to remain on the ballot, where he faces Democratic and no-party affiliation challengers.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-999-2271. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

"I intend to continue to campaign for re-election to the Senate and will continue to carry out my commitment to the people of my district," Thrasher said in a statement sent by his campaign. "If I am ultimately selected to lead FSU, this will allow the voters to select who will be the next Senator from the 6th district."

STUDENT, FACULTY DISSENT

Storbeck/Pimentel, the search firm helping FSU select its next leader, conducted surveys following each candidate's campus forums last week. Thrasher received favorable ratings from only 11 percent of the responders, while 87 percent said he was not fit to be FSU's president. By comparison, the other three candidates had favorable scores between 78 and 91 percent.

The FSU Faculty Senate, which represents all 16 colleges at the university, passed a unanimous resolution Friday calling for the trustees to hire one of the three academics among the four finalists.

"We deserve a president who plays on the national stage, one who walks the walk, one who won't put off potential donors in the other party," Michael Buchler, a music professor and faculty senator, said during the public comment period. "FSU has never hired a president who didn't have experience in the classroom."

CLOSE Students react to motion naming John Thrasher president of Florida State University Sean Rossman/Democrat

Thrasher said reaching out to those who opposed his selection would be among his first efforts.

"I'm going to reach out to them, I mean, that's the only thing I know how to do," Thrasher said. "I've done it all my life when I've had differences of opinion with folks, whatever it is, in private life or in public life. You reach out and try to find common ground and I'm more than willing to do that."

Trustee Ed Burr, who chaired the search committee, began the board's deliberation by outlining the attributes of each candidate. Thrasher is the only one of the four who will need no time to learn how Florida's complicated higher education system works and how it interfaces with the Legislature, Burr said.

Gary Tyson, the faculty's lone representative on the board, told the trustees he preferred Martin, chancellor of Colorado's State University System, and Wheatly, former provost at West Virginia University. He cast one of the two dissenting votes.

Miami attorney Peggy Rolando was the only other trustee to vote against the motion to select Thrasher. StefanoCavallaro, the student body president, voted for Thrasher, saying after the meeting that his responsibility was "to do what's best for FSU."

Rolando said she was concerned about Thrasher's "down side," and she expressed skepticism that Thrasher will be able to attract new resources from his former colleagues in the Legislature.

"I don't see this state all of a sudden getting religion and all of a sudden increasing the pool of money for higher education," Rolando said. "If that's your expectation, I think you're setting him up to fail."

Thrasher repeated several times Tuesday what he has said during previous candidate interviews, that improving faculty salaries will be a top priority for him. Trustee Kathryn Ballard, who made the motion to select Thrasher, cited that as one reason why he should be FSU's next president.

Thrasher said another top priority would be to re-energize FSU's $1 billion capital campaign, which will have a public kickoff on Oct. 17. Tom Jennings, FSU's vice president for university advancement, announced Tuesday that the university has raised more than $600 million to date.

Thrasher told the Democrat he plans to meet with Jennings as soon as possible to see if there are potential donors he should be contacting.

"Professionally, this is truly the highlight of my career," Thrasher said. "I enjoyed being speaker (of the Florida House of Representatives), being in the Senate, but this is special. I'm gong to do everything I can to advance Florida State."

Bill Cotterell contributed to this story.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1pc16mg