The truth about open carry and the 45 states that allow it
CLOSE

Marion P. Hammer

The chairman of the Florida Sheriffs Association’s Legislative Committee is quoted in some recent news outlets with many erroneous claims regarding the proposed open-carry bill in Florida (SB-300 by Sen. Don Gaetz and HB-163 by Rep. Matt Gaetz). The public deserves to know the truth.

FSA CLAIM: “The bill as currently drafted is extremely broad, lacking limits on when, how or where firearms could be carried.”

FACT: The same restrictions that apply to concealed carry also apply to open-carry(s.790.06). Only a person with a license to carry concealed will be able to carry openly. Additionally, the improper exhibition of firearms law (s.790.10) applies whether carrying concealed or openly.

Further, the FSA spokesman knows a clarification amendment has been added to the bill just to stop false claims.

FSA CLAIM: “The bill’s proponents claim that 45 other states already allow open-carry. But that’s not really accurate.”

FACT: The claim is false. Forty-five states allow open carry of firearms. Varying restrictions on open-carry in some states does not change the fact that 45 states allow open-carry.

FSA CLAIM: “(I)t’s ‘intellectually dishonest’ to say open-carry laws are working in the 45 other states because there are so many variations in the laws and the demographics.”

FACT: Opponents have presented no evidence that open carry isn’t working in any state and no evidence of problems in any state. Simply because different states have variations in their laws does not in any way alter the fact that open-carry is working.

FSA CLAIM: “In Pennsylvania, for example, cities can opt out of its open-carry law and some, including Philadelphia, do just that ... Florida cities don’t have the option to opt out of a state law.”

FACT: That’s just false. Pennsylvania does not allow cities to opt out of it’s open-carry law. Pennsylvania does not require a license for a person to carry openly. Philadelphia cannot “opt out” of the state open-carry law. Pennsylvania state law allows the city of Philadelphia (and only Philadelphia) to simply require a license to carry openly in Philadelphia.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-800-999-2271. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

FSA CLAIM: As for demographics, “You can’t compare Sioux Falls, S.D., to downtown Miami or downtown Tampa or downtown Orlando.”

FACT: This argument is illogical and probably intentionally misleading. Seventy percent of the American public live in open-carry states. Many of the 45 open-carry states have large and diverse cities just like Florida, and where you live geographically, whether it’s Trilby, Fla., or Fanning Springs, Fla., you have the same constitutional rights as citizens who live in Miami, Tampa or Orlando.

FSA CLAIM: “The state’s trespass law gives businesses the right to ask anyone openly carrying a weapon to leave their property,” but they... “will be reluctant to tell a person wearing a .45 to leave.”

FACT: Posting signs prohibiting open carry inside a business establishment is a simple solution. Proper notification will stop citizens from even entering the establishment. Businesses have the right to refuse service and evict anyone they wish unless it’s done on the basis of race, gender or religion. They post signs that say, “No shirt, no shoes – no service.” Why are they reluctant to post signs saying, “No open carrying of firearms?”

The Florida Sheriffs Association is once again working against the Constitutional rights of the citizens they were elected to serve. It’s that simple.

Marion P. Hammer is executive director of Unified Sportsmen of Florida and past President of the National Rifle Association.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1NEmFvU