Accord reached! House and Senate agree to start special session June 1
It's a start.

After dissolving the annual legislative session last week over a budget and health care impasse, House and Senate leaders have now agreed on one thing: the dates of the special session to finish their work.

In a joint press release issued Wednesday, House Speaker Steve Crisafulli and Senate President Andy Gardiner announced that they will convene a "tentatively scheduled" special session on Monday, June 1, and conclude it on Saturday, June 20.

Lawmakers must return to the state capital to finish the budget by June 30 and, integral to that decision, is addressing the question of how much federal government the state can expect to get to provide hospital compensation for charity care under the Low Income Pool program.

Disagreement over how to handle that money, which the federal government is phasing out, led to the stalemate. The Senate leaders want to expand Medicaid and draw down federal money to compenstate for the loss of LIP money in the future. The House leadership refuses to expand Medicaid and prefers to rely on the LIP money for another year.

Still unresolved is the scope of the session. "A proclamation will be issued in the near future,'' the statement said.

The agreement on the session dates also avoids having Gov. Rick Scott call the session, and dictate the terms. Crisafulli called the accord on session dates an accomplishment.

“While significant discussions lay before us, today marks a very good day for Florida as we have reached agreement on dates for a budget special session,'' he said in a statement. "We look forward to working with our partners in the Senate as we make continued progress in the weeks ahead.”

Meanwhile, Scott met with Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell on Wednesday to remind her of the state's budgetary deadline and asked her to approve the state's proposal for LIP funding.

"We want the HHS Secretary to approve our LIP waiver,'' Scott said in a statement. "That is what we asked her to do today. I hope we made some progress, but we will only have real resolution on this when we get their official approval. We need that approval immediately so we can start a special session and pass a budget."

Burwell's office responded that she asked the governor to consider expanding Medicaid and that the state's proposal for the LIP waiver is inadequate. The statement also hinted that the state's Medicaid reimbursement rates are too low, and said the state is expecting more LIP money than its going to get.

"...the proposal currently posted for public comment in Florida falls short of the key principles HHS will use in considering proposals regarding uncompensated care pool programs, and the size of the proposed LIP appears larger than what matches the principles,'' a statement released after the meeting said.

Here is HHS's full statement:

Today, Secretary Burwell met with Florida Governor Rick Scott to discuss the importance of access to high quality health care coverage for all Floridians.

As HHS communicated to the state in July 2014, the state’s Low Income Pool (LIP), an optional time-limited demonstration program, will not be extended in its current form beyond June 2015. The three principles by which the LIP and other uncompensated care pool proposals will be reviewed are:

· Coverage rather than uncompensated care pools is the best way to secure affordable access to health care for low-income individuals, and uncompensated care pool funding should not pay for costs that would be covered in a Medicaid expansion;

· Medicaid payments should support services provided to beneficiaries and low-income uninsured individuals; and

· Provider payment rates must be sufficient to promote provider participation and access, and should support plans in managing and coordinating care.

Secretary Burwell shared a preliminary view that the proposal currently posted for public comment in Florida falls short of the key principles HHS will use in considering proposals regarding uncompensated care pool programs, and the size of the proposed LIP appears larger than what matches the principles.

HHS is continuing to engage with Florida on the state’s LIP proposal, even as the period for public comment in Florida is underway. HHS heard the Governor’s request for a timely response to help the state meet its budget timeline. HHS believes completion of the public comment period, on-going discussions with the state, and the state’s submission of its proposal to CMS are the next steps in the process.

Regarding Medicaid expansion, Secretary Burwell reaffirmed that whether a state receives federal funding for an uncompensated care pool is not dependent on whether it expands Medicaid, and that the decision to expand Medicaid, or not, is a state decision. HHS has continuously worked with states interested in expanding Medicaid.

Secretary Burwell urged Governor Scott to consider Medicaid expansion, saying it is an important element to providing access to quality health care and reducing hospital costs that are typically passed on to taxpayers. She reiterated that, if Florida decides to pursue Medicaid expansion, HHS stands ready to work with the state to design a program that would be good for the economy and health of Florida, and tailored to Florida’s needs.