Crist flip-flop #563? 'I would have voted' for health care bill
Republican Senate candidate Marco Rubio's campaign, always on the watch for flip-flops by rival Charlie Crist, has seized on this interview the governor gave to an Orlando television station in which he says he would have voted for the health care legislation in Congress.

Whoa. As the Rubio campaign points out, that's not what Crist said in July. And Democratic candidate Kendrick Meek's campaign, which has been pulling out Crist's greatest hits on a daily basis, released the letter he sent Meek urging the Miami congressman to vote against it.

That was then, this is now:

UPDATE from Crist campaign: Apparently, based on an interview this afternoon, there may be some confusion regarding my position on health care. If I misspoke, I want to be abundantly clear: the

health care bill was too big, too expensive, and expanded the role of government far too much. Had I been in the United States Senate at the time, I would have voted against the bill because of unacceptable provisions like the cuts to the Medicare Advantage program. But being an independent, I have the freedom to be an honest broker for the people of Florida without regard for political party, and the reality is this: despite its serious flaws, the health care bill does have some positive aspects. Repeal must be accompanied by a responsible substitute repeal without passage of a substitute law protecting those with pre-existing conditions, closing the prescription drug donut hole for seniors, and allowing parents to keep their children on their insurance coverage until age 26 would be wrong. While I would not have supported the legislation, we have to recognize the positive components and work together across party lines to make our health care system more affordable for both consumers and the government. This debate must not be about political posturing; it must be about protecting the people of Florida and America, and I intend to do that hard work when I get to the United States Senate.