Group seeks ethics investigation into Alan Grayson
A conservative watchdog group wants the U.S. House of Representatives to open an ethics investigation into Alan Grayson, who has been accused of using official resources to campaign for Senate.

“We write today to request that the Office of Congressional Ethics immediately investigate Representative Alan Grayson's use of official government resources for campaign and political activity in violation of the House Ethics Rules,” reads a letter from the Foundation for Accountability and Civic Trust.

“It is a violation of ethics rules to use any House facilities or resources to conduct campaign or political activities, yet Representative Grayson has issued a press release and engaged in interviews for his U.S. Senate campaign from his House office. Not only is this a misuse of taxpayer funds entrusted to an elected official, but the repeated violations indicate a disregard of the ethics rules by Representative Grayson.”

Several questions have come up.

In July the Orlando Democrat did an interview with Huffington Post Live from his House office and discussed the campaign. His office said the interview was done on a campaign computer, but said Grayson “will not do any more interviews in his government office regarding his campaign for the U.S. Senate.

In September, Grayson did a radio interview with Nicole Sandler. “That buzzing that you heard in the background a couple of minutes ago was the notice that the votes have started. Yes, the votes have started here in the House. I have to go do that part of this job," Grayson said, according to a Fox News affiliate.

Grayson’s campaign declined comment to the Tampa Bay Times.

UPDATE:

Grayson spokesman Kevin Franck writes:

"The focus of that interview was on official activities – specifically, the Pope’s visit, Speaker Boehner’s resignation and Rep. Grayson's Shutdown the Shutdowns Act, which would prevent future politically-motivated government shutdowns. During the course of the interview, Rep. Grayson responded to questions from the host about his campaign, which is allowed under House rules.

"This is a meaningless complaint by a right-wing group that apparently has nothing better to do."