Take 3: Mike Haridopolos now says he would vote against Ryan Medicare plan
Third time's the charm for Senate President Mike Haridopolos. His campaign press shop, which initially told us "no comment" when we asked if he'd vote for Congressman Paul Ryan's Medicare plan, now says the Republican would vote against it.

Haridopolos ducked the question yesterday on a conservative radio show that ultimately booted him off. This afternoon, he issued a statement lacking a yes or no. Now it's a no. Apparently.

"As Senator Haridopolos made clear in his statement, the current Ryan Medicare plan should be amended to provide for greater protections for seniors,'' spokesman Tim Baker told the St. Petersburg Times. "If the question is would he vote for the Medicare provisions as they are currently written without amendment, then the answer is No, Sen Haridopolos would not vote for the plan as currently written."

The Adam Hasner campaign calls this "The Day Mike's Campaign Died."

But at least consider a new Florida poll by the respected Democratic firm Lake Research Partners for several Democratic-leaning groups wanting to protect Social Security benefits. The March 3-7 poll (MoE +/- 4.4%) found 76 percent of likely Florida votersn oppose cutting Social Security benefits in order to reduce the federal deficit. That includes 90 percent of Democrats, 66 percent of Republicans, 71 percent of Independents, and 56 percent of Tea Party supporters.

Nearly seven in ten (69 percent) Florida voters say they would be less likely to vote for a Senate candidate who supports cutting benefits to reduce the deficit, including two-thirds of voters in every region of the state. And swing voters? By a margin of 57 percent to 9 percent of independents and a margin of 65 percent to 5 percent of those who are undecided in the generic 2012 Senate ballot, voters said they would be much less likely to vote for a candidate who supports cutting Social Security benefits to reduce the deficit. Twenty-seven percent said they were undecided in the contest.