Marco Rubio can't believe the attention on his boots, 'This is craziness'
Republican presidential candidate Sen. Marco Rubio steps into his campaign bus Sunday after a stop at the Atkinson Country Club in Atkinson, N.H. He’s wearing the boots that caused such a stir.

In New Hampshire on Thursday, Sen. Marco Rubio appeared perplexed over media coverage of his sleek black heeled boots.

"This just tells you where we are as a country ..."

That came in response to a question from someone in the crowd Thursday in Nashua, N.H. who said, "Senator, I'm one of the undecideds in the room, and it didn't really make a difference to me, but I am glad you made a better shoe-choice today..." (Scroll down for the video)

"My kids told me about this last night," Rubio laughed.

He then added, "This just tells you where we are as a country," he said. "ISIS is cutting people heads off, setting people on fire in cages, Saudi Arabia and Iran are on the verge of a war.... But boy are we getting a lot of coverage about a pair of boots! This is craziness."

Just in case you haven’t being paying close attention to the news about presidential candidates’ footwear, here’s the background to all this.

On Monday, a New York Times political reporter tweeted a photo of Rubio’s black leather boots with a heel:

Marco Rubio is rocking some seriously fashionable black boots today in New Hampshire. pic.twitter.com/lwiSWuuCUt — Michael Barbaro (@mikiebarb) January 4, 2016

A fashion blogger for New Yorker magazine speculated that the boots were a pair of Maison Margielas that go for $995 (on sale now for 40 percent off!)

Then, a staffer for Sen. Ted Cruz’s campaign jumped in with this tweet:

Rubio supports Italian boots on the ground pic.twitter.com/fPOnncpWjP — Brian Phillips (@RealBPhil) January 5, 2016

And Cruz’s communications director Rick Tyler tweeted that a vote for Rubio is a “Vote for Men’s High-Heeled Booties.”

Rubio’s campaign told POLITICO the boots are from Florisheim, where they go for $135.

By then however, other candidates had joined. Carly Fiorina tweeted:

And Rand Paul tweeted this video:

I was in Whoopi Goldberg's dressing room picking out new show shoes. Eat your heart out @marcorubio! pic.twitter.com/vF06UzZgAL — Dr. Rand Paul (@RandPaul) January 6, 2016

Here's the video from Thursday: