Marco Rubio accuses Patrick Murphy of 'lying' using example that's actually true
In a new Spanish-language ad, Marco Rubio uses this image of a headline -- taken from an ad by his Democratic opponent, Patrick Murphy -- as an example of a "false" claim by Murphy. However, as the headline reads, Rubio did tell Politico he doesn't support abortions for women infected with Zika.

In a new Spanish-language ad, U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio accuses his Democratic challenger, Patrick Murphy, of lying -- but the specific example Rubio's ad uses to back that up is actually a true statement about one of the Republican incumbent's policy positions.

Rubio's new ad gives an example of a "false" claim by Murphy as being that Rubio opposes abortions for women infected with the Zika virus. But Rubio, who is stridently pro-life, has said himself he opposes them.

Murphy's campaign said Rubio is either "lying" in his new ad by calling Murphy's claim "false" or he must have quietly changed his position.

"It’s a fact that Rubio has stood with the far-right and is wholly opposed to a woman’s right to choose," Murphy campaign spokeswoman Galia Slayen said. "Either Rubio added his pro-life stance to his long list of flip-flops and forgot to let voters know, or he is brazenly lying to Florida families. Either way, Floridians deserve answers."

Rubio's campaign launched the ad in question last week and further promoted it Monday. As a narrator says Murphy "lies" about Rubio, viewers see a Politico headline on screen that reads (in Spanish) "Marco Rubio: No abortions for Zika-infected women," followed by a stamp of "False" across an image of Murphy.

As Murphy's campaign points out, Rubio said publicly he doesn't support abortions for women infected with Zika. He told Politico specifically: "When you present it in the context of Zika or any prenatal condition, it’s a difficult question and a hard one. But if I’m going to err, I’m going to err on the side of life."

Rubio campaign spokeswoman Olivia Perez-Cubas would not explain to the Herald/Times how Rubio can claim this attack by Murphy is "false."

In a statement Monday, Perez-Cubas said Murphy has "repeatedly distorted Marco's record" and then she attacked Murphy for his "extreme left-wing positions" in supporting abortion. She offered no direct rebuttal to Slayen's either/or accusation.

The image in Rubio's ad came from Murphy's first Spanish-language ad. (Murphy allies have also used the same headline in ads attacking Rubio.)

Here's the Rubio ad in question:

*This post has been updated with comment from Rubio's campaign.