Rubio blasts release of 'one-sided' torture report
Florida Senators took different views on the release today of an explosive report on CIA torture methods, with Republican Marco Rubio calling it "irresponsible" and "one-sided" and Democrat Bill Nelson saying abuses have been "rightly criticized."

"The people who serve this country in the aftermath of 9/11 deserve our thanks, not a one-sided politically motivated report," Rubio, a member of the Intelligence Committee, said in an interview in the Capitol on Tuesday.

Asked if anything in the report gave him pause, he replied: "None of the things that that report criticized is ongoing. Those individuals serving our country at the time in the intelligence community were acting under the orders of their superiors and approved by legal counsel. And all these people running around now complaining about it, a lot of them knew about it and didn't say anything."

Yesterday, Rubio and fellow Republican Sen. Jim Risch, R-Idaho, released a longer statement condeming the release of the report. “Congress has a legitimate and necessary role to play in conducting serious and constructive oversight of our intelligence agencies and capabilities. This report does not qualify as either serious or constructive. This was a partisan effort that divided members of the committee, and the committee against the people of the CIA. We voted against this report because it is flawed, and voted against declassifying this report because we believed that its release could put American lives at risk, be used to contribute to propaganda against the United States by our enemies, and damage U.S. foreign policy and counterterrorism efforts.

“The American civilian and uniformed personnel who worked tirelessly in the days and months after the September 11, 2001 attacks on our nation to keep us safe and prevent another mass casualty event deserve our eternal gratitude, not politically–motivated attacks. As a nation at war, we need a coherent detention and interrogation policy in order to extract valuable intelligence about terrorist networks from captured operatives. The Obama Administration has no detention policy, and it has hindered U.S. efforts to fight terrorism globally.”

Nelson sought a bit in both sides of the debate.

“Since 2001, we’ve made a number of decisions to strengthen our nation's defenses against terrorist attacks," the Democrat said in a statement. "Many of these decisions have saved lives while mistakes and abuses, such as those in this report, have been rightly criticized. We must remember that it is the goal of the U.S. intelligence community to gather information about a shadowy enemy determined to do us harm.”