Scott's address will contrast Florida with high-tax northern states
Gov. Rick Scott's second inaugural address on Tuesday will cast Florida as a "fighter in a great movement against the silent growth of government," a place where he's "fighting to limit the growth of government and grow opportunity instead."

Scott plans to use Florida's newfound status as the nation's third populous state -- having recently leapfrogged over New York -- to make the point that Americans are fleeing high tax states such as Illinois, Pennsylvania and California for Florida, where taxes are lower and the weather's better. He'll even issue a "come on down" to residents of those states.

"Over the last 20 years, millions of people have escaped from states with climbing high tax rates to move to states with lower taxes," Scott's prepared text reads. "Why does this matter? For starters, estimates say individuals who escaped these high tax states have taken with them around $2 trillion in adjusted gross income."

"In Florida we are proving that government can do better without getting bigger," Scott will say in the outdoor midday address in Tallahassee. "I have a message today to the people of New York, Illinois, California, Pennsylvania and others: Move to Florida! We want you to keep more of the money you make because we understand it's your money. We want your businesses to grow and succeed. We want to compete globally and win. Over the next four years, I will be traveling to your states personally to recruit you here."

Scott antagonized the governors of several states in 2013 when he sent letters to CEOs of hundreds of companies, trying to lure them to relocate to Florida.

Interestingly, the prepared text of Scott's speech makes no mention of New Jersey, the state with among the highest taxes in the country. But it wouldn't be polite for Scott to bash New Jersey with that state's governor in attendance. Gov. Chris Christie, who steered millions of dollars to Scott's re-election campaign through the Republican Governors Association, will be present for the inaugural festivities in Tallahassee.

In addition, Scott's criticism of the "silent growth of government" does not appear to note the fact that eight months ago, he signed into law the largest state budget in Florida history, about $77 billion. While it's true that Scott has reduced taxes and the overall size of the state workforce, the size of the budget has ballooned during his four years in office.

On education, Scott will emphasize his opposition to any future increases in tuition in undergraduate programs at state colleges and universities, and he'll issue a call to increase the number of $10,000 bachelor degrees offered by state colleges. Excerpts of Scott's second inaugural were provided to the Times/Herald by the governor's office.