Violations against Planned Parenthood may not be valid
Planned Parenthood is accusing state health care officials of wrongly citing three of their abortion clinics with violations of state licensing requirements.

On Wednesday, the Agency for Health Care Administration released reports showing that clinics in St. Petersburg, Naples and Fort Myers had been performing second-trimester abortions despite only being licensed to treat women whose pregnancies were in their first trimester.

The reports described women who were about 13 weeks into their pregnancies as being second-trimester patients. But under state regulations, the second trimester begins at 14 weeks.

"The claim that any Planned Parenthood health centers are performing procedures we are not licensed to perform is false and seemingly stems from AHCA, under the Scott administration, ignoring its own rules and definitions of gestational periods," Barbara Zdravecky, CEO of Planned Parenthood of Southwest and Central Florida, said in a written statement.

The confusion stems from how pregnancies are measured. Rules passed by AHCA define the first trimester as the first 12 weeks after fertilization, which is the same as the first 14 weeks after the woman's last normal period.

Here's what the rule says:

(14) "Trimester" means a 12-week period of pregnancy.

(a) First Trimester. The first 12 weeks of pregnancy (the first 14 completed weeks from the last normal menstrual period).

(b) Second Trimester. That portion of a pregnancy following the 12th week and extending through the 24th week of gestation.

It's "absolute medical consensus" to measure a pregnancy's length from the last period, said Kate Connors, spokeswoman for the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. This is also reflected in guidance from the National Institutes of Health.

"No doctor would use anything but the last menstrual period," she said.

In a statement, AHCA spokeswoman Shelisha Coleman said Planned Parenthood is incorrect in saying abortions it performed in the 13th week of pregnancy were done in the first trimester.

"As stated in the inspection report, the Director of Compliance Quality and Risk Management for Planned Parenthood stated that she considers gestational age (not menstrual period) at 13.6 weeks as the end of the first trimester," she wrote. "According to the attached rule, second trimester is the portion of a pregnancy following the 12th week and extending through the 24th week of gestation."

The violations came after Gov. Rick Scott ordered AHCA to investigate Florida's 16 Planned Parenthood clinics in connection with videos from other states allegedly showing employees of the organization discussing the sale of fetal organs.

Planned Parenthood has called the inquiry politically motivated.

Indeed, Scott publicly announced the inspections before many of them had been completed, an unusual move that contradicts AHCA's normal policy of conducting surprise inspections. Some of the inspections were conducted before Scott's announcement the afternoon of July 29.