With Clinton in Florida, Grayson goes after Murphy on Benghazi
It won’t be the first time Alan Grayson has deployed the Benghazi attack on Senate rival Patrick Murphy. But Grayson has a generous hook Friday morning for a telephone conference call with reporters.

Hillary Clinton arrives in Florida today for campaigning with the added juice of a major blunder by the man likely to replace House Speaker John Boehner. Rep. Kevin McCarthy of California boasted to Fox News that the long-running Benghazi investigation had taken a political toll on Clinton.

“Patrick Murphy was one of only seven Democrats who voted with Republicans to approve the Benghazi witch hunt committee, and he has since refused to express regret for that decision,” reads a Grayson news release inviting reporters to the 10:30 a.m. call.

The attack is part of an attempt by liberal Grayson to paint Murphy, a former Republican, as a phony. Murphy took a number of votes in recent years that contrasted with the Democratic party line. It was politics, sure, but Murphy also represents mixed district.

Here’s what a Murphy spokeswoman said when he voted to create the Benghazi committee in May 2014:

“While the congressman respects the work his colleagues have done already investigating this matter, when it comes to American lives lost overseas in service to our nation, we must make sure that all questions have been answered. He sincerely hopes that this committee is not used as a way to politicize this tragedy and the deaths of four Americans.”

Expect Grayson to say something along the lines of what he said in August:

"Patrick Murphy voted to give the Tea Party Republicans who run the House of Representatives the power to subpoena Hillary Clinton's records, hold hearings and conduct a political witch hunt that will last through the presidential election. I would like to know if Patrick Murphy is happy with what he has done, or if he now regrets that vote.”

Murphy’s camp has not responded, but he defended his vote in an interview last month (see video)

Sidebar: Murphy will be with Clinton on Friday and has endorsed her. Grayson has not yet picked a horse.