Marco Rubio to CBS: I was 'consistent' on immigration (huh?), Hillary Clinton has problems
@MarcACaputo

Sen. Marco Rubio's just-released interview with Jan Crawford on CBS This Morning was a lot like the spread of him and his family in PARADE magazine this week: A public-relations coup.

It's another sign of how the Republican is making major strides in the mainstream media after the conservative opinionati attacked him over immigration reform. Whatever Rubio might have lost on Breitbart or in Human Events, he has made up for umpteen-fold on CBS, PARADE and (in between) on CNN.

If folks thinks he's not going to be formidable in 2016, the past few days of fawning coverage should help put the lie to that.

Indeed, as immigration fades as an issue, the conservative criticism appears to be as well. And so has critical coverage. Rubio doesn't just command attention from the northeast media elite, he can command his own set of facts that aren't quite true and that aren't really questioned.

Consider his statement about his support of immigration reform, which he called "consistent." Rubio hasn't been. Rubio has been consistent -- but only in his inconsistency when it comes to a pathway to citizenship, immigration reform's sticking point. The background is here, here and everywhere.

The rest of Rubio's quote on immigration is perhaps more illuminating: "it's a long game, not a short game."

It's little wonder, then, that CBS called the piece "Rubio Reset."

Yup, and with still-solid numbers of Republicans behind him and major news coverage before him, Rubio has loads of persuadable voters he can gobble up in the middle. Details like his flip-flops on immigration reform probably matter less to a majority of voters than the fact that he compromised on an important issue and reached across the aisle.

Look out, Hillary Clinton, Rubio knows how to work a camera and he knows his facts when it comes to foreign policy.

And now that President Obama's foreign policy is reaching a low point in the polls, Rubio is making sure to remind people that the former secretary of state was the "architect" of the "colossal failure."

Here's the transcript: