Alan Grayson compares GOP to paranoid, gullible, bigoted, Confederate flag-waving gun nuts
@MarcACaputo

Just days after comparing the tea party to the Ku Klux Klan, Florida’s most-outspoken Democratic Congressman, Alan Grayson, addressed the state party faithful Saturday and likened some Republicans to Confederate flag-waving “bigots.”



Grayson made his comments during a mock reading of a fake Republican Party agenda in which he suggested conservatives were also gay marriage-bashing gun nuts.



“At 8:30 a.m., the morning breakout sessions,” Grayson said, reading the made-up GOP agenda. “Ballroom A: the bigots. Ballroom B: the paranoids. And Ballroom C, the largest group of all: the gullible.”



The speech, largely applauded by the attendees of the Florida Democratic Party’s biannual state conference, followed an opening address by Democratic National Committee Chairwoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz, also a Broward Congresswoman.



Wasserman Schultz limited her attacks to Republican Gov. Rick Scott for passing a law that curtailed some early voting days in 2012 and for trying to purge noncitizens from the voter rolls. She didn’t mention that Scott reversed his election law last year.



“We are not going to allow him to put obstacles in the path of our voters,” Wasserman Schultz, a Broward County congresswoman, said.



“Slick Rick and his Republican cronies in Tallahassee, the tea party extremists he likes to pal around with, they know they can’t win on the merits,” she said. “They try to rig the outcome.”



Wasserman Schultz’s speech wasn’t all negative. She and others mentioned the Oct. 15 special election win of new state Rep. Amanda Murphy, a Democrat.



Wasserman Schultz earlier this week issued a statement expressing a measure of displeasure with Grayson’s fundraising email that bore an image of a burning cross and that likened tea partiers to Klansmen.



“Obviously I am disappointed in the use of that imagery. Both sides need to dial back that kind of rhetoric and look to bring more civility into politics,” Wasserman Schultz said in a statement.



Grayson, who said he stood by his fundraising email, dialed it back by Saturday. But not by much when he read his mock copy of a conference agenda for the Republican Party of Florida:



At 8 a.m. the raising of the flag -- the Confederate flag



At 8:30 a.m., the morning breakout sessions. Ballroom A: the bigots. Ballroom B: the paranoids. And Ballroom C, the largest group of all: the gullible.



At 9 a.m., a colloquium on the subject of ‘How gay marriage ruined my straight marriage,’ by No One



At 10 a.m., a demonstration of the Kevlar chastity belt.



At 11 a.m., a seminar on the dangers of education



At noon, a special luncheon event with Gov. Rick Scott on the subject of ‘How I bought my job…. And turned a profit.’…



At 2:30 p.m., Rush Limbaugh speaking on how prescription drug addiction has improved his life.



3:30 p.m., a special preview of the remake of the Manchurian Candidate, the movie, starring Ted Cruz. That’s the Manitoba Candidate.



At 4 p.m., a silent auction of Davy Crockett’s flintlock rifle used only to kill rabbits and Native Americans



430 p.m. a real tribute to Dan Qualye the former vice president called The brains of the operation



5 p.m. the keynote speech by Sarah Palin on the subject of whatever’s on my hand….



At 8 p.m. the ritual burning of the Bill of Rights. Except for the Second Amendment.