Bush email account is discovered
As Florida governor, Jeb Bush used another, previously undisclosed email address, records show — the newest wrinkle in an evolving debate over public officials' use of private email accounts.

When Bush released thousands of emails from his tenure as Florida's governor as part of his preparations to run for president next year, he did so from the email account he shared openly, [email protected]

Those emails also include references to another email address, [email protected] Bush said through a spokeswoman that he was unaware of the account, although records showed that people wrote to him there more than 400 times between 1999 and 2004.

The same records show no replies from Bush coming from that address. Instead, when Bush responded, he did so from his more well-known email address. Writers sometimes also reached the governor at [email protected] or [email protected]

Bush's spokeswoman, Kristy Campbell, said Bush had no knowledge of the other email account. "He doesn't know what that email address is," she told the Associated Press on Tuesday.

There's no indication this other account was used in any improper or secretive way.

Nelson on sideline

Sen. Bill Nelson, Florida's only statewide elected Democrat, said Tuesday that he'll stay out of the 2016 Senate primary but did not hide his admiration for Rep. Patrick Murphy.

"I think Patrick Murphy is a very attractive candidate who can win statewide," Nelson said.

He has talked to Murphy, who got in the race Monday, "at length," adding, "I'm a big fan." He said Rep. Alan Grayson, a potential rival to Murphy, has not reached out to him. When told it sounded like he has a preference, Nelson objected: "Reubin Askew taught me an important lesson: When you are the senior member in the entire state, you don't get involved in a primary."

Nelson also said he's not concerned that Murphy, who turns 32 next week, lacks experience. "He'll be 34 by the time of the election. The Constitution says 30."

Poll backs Clinton

A new Florida robo poll by the Democratic-leaning Public Policy Polling finds a majority of voters don't think either Marco Rubio or Jeb Bush should run for president — and that Hillary Clinton leads all the GOP presidential contenders in Florida.

Alex Leary and Adam C. Smith contributed.