School Finance Facts
This summer has brought some spectacular Superhero hero movies such as Wonder Woman, Guardians of the Galaxy and Spider Man. What moviegoers enjoy about these films is that it allows the viewer to suspend disbelief. While fantasy is part of a great movie experience, it is a real problem when it’s applied to school finance. Fantasy has no place when it comes to governmental accounting.

Both Governor Abbott and Lieutenant Governor Patrick have confidently proclaimed that school districts have plenty of money, despite evidence to the contrary. In 1999, Texas ranked 32nd in per pupil spending. We’re now 46th. The spending looks higher sometimes because Texas was also the fastest growing state during this period, which means more capital investment.

Both Governor Abbott and Lieutenant Governor Patrick have expressed a desire to provide property tax relief. We encourage them to look at the increases in local taxpayer share compared with State Support. According to the Legislative Budget Board, the amount of state revenues relative to local revenues declined from a 50% to 50% ratio in school year 2007-08 to a ratio of 42.7% (state revenues) to 57.3% (local revenues) in school year 2016-17. This indicates that Legislature’s relative support of K-12 education fell by 14.8% when public school enrollment grew by 800,000 for the decade from 2008 to 2017. Furthermore, the LBB’s publication shows total revenues supporting public schools increased from 2008 to 2017 by $10 billion increase; however, approximately $8 billion or 80% of the increase was paid by local taxpayers.



To help make his case that school districts were not properly balancing their budgets, Patrick cited that of the “$163,000 being spent per classroom,” only $52,000 is paid to classroom teachers. We could not verify his numbers, but encourage everyone to view Moak Casey’s study breaking down how education dollars are spent. This gives just a preview of how difficult it is to make cuts. What school leaders already know is this: the days of cutting “low-hanging fruit” are long gone. To find almost a billion dollars for teacher raises, as Abbott & Patrick suggest is possible with existing funds, is impossible for most districts without making sacrifices to quality and safety.

The real heroes are local taxpayers, who continually go above and beyond in their support of school districts, despite diminishing support from the State of Texas. More and more taxpayers understand the solution to both effective public schools and real property tax relief is by properly funding our public schools. Until all of our elected officials understand this, we may continue to receive ideas straight from the comic books.

Respectfully,





Tracy Ginsburg, Ed.D.

TASBO Executive Director