Tax Analysts -- Federal Tax News and Analysis
Publications & Tools Federal Tax News and Analysis

®

Sample Edition Tax Notes Today ™

Sample Edition Tax Notes

Covering all federal tax laws, regulations, and policy developments, Tax Notes and Tax Notes Today keep you up to date with the most thorough news and commentary service available. Whether you like your information daily or weekly, our federal news and commentary offer the essential information you need to keep your critical edge:



Federal tax law changes and policy shifts — often months before they occur

Cutting-edge special reports, in-depth analytical articles, investigative reports, and insightful commentary from leading practitioners, scholars, government officials, and Tax Analysts’ own Martin Sullivan and Lee Sheppard

Coverage of the latest congressional action and comments from Treasury and IRS officials Just-released IRS regulations, revenue rulings, revenue procedures, announcements, and chief counsel advice

White House budget proposals, tax bills introduced in Congress, cost estimates of those proposals by the Congressional Budget Office and the Joint Committee on Taxation, and more.

Tax Notes Today ® Online Daily Get your news as it happens with our online daily — supplemented with an in-depth library of current and archived documents.



Access to FATCA Expert, featuring the latest news, in-depth analysis, and an always up-to-date IGA chart.



Searchable full-text documents from courts, Congress, and government agencies and departments, including:



Congressional correspondence Tax Court opinions GAO reports Internal Revenue Bulletins Chief Counsel Advice Proposed, final, and temporary regulations Public comments on regulations Joint Committee on Taxation correspondence

Free daily and customized e-mails focused on your choice of topics.

Searchable archives going back to 1987. Tax Notes ™ Print Weekly or Online Weekly If you prefer a weekly summary of federal tax news, with in-depth commentary on the week's events, you'll want to read our magazine in print or on the Web. The searchable Web version includes archives dating from 1972.



Online magazine subscribers receive free weekly e-mails of headlines and PDFs.



If you prefer a weekly summary of federal tax news, with in-depth commentary on the week's events, you'll want to read our magazine in print or on the Web. The searchable Web version includes archives dating from 1972.Online magazine subscribers receiveweekly e-mails of headlines and PDFs.