The Tax Foundation
Staff > Scott A. Hodge

Scott A. Hodge

President

hodge@taxfoundation.org

Scott A. Hodge is president of the Tax Foundation in Washington, D.C., and is recognized as one of Washington's innovative thinkers on tax policy, the federal budget and government spending. Over the past 20 years Scott has been a leader in many successful efforts to change public policy. During the 1990s, he led the campaign to include the $500 per-child credit and capital gains tax cuts in the Contract with America. These tax cuts were the eventual centerpieces of the 1997 tax bill and the Bush tax cuts in 2001 and 2003.

He has been the creative force behind the Tax Foundation’s Putting a Face on America’s Tax Returns project and the State Business Tax Climate Index, two programs that are changing the terms of the tax debate at the federal and state level. Scott has written and edited three books on the federal budget and streamlining the government and has authored over 100 studies on tax policy and government spending. He has also authored dozens of editorials and opinion pieces for publications such as The Wall Street Journal, The Washington Post, USA Today, The New York Post and The Washington Times. Hodge has conducted over 600 radio and television interviews—including NBC Nightly News, CBS Nightly News, CNN, Fox Network, Hardball with Chris Mathews, and C-SPAN. In addition, he has contributed to stories on wasteful spending aired by ABC's "Prime-Time Live" and "20/20," and NBC's "Fleecing of America."

Before joining the Tax Foundation, Scott was Director of Tax and Budget Policy at Citizens for a Sound Economy. He also spent ten years at The Heritage Foundation, including eight years as Heritage’s Grover Hermann Fellow in Federal Budgetary Affairs. Scott began his career in Chicago where he helped found the Heartland Institute in 1984. He holds a degree in political science from the University of Illinois at Chicago.

(Click here to download high-resolution photo.)

Recent Media Appearances

Contributions