2012 Budget - Expand FUTA and Make UI Permanent
Expand the Federal Unemployment Tax Act and Make Unemployment Insurance Surtax Permanent





Unemployment insurance (UI) is financed by a combination of state and federal taxes on employers based on the wages of each employee. Due to the length of the current downturn and the relatively low levels of state reserves at the beginning of the recession, states have accrued a large level of debt to the federal UI trust fund. The Federal Unemployment Tax Act (FUTA) currently imposes a federal payroll tax on employers of 6.2 percent of the first $7,000 paid annually to each employee. The tax funds a portion of the federal/state unemployment benefits system. This 6.2 percent rate includes a temporary surtax of 0.2 percent (begun in 1976 and extended since then). Employers in states that meet certain federal requirements are allowed a credit for state unemployment taxes of up to 5.4 percent, making the minimum net federal tax rate 0.8 percent.

While states could set their taxable wage bases below the federal taxable wage base, employers in these states would not receive the entire credit. Currently, no state has a taxable wage base below the federal level; instead, 47 states set their taxable wage base at a higher level, with Washington the highest at $37,300 for 2011. (The current federal base was set in the 1980s, and the states with the highest state taxable wage bases automatically adjust their wage bases for inflation.) Federal requirements are also not satisfied when states have exhausted their funds and need to borrow from the federal government to pay benefits. States are required to pay back the borrowed amount including interest. Thus, net federal tax rates on employers increase in indebted states (since they are not eligible for the full credit) to repay the loans. Affected states also must increase state payroll tax rates or the covered wage base to rebuild their funds.

Currently, 30 states have exhausted their UI trust funds in the face of high unemployment and are borrowing from the federal government. Outstanding loans, which totaled $41 billion at the end of 2010, are projected to climb to a record $65 billion in 2013. Employers in indebted states will face immediate tax increases to repay these debts, which could discourage job creation at a time when growth is needed. In addition, states may address their short-term debt burden by limiting eligibility or benefits paid to unemployed workers.

The president’s budget proposes two changes. The first would make the existing 0.2 percent surtax permanent. The second would provide short-term relief to employers by suspending interest payments on state UI debt and suspending the FUTA credit reduction for employers in borrowing states in 2011 and 2012. The proposal would also raise the annual FUTA wage base to $15,000 per worker in 2014, index the wage base to subsequent wage growth, and reduce the net federal UI tax from 0.8 percent (after the proposed permanent extension of the FUTA surtax) to 0.38 percent. States with wage bases below $15,000 would have to conform to the new FUTA base. States would retain the ability to set their own tax rates, as under current law.

Given the current depletion of funds and the lack of job growth in the recovery, these proposals make sense. Postponing an increase in unemployment taxes can encourage new hiring, while increasing the base will help states accumulate larger balances before the next recession. In addition, indexing the wage base for the tax will prevent future erosion of unemployment funds by inflation. Making the 0.2 percent surtax permanent would raise $15 billion between 2012 and 2021, while the combination of providing short-term tax relief to employers and expanding the federal base would raise $46 billion over the same period.

Additional Resources

U.S. Department of Labor, “UI Data Summary FY 2011 Budget Mid-session Review”



Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, “Rebuilding the Unemployment Insurance System”