Charters need to prove their worth
According to the National Center for Education Statistics, a public charter school is defined as “a publicly funded school that is typically governed by a group or organization under a legislative contract (or charter) with the state or jurisdiction. The charter exempts the school from certain state or local rules and regulations. In return for flexibility and autonomy, the charter school must meet the accountability standards stated in its charter.”

It goes on to say that a school’s charter is reviewed periodically and can be revoked if guidelines on curriculum and management aren’t followed or if certain standards aren’t met, which is a good thing.

According to the Florida Department of Education, there are now more than 600 charter schools in the state with an enrollment of more than 200,000 students. Following the movement started by former Gov. Jeb Bush, the Legislature has been supporting “school choice” to give parents alternatives when they’re not satisfied with traditional public schools. Bush even supported vouchers for students if they had attended an F school the previous year, which even could be used for private schools, but a court decision put a halt to it.

❖ ❖ ❖

This week, a Florida House panel signed off on a measure that would allow charter schools to receive more money for facilities, but not before setting off a debate about district finances and school construction costs. House legislative staff estimate charters would receive more than $60 million in local property tax revenue under a plan that sets aside $90 million in state Public Education Capital Outlay funding next school year. It’s not yet clear whether the state Senate will match the House’s proposal, or work on a plan of its own. It fell mostly along party lines, but one Democrat, Rep. Daryl Rouson of St. Petersburg, voted for the legislation while urging his colleagues to allay districts’ concerns so that once the proposal reaches the House floor, “It’s a better bill.”

I was once a vigorous supporter of school choice, including vouchers, which got me into many arguments with my oldest sister, who has a doctorate in education. She believes any policy that “takes money away from public schools” shortchanges the students left behind. She also feared it would further segregate schools along racial and class lines.

“Didn’t we get a good public school education?” she asked me.

I acknowledged that we did indeed get good educations, but the Chicago public schools we attended in the 1950s and ’60s were different. Teachers had more authority in the classrooms, and most families were stable. That’s why I told her I believed that concerned parents who wanted their children to attend a good school deserved to have an alternative if their neighborhood didn’t have one.

That was more than 20 years ago, and I promised her I would keep an open mind on the issue. During that time I monitored the progress — or lack of it — students were making when their parents opted to send them someplace outside of neighborhood schools. A few years ago I had to admit that school choice didn’t provide the major educational benefits I hoped it would.

The first thing that tested my belief in school choice was the citywide voucher program for Milwaukee schools, which began in the mid-1990s. Under the policy, any student could attend any school, even parochial institutions, and government funds would cover the tuition. After more than a decade, there was no difference in test scores between students who used vouchers and those who didn’t. The same occurred with a program in Washington, D.C. Worst still, Milwaukee’s dropout rate didn’t improve, and three-quarters of students who did graduate had left the schools they chose.

Then there is the question of fairness in admissions to charter schools. A public school has to educate every child, no matter if they have disabilities or are homeless. If government funds are involved, you can’t discriminate, so school choice through charters can only go so far.

But what has really given me second thoughts is that in many cities across the country, charter schools have become breeding grounds for hustlers who are simply interested in enriching themselves, not educating students. In far too many of them, the favorite subject seems to be nepotism. I’ve read of charter organizers who put their entire family on the payroll. By the time school administrators catch on to these scams, the “educators” have collected their money and moved on.

So where I was once an advocate of school choice and charter schools, I’m now a skeptic. Legislators pushing to expand these educational options need to explain why this latest push to expand them is in Florida’s best interest.

Charter schools are a work in progress. Before we push for more of them, we should make sure the students are progressing better than they would in a traditional public school.

[email protected]