Rep. Jolly introduces bill to defund Planned Parenthood
Congressman David Jolly said Tuesday he is continuing the fight to strip federal funds from Planned Parenthood in the wake of videos of organization officials dispassionately discussing how they sometimes provide medical researchers with tissue from aborted fetuses.

Those videos have led conservatives to accuse the group of illegally selling the organs for profit — denied by Planned Parenthood — and inserted abortion and women’s health into the mix of issues to be argued in the 2016 campaign.

Jolly, a Republican who represents Pinellas County, filed a bill identical to one that failed in the Senate this week. It would stop the flow of federal funds to the group and instead spread the money to other women’s health providers.

“All funds no longer available to Planned Parenthood will continue to be made available to other eligible entities,” the Jolly bill says.

Planned Parenthood receives more than $500 million yearly in government funds, including state payments — more than one-third of its annual $1.3 billion in revenue.

By law, federal funds cannot be used for abortions except for cases of incest, rape or when a woman’s life is in danger.

Jolly said his bill “does defund Planned Parenthood fully … but it retains funding for women’s health care services” like sexually transmitted disease testing and cervical and breast cancer screenings.

The same language, however, failed Monday in the Senate on a mostly party-line vote of 53-46, seven short of the 60 votes Republicans needed.

Even so, the GOP is hoping to reap political gains because the videos have ignited the party’s core conservative, anti-abortion voters.

“The more the American people and its representatives see and understand the actions of Planned Parenthood, the more they will see … how (the organization is) manipulating the administration of abortions,” Jolly said.

The anti-abortion Center for Medical Progress has released four videos in which people posing as representatives of a company that purchases fetal tissue converse with Planned Parenthood officials.

The videos have had impact because of the casual descriptions by the Planned Parenthood officials of the abortion procedures they use to obtain tissue, and because they show close-ups of fetal organs in laboratories.

Planned Parenthood officials say the group gives fetal tissue to researchers only with a mother’s advance consent in “fewer than five states.”

Gov. Rick Scott, an anti-abortion Republican, has ordered an investigation of the state’s 16 Planned Parenthood centers “to ensure they are in full compliance with the law,” he said in a press release last week.

“If a Planned Parenthood office is not following the law, we will move quickly to take legal and regulatory action against them,” Scott said.

The House is expected to vote on the legislation when Congress returns. Jolly also is seeking the U.S. Senate seat held by Republican Marco Rubio, who is running for president.

Information from the Associated Press was used in this report.

[email protected]

(850) 765-0807

Twitter: @jlrosicaTBO