St. Pete council approves $20 million for new police headquarters
Seeing a chance to expedite construction of a new police headquarters, the City Council voted Thursday to free-up $20 million in sales tax money in a plan proposed by Mayor Rick Kriseman.

The money from the city’s share of the Penny for Pinellas tax gives it a $70 million pot to replace the cramped and deteriorating police station, and to build it in one phase of construction.

The city has spent years patching up the three aging police headquarters buildings at 1300 First Ave. N.

“We have reached a point where we have to stop doing Band-Aids,” Kriseman told the council.

Council Chairman Charlie Gerdes said he “couldn’t be happier” to approve the sales tax funding. He said the police station was the biggest issue among voters when he campaigned in 2011.

“This is a priority that is long since past due,” Gerdes said. “I can’t wait to send the message that we’re ready to go.”

The council voted 7-1 to support Kriseman’s proposal to shift about $20 million earmarked for other Penny of Pinellas projects to the police station. The mayor and Public Works Administrator Mike Connors said the money comes primarily from projects that were completed with other money or under budget.

Kriseman reached an agreement with Pinellas County officials to divert money from the Penny projects, which were approved by voters. The county commission still needs to approve the plan.

The council previously set aside $50 million for the police headquarters, but that would have been enough only to build one phase. The remainder would have been built later, which could have increased the cost by about $15 million.

Connors estimated construction could begin in 12 to 15 months. The council and the public will have chances to review the plans as they develop. Architect Harvard Jolly has a contract to design the new station and operations center on property next to the existing police headquarters.

Kriseman told the council that approving the $70 million construction budget did not mean it all would be spent.

“I share your concerns over the cost ... and I’ve asked the (police) chief to look at the designs, to make sure we are looking at a facility that will meet our needs for 50 to 70 years, but not more than what we need,” Kriseman said.

Connors said repairing the existing buildings and bringing them up to code would be “throwing good money after bad.” The two main buildings are 30 and 50 years old, and a third was built in 1928. In addition, the buildings are too small and antiquated for current needs.

The new facility will be designed to withstand a Category 4 hurricane and will be a backup emergency center for the county, which Councilwoman Darden Rice called “a strategic asset for the entire community.”

She said anyone who would tour the police station “would be dismayed with the current state of affairs.” Councilwoman Amy Foster called the conditions “deplorable.”

Councilman Steve Kornell said the police station was one of the projects the city promised to voters. “I support this. I think it’s a great deal,” he said.

Councilman Wengay Newton voted against moving the $20 million. He said he supports building a new police station, but the money should be spent on neighborhood projects instead.

[email protected]

(727) 828-6752

ï¿½

ï¿½