Seminole tribe sues Florida in midst of talks over gaming pact
The Seminole Indian Tribe filed a lawsuit in federal court Monday charging that the state of Florida has violated the tribe’s exclusive rights to hold “banked” card games, such as blackjack, at Seminole casinos.

The lawsuit claims the state violated a five-year-old agreement with the tribe in two ways: by allowing dog tracks and other gambling venues in south Florida to hold electronic black jack games, and by permitting pari-mutuel facilities around the state to operate card tables for poker and other games where players bet against each other.

The lawsuit was filed despite ongoing negotiations between the Seminoles and state officials, including the governor’s office and members of the Legislature. The state wants more money from the tribe in return for allowing the Seminoles to offer roulette and craps tables at their casinos.

Hillsborough County Commissioner Victor Crist, a former state legislator with contacts in Tallahassee, said the state is also keeping outside gambling interests from setting up shop in the Sunshine State.

“The state wants more money and, as I understand it, they are going to get significantly more and it will grow exponentially over the next five years to close to $1 billion annually,” Crist said. “In return, the state is keeping out any new companies or entities from coming into the state and starting up casinos.”

Since the overall gaming compact was signed in 2010, the Seminoles have paid the state in excess of $1 billion, according to the lawsuit. Last year, the tribe contributed $248.5 million to the state’s general fund, according to records, with $7 million of that going to local governments. Hillsborough County’s share this year was just over $3 million, with a $3.2 million payout expected in 2016.

In a news release, James E. Billie, chairman of the Seminole Tribe of Florida, said “significant progress” has been made in the negotiations. Yet the tribe felt a lawsuit was necessary to “protect its interests” should the talks with the state founder.

Timing was a key issue. The compact between the Seminoles and the state had a five-year provision that allowed the tribe to hold banked card games exclusively at five of the tribe’s seven casinos. One of the sites is the Hard Rock Hotel & Casino in Tampa.

That provision of the overall compact expired at the end of July. A 90-day grace period followed which ends Thursday. After that, the Seminoles were to discontinue the banked card games unless a new agreement was reached.

“The tribe and the state are negotiating either an extension of the compact or a new compact,” said Gary Bitner, a spokesman for the tribe. “Those negotiations are going very well, but because of the timing it was necessary to file this suit now.”

The lawsuit is asking the court for a declaration that would let the tribe expand black jack tables to the two remaining Seminole casinos, Brighton and Big Cypress. The tribe also wants the judge to declare that the state has failed to negotiate in good faith as required by federal law and to order the state and the Seminoles to proceed with negotiations.

Crist called the lawsuit a “formality” and said a new agreement likely will be signed before the end of the year so it can be taken up by the Legislature in January.

[email protected]

(813) 259-8303

Twitter: @mikesaltbo