Reps. Mayfield, Workman will seek Sen. Altman’s redistricted seat in 2016
Indian River County lawmakers will play musical chairs next year after the Florida Senate redraws its district boundaries.

Vero Beach Rep. Debbie Mayfield will run for the seat currently held by Rockledge Sen. Thad Altman, who represents parts of Indian River County. Altman will run for the seat currently held by Melbourne Rep. Ritch Workman, who will be term-limited next year. Workman in turn will challenge Mayfield for Altman's seat. All three are Republicans.

TERM LIMITS

Altman wasn't planning to vacate his Senate seat until 2018. But his seat will be on the ballot next year because a lawsuit forced the Legislature to redraw the state's 40 Senate districts. He cannot seek re-election to the Senate because state laws on term limits.

Mayfield, who also will reach her House term limit in 2016, had already filed to run for Altman's Senate seat in 2018 — as had Workman.

They can't file to run in 2016 until the new Senate districts are finalized. A Leon County judge has to recommend new boundaries to the Florida Supreme Court because the Legislature couldn't agree on its own map during a special session that ended last month.

The new district would cover Brevard and all of Indian River counties if the judge picks one of the five maps the Senate and a coalition of voting rights groups submitted to him.

MAYFIELD'S CAMPAIGN

Mayfield was elected to the House in 2008 after the death of her husband, Rep. Stan Mayfield.

Among the achievements she said she will tout is her work to try to rein in the Florida Municipal Power Agency, which sells electricity to Vero Beach at high prices. Her bills to address the issue died in the 2014 and 2015, but she filed a bill for 2016 to force the agency to disclose its financial information.

Mayfield this year also tried to repeal the state version of the controversial federal Common Core education standards but her legislation died. She said despite failing, her efforts brought awareness to federal intrusion in state education.

She will push next year for a bill to make the commissioner of education, today appointed by the state Board of Education, an electable position upon a statewide referendum. That would give parents more power over education, she said.

She is trailing Workman in fundraising. He's raised $226,000 to her $1,000.