Robert McElroy: Murphy's congressional motion bold, but could cause problems with Republicans later
SHARE

By Robert Mcelroy Of Jensen Beach Publishes Theweekincongress.Com

Murphy motion bold, but could cause problems with GOP later

Maybe you voted for him and maybe you didn't, but you can say this about Rep. Patrick Murphy, D-Palm Beach Gardens: He's not shy. Effective? We'll see.

Shy? No way.

Murphy recently offered a motion to recommit HR 325, the debt limit bill, to assure that veterans and seniors don't suffer benefit cuts when the fiscal 2014 budget is built. A motion to recommit is the last chance to amend a bill before the final vote on passage.

Murphy's motion failed, as most do, but one has to ask how it came to pass that a freshman congressman with three weeks on the job succeeded in maneuvering himself to making such a motion on such a high-profile bill.

Murphy was well received by House Democrats not only because he landed a seat in a Republican district but because he defeated Allen West for that seat. He is a young man with a long future on the Hill if he can be re-elected, and that certainly would be on the minds of Democrat leaders.

Played back home the motion allows him to appear to have hit the ground running and is actively taking up for seniors and veterans, two very large voting blocks that, I am sure, he has great intentions toward. But, as they say about legislation: The devil is in the details.

Murphy's floor comments included his conclusion that, "Anyone who supports the underlying legislation has no reason to not also support this amendment."

That proved not to be the case with Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., who crafted the Republican budget last year and ran for vice president on the Romney ticket. Ryan said the motion was silly and partisan.

Silly it wasn't. Partisan it was, and here's why: The text of the motion required that a budget resolution protect veterans and seniors from cuts but also included provisions that even Republicans acquiescing to support the debt bill could not support. Specifically his motion insisted that a budget does not include the conversion of Medicare into a voucher plan, cuts in Medicaid health insurance benefits, cuts in nursing home care or privatization of Social Security benefits — all of which Ryan supports.

The battle over the provisions in his motion that are obviously dear to him will come, as Ryan pointed out, when the budget process begins later this year. So what is the point of Murphy's motion?

The Democrat leadership has tagged Murphy with this one, and the Murphy who campaigned on reaching across the aisle should take note of that because, in the end, the Republicans are still the House majority, the architects of the fiscal 2014 budget, and can still get a resolution passed without Democrats. Those are the people on that other side of that aisle, and most of the time when politicians talk about reaching across the aisle it is to convince the other side in their direction.

It's politics, of course, and both parties are already preparing for 2014. Even local elections draw national attention and resources, but eventually it comes down to local needs.

Former U.S. Reps. Mark Foley and Tim Mahoney managed to get the St. Lucie Inlet dredged; Tom Rooney didn't. That is a matter that will take some bipartisan doing. The process of reaching across the aisle and getting things done involves horse trading and quid pro quo. Branding himself as early on as he did may cause Murphy problems later.

Robert McElroy, Jensen Beach, and publishes TheWeekinCongress.com. He writes about legislation for the Center on Congress at Indiana University.