Republicans attack Patrick Murphy's 'career built on lies'
@ByKristenMClark

Republican groups continue to hammer home revelations of résumé embellishment by Democratic U.S. Senate candidate Patrick Murphy.

The National Republican Senatorial Committee launched a new TV ad today condemning what it described as Murphy's "career built on lies."

The ad will run over the next two weeks in the Washington, D.C. area, the NRSC said. The group is spending about $45,000 on the airtime, a spokesman said.

Information in the 60-second spot draws largely from a scrutinizing TV investigation that aired last week by Jim DeFede of Miami Herald news partner WFOR CBS-4 Miami. DeFede's two-part report highlighted the facts that -- despite Murphy's and his campaign's claims -- Murphy never "worked" as a certified public account and he wasn't actually a "small business owner."

The NRSC's ad also includes video of Murphy responding to questions by the Herald/Times about the documented discrepancies in his credentials that the Herald, Tampa Bay Times and Politico Florida previously uncovered.

"What is Privileged Patrick Murphy hiding?" a narrator asks, using the nickname Republican critics use for the Jupiter congressman.

Watch the ad here:

Murphy campaign manager Josh Wolf said in a statement this morning: "The NRSC is welcome to waste their money in D.C., because Patrick is fighting for Florida."

The statement included a lengthy "fact check," seeking to debunk both the ad and, again, the CBS Miami report.

Murphy's campaign blasted the station's investigation as "deeply false" and "misleading" and, as part of its damage control, claimed that the station made several corrections.

However, while some wording was changed slightly from what was originally published in the online, written version, no official corrections have been made by the station, and CBS Miami has said it stands by its reporting.

The two key conclusions of DeFede's reporting -- that Murphy never "worked" as a CPA and isn't a "small business owner" -- are true.

Murphy was -- and is -- licensed in Colorado as a CPA, not in Florida. Florida requires a license here to perform any work associated with being a CPA, such as "performing audits" or "representing oneself as a CPA."

And there is no conclusive evidence that shows Murphy "owned" Coastal Environmental Services, a subsidiary of his father's Coastal Construction company. The evidence to which the Murphy campaign links in an effort to prove Murphy owned the business is the company's incorporation documents from 2010. But those were signed by Coastal Construction executive Dan Whiteman and it lists Murphy third on a list of company directors behind Whiteman and his father, Tom Murphy Jr.

Last week, a new super PAC supporting Rubio also released an ad online to attack Murphy using the CBS Miami report.

This post has been updated.