Tea Party Express Endorses Three Candidates for U.S. Congress in New Jersey

Sacramento, CA – Tea Party Express, the nation’s largest grassroots Tea Party political action committee, is pleased to announce its endorsement of the following candidates for Congress in New Jersey: Tom MacArthur in the 3rd District, Leonard Lance in the 7th District, and Jay Webber in the 11th District.



Tea Party Express Co-Founder and Chief Strategist Sal Russo said, “Today, we are excited to endorse three New Jersey conservatives with stellar records of fighting for lower taxes and limited government. Early voting began this weekend in New Jersey, and we encourage voters to cast their votes for Congressmen Tom MacArthur and Leonard Lance and State Assemblyman Jay Webber. We need them in Washington fighting to support the efforts of President Trump and our Tea Party Congress to reduce the size and intrusiveness of the federal government, balance the budget, and take on the culture of corruption inside the Beltway.

3rd District: “Working to support pro-growth policies in New Jersey and standing up for the empowerment of people, Rep. Tom MacArthur has spent his time in Congress working hard to ensure that all have the same opportunity to achieve the American Dream. Tom supported the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, which is putting more money into the pockets of New Jersey taxpayers, and he has advocated for policies that reduce regulations and put Americans back to work. With more than 30 years of experience in the insurance industry, Tom understands the regulatory reforms needed to make insurance more affordable for all and eliminate the disastrous impact of Obamacare.

7th District: “Rep. Leonard Lance has a stellar record of advocating policies that encourage economic growth, job creation, fiscal responsibility, and a less intrusive federal government. While serving in the New Jersey Legislature, he put forth an Amendment to the New Jersey State Constitution stopping any further borrowing by the state until the voters approve it, and he also supports a federal balanced budget amendment to the U.S. Constitution. Leonard voted to lower taxes for 99% of New Jersey taxpayers, and he is the leading advocate in Congress for eliminating the death tax. He will continue to help the constituents of New Jersey prosper while holding to the ideals of the American dream.

11th District: “Jay Webber serves in the New Jersey General Assembly, representing Garden State residents in the 26th District. Jay has worked hard to lower the taxes and even received a “Taxpayer Hero Award” for his efforts. He has supported legislation to help create good paying jobs for New Jersey, worked with small businesses to build success, and worked to protect the future of free enterprise. Jay has earned the award of “Guardian of Small Business” from the National Federation of Independent Businesses. He is considered one of the most influential voices in New Jersey politics and will be a strong voice for conservative principles in Congress.