Polish migrants almost 20pc more likely to work than Britons
Polish people living in Britain are almost 20 per cent more likely to have a job than those born in the UK, a study of official figures shows.

New Analysis of findings from the 2011 Census by the Office for National Statistics shows that Polish-born residents of England and Wales have the highest employment rate of any other group when analysed by birth.

It also shows that migrants from EU countries have dramatically higher levels of employment than those from non-European countries.

Overall 81.2 per cent of working-age Polish born residents of England and Wales on census day were working, compared with only 69 per cent of their UK-born counterparts and only 59 per cent of those from outside the European Union.

Although employment levels among migrants were lower overall than the British born population (63.2 per cent), the ONS said overseas students largely accounted for the difference.

But the study also highlights pockets of high unemployment among some Commonwealth immigrant communities with almost one 10 Jamaican-born residents out of work, twice the rate among the British-born population at the time.

Overall, it shows that new migrants are also more highly qualified than those who have been living in the UK for longer periods.

Only one in 10 of those who had been living in Britain for under four years had no formal qualifications compared with a third of those who had been in the country for 30 years or more.

The analysis also highlights significant language ghettoes in the UK’s long-term immigrant communities.

It is most acute in the Bangladeshi community in which around 90 per cent of elderly women living in the UK cannot speak English.

Three quarters of those who had been in the country for more than 30 years still could not speak the language and the proportion rises to 94 per cent among older Bangladeshi women who have been living in the UK for between five and 10 years.

When both sexes are included, the study shows that almost four in 10 Chinese-born migrants living in the UK for more than 30 years cannot speak English.

More than a quarter of the long-term Bangladeshi and Pakistani populations and those who arrived from India more than three decades ago also had no English.

Proportion of working age population in employment on census day (per cent):

UK born 69

Non-UK born 63.2

EU born 73

Non-EU born 59

Country of origin:

Poland 81.2

South Africa 78

Germany 70.6

Ireland 68.9

USA 66.8

India 65.4

Jamaica 62.4

Nigeria 58.6

Pakistan 46

Bangladesh 44.1

China 38.1