Iraq faces take-over by Iran-backed militias if Islamic State is defeated, coalition commanders fear
Coalition commanders in Iraq fear that Iran-backed Shia militias may stage an armed takeover of the country if Isil is defeated, a new report has warned.

Senior figures in the US-led mission believe there is a high likelihood of a "war after the war" because of the Iraqi government's reliance on Shia militias in its fight against Isil.

The move has hugely boosted the strength of such militias, to the point where they are now in a position to challenge the elected government for control of the country.

The warnings are revealed in research compiled by one Britain's foremost experts on Iraq, Professor Toby Dodge, who served as an adviser to General David Petraeus, America's former top commander in Baghdad.

"Coalition commanders talk about ‘the war after the war." Professor Toby Dodge, LSE Middle East Centre

Prof Dodge’s findings are based on meetings with high-level coalition commanders and Iraqi politicians conducted during a recent study trip to Iraq for the Middle East Centre at the London School of Economics.

They told him that recent defeats against Isil in Ramadi and Sinjar had shifted "the balance of power" to the Shia militias, who lead around 70 per cent of all military operations.

"Against a background of positive military news, there was near unanimity amongst the senior Iraqi political figures and the military commanders of the American-led, multilateral coalition that that the military defeat of (Isil) in Iraq would trigger another military conflict, which would in effect, mark the country’s return to civil war," said the report.

Photo: REUTERS/Stringer

Prof Dodge's warning comes amid heightened concerns about the Middle East erupting into a wider Sunni-Shia civil war.

Last weekend, long-running tensions surfaced between the Shia mullahs of Iran and the Sunni monarchy of Saudi Arabia after Riyadh beheaded a Shia activist accused of sedition.

The two nations, which act as the Shia and Sunni regional powerhouses respectively, are both accused of backing militias forces on either side of Iraq's sectarian divide.

Prof Dodge's research, which will be released as a report later this year, cites estimates given to him by the current Iraqi defence minister that around two-thirds of the Iraqi armed forces deserted in the wake of Isil's invasion of northern Iraq in 2014.

• Iraq chooses a risky course by mobilising Shia militias for Isil offensive

That led to the government turning instead to Shia militias to fight against Isil, including insurgent groups like the League of the Righteous, which carried out thousands of attacks on US troops during Iraq's American occupation. They also abducted and killed four British security guards during the kidnapping of Peter Moore, a British computer expert.

The strongest militia of all, however, is the so-called "Hashd" or "Popular Mobilisation Forces" which is now believed to have up to 100,000 men-at-arms.

Many, according to Prof Dodge's research, are lured by the fact that the militia has "more societal prestige and better and more reliable pay than the Iraqi army."

That has in turn weakened the Iraqi army, which has had to rebuilt almost from scratch, and now takes an "extremely defensive" approach in major operations such as last week's recapture of Ramadi.

Photo: REUTERS/Stringer

"Senior coalition commanders suggest that the Iraqi army can only move towards the enemy at a rate of 100 metres a day, hampered equally by little or no logistical capacity," the research found.

The wider consequences of militia domination of the security forces, Prof Dodge added, was that Iraq's Sunni minority felt ever more obliged to seek protection from Isil, which styles itself as the guardian of Sunnis against Shia aggression.

• Iraq crisis: militants carry explosives as they parade through Baghdad

He was also critical of the current approach to the conflict by both Britain and Iraq, saying that just as during the 2003 invasion, too much effort was being put into "a short-term military defeat" and not enough into "long-term sustainable stability."

Longer term, Prof Dodge warned, US military commanders feared an all-out takeover of Iraq by an emboldened Hashd if and when Isil was defeated.

"Coalition commanders talk about ‘the war after the war’, the conflict between the Hashd and the remnants of the Iraqi army for the control of the territory of the Iraqi government," he wrote. "This fight could be between the Hashd and the Counter Terrorism Force controlled by the Prime Minister."