Vladimir Putin blames Nato expansion for rising tension with Europe
Vladimir Putin has criticised western governments for seeking to “reign” over Europe, blaming Nato’s post-Cold War expansion for the crisis in relations between Russia, the United States, and Europe.

In a bitter condemnation of the post-Cold War world order, Mr Putin said the current confrontation between Russia and the West occurred because western leaders ignored advice against expanding Nato and Russia’s post-communist leaders failed to assert the country’s interests following the collapse of the Soviet Union.

But he insisted Russia was willing to cooperate on fighting terrorism, international crime, and environmental issues as long as the West “listens to us, critically reflect on what we say.”

“We did everything wrong from the outset,” Mr Putin said in a wide-ranging interview with the German newspaper Bild. “We did not overcome Europe's division: 25 years ago the Berlin Wall fell, but Europe’s division was not overcome, invisible walls simply moved to the East,” Mr Putin said. “This created the foundation for mutual reproaches, misunderstanding, and crises in the future.”

Instead, the alliance should have refused membership to former communist nations in eastern and central Europe, telling candidate countries like Hungary and the Poland that “we see the future of Europe in a different way,” he said.

Mr Putin has frequently criticised the United States and other western governments for ignoring Russian security concerns by expanding Nato and attempting to build a missile defence system in Europe.

Ten former communist countries in eastern and central Europe joined Nato in 1999 and 2004. The most recent members to join were Croatia and Albania, in 2009.

Relations with the West were plunged into crisis when Russia annexed Crimea and backed a separatist uprising in eastern Ukraine following a revolution that ousted Viktor Yanukovych, Ukraine’s pro-Russian president, in 2014.

The United States and the European Union have imposed a range of economic sanctions against Russia in response.

Western leaders have said sanctions will remain in place until Russia fulfils its part of the Minsk peace agreement, including by ceasing to supply arms to separatists and prevailing on them to relinquish control of the border to Ukrainian forces.

Mr Putin called that position “theatre of the absurd,” and described Russia’s seizure of Crimea as a morally and legally justified response to what he called a “coup d’etat” in Kiev.

“I think [the sanctions are] wrong and are not aimed at supporting Ukraine but at suppressing the growth of Russia’s capabilities,” he said.

“Everyone says that the Minsk Agreements must be implemented and then the sanctions issue may be reconsidered,” he said, referring to the deal he negotiated with Petro Poroshenko, the Ukrainian president, at French and German brokered talks in February last year.

“This is beginning to resemble the theatre of the absurd because everything essential that needs to be done with regard to implementing the Minsk Agreements is the responsibility of the current Kiev authorities,” he added, pointing to Ukrainian constitutional reforms included in the agreement.