How South Florida Congressional members are reacting to new GOP Obamacare overhaul
@amysherman1

The Republican Party has revived it's effort to overhaul Obamacare that could reach a vote in Congress this week as President Donald Trump approaches his 100th day in office.

The amendment by U.S. Rep. Tom MacArthur, a New Jersey Republican, would allow states to apply for waivers to certain aspects of the Affordable Care Act. The House could vote on the measure, which amends the GOP's American Health Care Act, this week. (The AHCA died in March without a vote when competing GOP factions in the House couldn't agree on it.)

Many of the Florida Republicans have been non-committal so far including Carlos Curbelo and Mario Diaz-Balart who represent Miami-Dade.

Here is a running tally of comments by South Florida members of Congress on the amendment based on interviews with their spokespersons.

Republican

Ileana Ros-Lehtinen: “After studying the revised bill, I intend to vote NO. This plan still does not effectively address the needs of my South Florida constituents. The proposed changes to this bill would leave too many of my constituents with pre-existing conditions paying more for health insurance coverage and too many of them will even be left without any coverage at all. Additionally, this new plan still includes painful cuts to Medicaid that will make it more difficult to care for patients with high costs of coverage due to special needs or chronic diseases. Unfortunately, the bill does not deliver what my district needs and until a plan that helps South Florida is proposed, I will continue to side with my constituents in opposing this plan.”

Carlos Curbelo: "The Congressman is still in the process of reviewing the legislation and discussing it with House leaders."

Mario Diaz-Balart: "He is still reviewing the proposal and awaiting bill text to be introduced."

Democrats

Alcee Hastings: “After its implosion last month, ‘TrumpCare2.0’ still eviscerates essential health benefits, increases premiums, guts Medicare, eliminates protections for those with pre-existing conditions, and unfairly targets seniors with tax increases. This bill is riddled with sweetheart deals to insurance companies and the pharmaceutical industry, but does nothing to actually improve healthcare in America. Republicans need to join Democrats in pursuit of actual healthcare reform and stop pandering to the extreme flank of their party."

Ted Deutch: “Republicans are clearly not listening to the American people. Just like the last one, this bill gives the green light to strip away essential health benefits supported by an overwhelming majority of Americans, like maternal care and ER visits. This bill opens the door for discrimination against women, seniors, and people with pre-existing conditions like cancer, Alzheimer’s, and so many other diseases. Is this really how we are making America great again?”

Debbie Wasserman Schultz: Opposed. In a fundraising email she called "TRUMPCARE 2.0 ... more dangerous than ever."



- with Alex Leary, Tampa Bay Times