Democrats, that shameful performance proves why normal Americans despise your party
President Trump delivered an impressive speech to a joint session of Congress on Tuesday night. He hammered on a lot of familiar Trump themes but did so in a more effective way than we've seen before. People will say it was a "presidential" speech, but of course any speech given by a president is, by definition, presidential. Better to say that it was a successful speech. Successful in communicating Trump's core message in a clear, concise, and even eloquent way.

On the other hand, while Trump's messaging was on point, Democrat messaging was somewhat less inspiring. Of course, we're all familiar with how the Clapping Game is played during these speeches: The president's party gives a standing ovation after every third syllable while the opposition party chooses its applause spots more carefully, usually electing to clap only when bipartisan platitudes are offered. But that changed last night.

Democrats remained seated with their hands in their laps even as Trump uttered the most non-controversial and universal of sentiments. They refused to applaud when Trump said we should put Americans first. The refused to applaud when Trump talked about fighting drug addiction in the inner city and corruption in Washington. They refused to applaud when Trump discussed the need to make sure certain blue collar Americans, like coal miners, still have jobs. They refused to applaud Trump's vow to fight Islamic terrorism. They refused to applaud when Trump movingly stated that "we all salute the same flag and are made by the same God." When the president highlighted the victims of illegal immigrant crime, many Democrats let out audible groans of disgust. And, most shameful of all, a number of top Democrats refused to stand and clap as the president honored the widow of a fallen Navy SEAL.

Disgusting. Truly disgusting.

If we were to judge their positions by the things they declined to applaud, we must arrive at the conclusion that Democrats are staunchly opposed to the flag, God, the law, job creation, and military widows, and enthusiastically in favor of drug addiction, terrorism, crime, unemployment, and murder. To those who've been paying attention, this is not much of revelation. They've given us a lot more than a lack of applause to indicate their positions on these topics. But it's still somewhat surprising that Democrats are so eager to advertise the fact.

Mostly, this absurd performance on the part of Democrats tells us two things. First, they have a bunch of maniacs in their base and they're fully aware of it. Democrat politicians know they'll get in trouble with their liberal constituency if they appear to be even vaguely opposed to illegal immigration, Muslim terrorism, and the impoverishment of coal miners, or even slightly in favor of the rule of law, prosperity, freedom, and God.

Second, their hatred for Trump, and their base's hatred for Trump, is pushing them ever further into the extreme fringes. Democrats have been booing God, defending radical Islam, and explicitly encouraging illegal immigrants to break the law for years now, but giving such an icy reception to a concept like "creating jobs," and publicly giving the cold shoulder to a military widow, is a new step. That's something they're doing purely to spite Trump. But, in the process, they only make Trump look dignified and themselves look like monsters.

It's clear that Democrats will automatically oppose anything Trump says simply because it's Trump saying it, and for no other reason. Personally, I'd love for him to exploit this power. For instance, he could give a speech forcefully opposing puppy murder, head lice, and diabetes, just so that Democrats will feel required to come out in favor of all three. Perhaps Trump could even get them to abandon their support for gay marriage and abortion by announcing his support for both.

Well, maybe they'd draw the line there. Or maybe not. Who knows anymore? But what's clear, in any case, is that the Democrat Party has no interest in, or love for, normal Americans, and has now given up even pretending otherwise. They are the party of anti-Americanism, elitism, and lawlessness, and have been for quite some time. Last night they simply made it official. The rest of us have taken note.

To see more from Matt Walsh, visit his channel on TheBlaze.