Governor candidates Adam Putnam and Gwen Graham lead in May fundraising
The financial arms race for governor got off to a quick start in May, as Republican gubernatorial candidate Adam Putnam raised $2.2 million in hard dollars and Democrat Gwen Graham reported $1.5 million, according to reports from the campaigns or posted Monday on the state Division of Elections website.

Putnam, the Florida commissioner of agriculture who officially launched his campaign in May after spending the last two years raising funds through his political committee, finished the month with a whopping $9 million in cash on hand. After he formally entered the race in May 1, his campaign raised $1,190,946 and his political committee, “Florida Grown,” collected $1,017,702.

Graham's committee, Our Florida, raised $1.1 million for a total of $1.8 million since her official announcement May 2. The bulk of that, about $950,000, came from her former congressional committee. Her campaign appears to have raised about $430,000 for the month, according to a press release. Details had not been posted late Monday on the state elections website.

Chris King, the Orlando businessman also running in the Democratic primary, announced his campaign has raised $2 million to date. That includes $1.4 million from his campaign, which was boosted by the $1 million contribution he gave himself. King's political committee, Rise and Lead, Florida, has raised $543,750 to date, including $121,256 in May. One of the largest contributors to King's political committee is $166,000 from his father, Orlando lawyer David King, who successfully challenged the Republican Legislature's redistricting maps on behalf of a coalition led by the League of Women Voters.

Democrat Andrew Gillum has raised $1.1 million to date, including $96,760 in May, Division of Elections data shows. His political committee, Florida Forward, did not raise anything in May in part because Gillum, the mayor of Tallahassee, “took some well-deserved time off the campaign trail" to welcome in third child, said campaign spokesman Geoff Burgan.

Note: all amounts listed are hard dollars, not in-kind contributions.