EBOLA, DRUG-RESISTANT TB, DENGUE FEVER ARE COMING INTO THE U.S.

On June 30, 2014, I interviewed Dr. Jane Orient, an internal medicine specialist and the Executive Director of the¬†Association of American Physicians and Surgeons¬†(AAPS). Dr. Orient stated that by admitting these huge groups of children who come from countries where medical screenings are minimal and hygiene is poor, the United States is at risk for epidemics of serious diseases and viruses that the nation has not seen in years and for which we have no immunity.

The following paragraphs contain the contents and supporting documentation of my phone interview with Dr. Orient.

A New Type of Immigration

Our former image of how people come to the United States is outdated. The old image of illegal immigrants scaling a fence and making their way through the Arizona desert is antiquated.

The majority of our new illegal immigrants are no longer from Mexico. Central American countries comprise 75% of these points of origin including Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua and Guatemala presently comprise 3 out of 4 illegal aliens captured by the Border Patrol.

A Manufactured Crisis

This past week, I presented the fact that FedBizzOpps.gov posted an ad, in January 0f 2014, seeking ‚Äúescort services for unaccompanied alien children‚ÄĚ from ages from infancy to 17, to transport them to Office of Refugee Resettlement Shelters throughout the U.S. This was a completely manufactured crisis and it was well planned. Even the Wall Street Journal, on June 20, 2014, stated that someone is spreading the belief in Central America that if children can get to America, they will be allowed to stay along with their parents. The culprit for this disinformation would most likely be the CIA.

I have previously covered how the federal government has manufactured the health crisis and one of the standards of proof is in the degree of preparation demonstrated by the federal government. The government knew this was going to happen and they planned for it.

The net result for what I am labeling as treason against the American people, is that we are at risk for contracting the planet’s most virulent diseases and viruses for which we have no treatment and no immunity. In my discussion with Dr. Orient, she used the term “biological attack” in order to describe the threat being posed in the present crisis. Dr. Orient used the term “possible collusion” to describe the federal government’s complete inaction in addressing the growing health concerns as the CDC is completely absent on the border.

¬†

Ebola Hemorrhagic Fever

This is everyone’s nightmare. If you are unfamiliar with Ebola, good luck trying to sleep tonight after reading the following”:¬†

Ebola hemorrhagic fever broke out in West Africa in March, and is totally out of control as one of the most deadly illnesses has crossed into seven African countries. The illness causes fever, headache, and internal and external bleeding. It is transmitted person to person through body fluids, and has up to a 90% mortality rate. This was reported in the Washington Post on June 29, 2014. Adding fuel to this fire is a statement that comes from the chairman of the National Association of Former Border Patrol Officers (NAFBPO), Zack Taylor, who states that West African illegal immigrants are presently coming into the U.S. through Mexico. These West Africans have been apprehended in the Rio Grande Valley sector in the last few years. Some of these groups speak Spanish in order to infiltrate into the United States posing as Central American immigrants. This speaks to planning and collusion that some of these groups were taught to speak Spanish so they will “blend in” with other illegal immigrant groups. This is another piece of evidence that the coming series of pandemics has some governmental agency fingerprints on this invasion. Smart money would say that the CIA is involved.

Drug Resistant TB, Dengue Fever and Chikungunya

In the interview, Dr. Orient spoke of a mosquito-transmitted disease known as Dengue fever,. Dengue fever comes from Mexico, Central America, the Caribbean and northern South America. According to my Border Patrol contact, many more illegal immigrants from these regions are making their way into the United States. This illness is taking a fatal hemorrhagic form. There is no vaccine and no drug therapy for this viral disease that is almost always fatal.

Dr. Orient speaks and writes about Chikungunya, a mosquito-borne virus from both Africa and Asia, which surfaced in the Caribbean in December 2013. As of June 3, more than 100,000 confirmed and suspected cases have been reported from 17 countries in the Caribbean and South America. Dr. Orient stated that the CDC predicts the disease will continue to spread in the Americas. If people from these regions are coming to America, Chikungunya is spreading to the United States. Chikungunya and dengue are carried by the same mosquitoes and can be difficult to distinguish between the two. Chikungunya is not always fatal, unless it has been weaponized, and certainly, Americans will have no immunity for Dengue Fever and Chikungunya. ALTHOUGH BOTH OF¬†THESE DISEASES ARE FIRST TRANSMITTED BY MOSQUITOES, ¬†BUT THEN THEY ARE THEN TRANSMITTED BY HUMAN TO HUMAN CONTACT!

Drug-resistant TB has already made its way into the United States as a result of the presence of the illegal immigrants. The Border Patrol is privately stating that they are impacted and at least one confirmed case of TB has shown up among the Border Patrol as have scabies and other select illnesses. Dr. Orient is aware of this, as am I. However, the government is covering this up by threatening criminal prosecution of any whistle blowing Border Patrol agents. Dr. Orient said that the Border Patrol is already laundering their work clothes on site so as to lessen the chance of spreading disease to their family members at home.

Dr. Orient Publicly and Officially Expresses Her Concerns