Wasserman Schultz fires arrested IT staffer under investigation
@amysherman1

U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, D-Weston, has fired an IT worker arrested on bank fraud.

Imran Awan was fired Tuesday, according to her office spokesman David Damron.

"Mr. Awan previously served as an employee in our office, but his services have been terminated,” he said in an email.

Fox News reported that Awan was arrested at Dulles International Airport Tuesday after buying a ticket to Pakistan on Monday with a return ticket for January.

Awan, 37, of Lorton, Virginia, was arraigned Tuesday in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia on one count of bank fraud, according to Bill Miller, a spokesman for the U.S. Attorney's Office in Washington D.C.



Awan pled not guilty and was released pursuant to a high-intensity supervision program which requires him to use a GPS monitor, abide by a curfew and not leave a 50-mile radius of his home. Awan was also ordered to turn over all of his passports. A preliminary hearing was scheduled for Aug. 21.

A federal criminal complaint posted by Politico Tuesday states that Awan and his wife Hina Alvi attempted to defraud a Congressional credit union. The couple obtained a $165,000 home loan by making misrepresentations, including about their use of a residence as a primary residence and not a rental property. Alvi left for Pakistan in March and the FBI does not believe she intends to return.

Imran has been under a criminal investigation for equipment and data theft for several months. Many of his relatives, who have also worked for House members, have also been a part of that investigation.

A spokeswoman for U.S. Capital Police, Eva Malecki, told the Miami Herald in February that the United States Capitol Police began the investigation at the request of members of Congress and that no members were being investigated.

Awan has worked for various members of the House since 2004.

This post has been updated with information from the U.S. Attorney's Office