All of Donald Trump’s Accusers: A Timeline of Every Alleged Grope and Assault
In the days since a video emerged showing Donald Trump bragging about his ability to get away with sexually assault, several women have stepped forward to allege the Republican presidential nominee touched them inappropriately. Together, their allegations amount to a substantial list of alleged sexual harassment and assault dating back to the early 1980s. Trump has denied every allegation against him.

Early 1980s: Jessica Leeds claims she was groped on a flight: Leeds, now 74, told The New York Times on Wednesday that shortly after her flight took off to New York, over three decades ago, Trump raised the armrest separating them and grabbed her breasts and tried to put his hands up her skirt. “He was like an octopus,” she said. “His hands were everywhere.”

1989: Ivana Trump, his first wife, claims that she felt “violated” during sex: As The Daily Beast reported last year, Ivana Trump said in a court deposition about their divorce that he “violated” her during sex following a violent attack. Ivana reportedly described the incident as “rape” to several confidantes. She later said she wouldn’t describe the act as rape in a “criminal sense,” adding: “As a woman, I felt violated, as the love and tenderness, which he normally exhibited towards me, was absent. I referred to this as a ‘rape,’ but I do not want my words to be interpreted in a literal or criminal sense.”

Early 1990s: Kristin Anderson claims he touched her genitals: The Washington Post reported on Friday that Anderson was at The China Club in Manhattan when Trump, without introducing himself or speaking to her, reached his hand up her skirt while they were seated. "This is the vivid part for me: The person on my right, unbeknownst to me was Donald Trump, put their hands up my skirt. He did touch my vagina through my underwear, absolutely." At the time, Anderson got up and told her friends but did nothing about the incident. She added that, over the years, her opinion has changed: "It's actually not nothing, and it really sends an awful message to women that they are nothing." The bus tape was "nauseating” to Anderson and that the story of Trump allegedly groping a woman on an airplane motivated her to come forward to "back these girls up."

1993: Makeup artist Jill Harth accuses Trump of attempted rape: Harth alleged in a Guardian interview that Trump had cornered her and groped her in his daughter Ivanka’s bedroom. “He pushed me up against the wall, and had his hands all over me and tried to get up my dress again,” Harth told The Guardian, “and I had to physically say: ‘What are you doing? Stop it.’ It was a shocking thing to have him do this because he knew I was with George [Harth’s boyfriend at the time], he knew they were in the next room. And how could he be doing this when I’m there for business?”

1997: Miss Teen USA contestants say Trump walked in on underage girls dressing backstage: Four women who competed in the contest alleged to BuzzFeed News that Trump walked into the dressing room while they were changing. Tasha Dixon, who competed as Miss USA Arizona—not in the teen competition—in 2001 said: “He just came strolling right in. There was no second to put a robe on or any sort of clothing or anything. Some girls were topless. Other girls were naked.” Some of the contestants in Miss Teen USA were as young as 15. “Don’t worry, ladies, I’ve seen it all before,” Trump allegedly said.

Trump would later admit that he did these sorts of things during an appearance on Howard Stern’s radio show.

1997: Temple Taggart McDowell said he forcibly kissed her: As a 21-year-old Miss USA contestant, McDowell was introduced to Trump during a pageant rehearsal in Shreveport, Louisiana. She says Trump embraced her and then immediately kissed her. “He kissed me directly on the lips. I thought, ‘Oh my God, gross.’ she told The New York Times. “He was married to Marla Maples at the time. I think there were a few other girls that he kissed on the mouth. I was like ‘Wow, that’s inappropriate.’”

1998: Karena Virginia said he grabbed her breast her at the U.S. Open: While she was waiting for a car, the then-27-year-old woman claims Trump grabbed her right arm and her breast. “‘Don’t you know who I am, don’t you know who I am,’ he said,” Virginia said at a press conference with Gloria Allred. “I felt intimidated and I felt powerless,” she said, adding: “I felt ashamed that I was wearing a short dress and high heels. That feeling of shame stayed with me for a while and it made me disinclined to wear short dresses or high heels.”

2003: Mindy McGillivray claims he groped her at Mar-a-Lago: The woman, then 23, told the Palm Beach Post on Wednesday: “All of a sudden I felt a grab, a little nudge. I think it’s Ken’s camera bag, that was my first instinct. I turn around and there’s Donald. He sort of looked away quickly.” McGillivray said she recalls telling the photographer, Ken Davidoff, “Donald just grabbed my ass.”

2005: Rachel Crooks said he forcibly kissed her at Trump Tower: Crooks, who was working at the real-estate company Bayrock Group at Trump Tower, told The New York Times on Wednesday that after a handshake, Trump began kissing her on the cheeks and then directly on the mouth. “It was so inappropriate,” Crooks said. “I was so upset that he thought I was so insignificant that he could do that.”

2005: Trump admits he looks at naked beauty-pageant contestants: During one of his many appearances on the Howard Stern show, CNN reported Trump said he would go backstage while women were dressing for his Miss USA and Miss Universe pageants. “Well, I’ll tell you the funniest is that before a show, I’ll go backstage and everyone’s getting dressed, and everything else, and you know, no men are anywhere, and I’m allowed to go in because I’m the owner of the pageant and therefore I’m inspecting it,” Trump said. “You know, I’m inspecting because I want to make sure that everything is good.”

Get The Beast In Your Inbox! Daily Digest Start and finish your day with the top stories from The Daily Beast. Cheat Sheet A speedy, smart summary of all the news you need to know (and nothing you don't). By clicking “Subscribe,” you agree to have read the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy Subscribe Thank You! You are now subscribed to the Daily Digest and Cheat Sheet. We will not share your email with anyone for any reason.

2005: Trump brags he can get away with sexual assault: On a tour bus with Access Hollywood co-host Billy Bush, Trump claims on a hot-mic that his fame allows him to do almost anything to women. “You know I’m automatically attracted to beautiful women—I just start kissing them. It’s like a magnet. Just kiss. I don’t even wait,” he said on a video first obtained by The Washington Post. Trump explained: “And when you’re a star, they let you do it. You can do anything... Grab them by the pussy.” During this exchange, Trump says he tried to have sex with Access Hollywood’s Nancy O’Dell. Trump was already married to his third and current wife, Melania, who was pregnant with their son at the time.

2005: People reporter Natasha Stoynoff alleges Trump pushed her against a wall and forced a kiss on her: Stoynoff, who writes that she had a developed a friendly relationship with Trump and Melania while on the Trump beat for People, had come to Mar-A-Lago to report on the couple’s first wedding anniversary. When pregnant Melania went upstairs to change clothes, Stoynoff writes, Trump said he had a “tremendous” room to show her and led her into another room and shut the door. There, she writes, “within seconds, he was pushing me against the wall, and forcing his tongue down my throat.” The alleged incident ended when Trump’s butler entered the room to say Melania was on her way down. “You know we’re going to have an affair, don’t you?” Trump allegedly said when the butler left.

2006: Former Miss Finland Ninni Laaksonen says Trump groped her: A local Finnish newspaper reports that Miss Finland in 2006, Ninni Laaksonen, claims Trump grabbed her on the behind while she was in New York that year, just before she appeared on the Late Show with David Letterman. “Trump stood right next to me and suddenly he squeezed my butt. He really grabbed my butt,” she said. “I don’t think anybody saw it but I flinched and thought: ‘What is happening?’”

2007: Former Apprentice contestant Summer Zervos says he thrust his genitals at her: On Friday, Zervos accused Trump of groping her and trying to have sex with during a job interview. Zervos had been a contestant on Season 5 of The Apprentice in 2005 and came to his golf course in Palos Verdes, California to discuss a job opportunity two years later. Zervos said Trump kissed her forcibly on the lips several times and groped her. A second time, Trump allegedly walked her into a bed room and began "thrusting his genitals" at her before she told him to stop. The two had dinner immediately afterwards, where Trump allegedly "started saying that he did not think that I ever known love."

2010: Trump allegedly tries to kiss woman in a boardroom: CNN anchor Erin Burnett told a story relayed to her from a friend about Trump attempting an unprompted kiss. “Trump took Tic Tacs, suggested I take them also. He then leaned in, catching me off guard, and kissed me almost on lips. I was really freaked out,” Burnett quoted her friend as saying. Afterward, the friend said Trump told her how “special I am” and asked her to call him.

2013: Cassandra Searles alleges that Trump groped her: Cassandra Searles, a former Miss Washington who participated in the Miss USA contest while Trump was an owner, posted on Facebook saying, “he continually grabbed my ass and invited me to his hotel room,” reported Seattle’s KING-TV.

—Staff writer Olivia Messer contributed to this report.