US Embassy Moves Its "Go Green" Independence Day Celebration to June 4th Out of Respect for Ramadan
US Embassy Moves Its “Go Green” Independence Day Celebration to June 4th Out of Respect for Ramadan

It’s an Obama world.

The US Embassy in Indonesia moved Independence Day to June 4th out of respect for the Muslim holiday of Ramadan.



US Ambassador to Indonesia Robert Blake (right), Jakarta Governor Basuki “Ahok” Tjahaja Purnama (left) and People’s Consultative Assembly (MPR) speaker Zulkifli Hasan (second left) cut a cake to mark the anniversary of the 239th US Independence Day at the ambassador’s residence in Jakarta on Thursday. (Jakarta Post)

The Jakarta Post reported, via Jihad Watch:

The United States Embassy enjoyed its annual 4th of July celebration on Thursday, June 4, one month early, in order to respect the upcoming Ramadhan month, which will begin on June 17 and last for one month. US Ambassador to Indonesia Robert O. Blake and US Ambassador to ASEAN Nina Hachigian presided over the festivities, which involved brass band renditions of the Star-Spangled Banner and the Indonesian national anthem, Indonesia Raya. Blake explained that the theme of the event leaned toward “green” development, which supported the US’ focus on building and promoting a green economy and more environmentally sustainable development. He also praised Indonesia’s performance as a fully functioning democracy, aiming for further collaboration between the two countries in the years to come. “The US will continue to support Indonesia in the future through its democratic achievements. Democracy is an American value which we have championed since [the country’s birth in] 1776,” Blake told the crowd during the festivities at his residence near Taman Suropati, Central Jakarta, on Thursday. He added that moving the 4th of July celebrations to June 4 was one done out of respect for the upcoming Ramadhan month, which will last from June 17 to July 17.

Ambassador Blake released this statement.