2016 Democratic Unpledged Delegate Preferences
Our unpledged delegate Presidential Preference sources are Democratic Convention Watch 2016 Superdelegates and Wikipedia - List of Democratic Party superdelegates, 2016.

The tallies were last updated

About 15% of the delegate votes at the convention will come from "unpledged" or "Superdelegates". These delegates serve because of the office they hold or office(s) they have held. The presidential preference of these delegates is not a factor in their selection as delegates. Unpledged delegates are:

The approximately 450 elected members of the Democratic National Committee (DNC).

Democratic Governors of the 50 states along with the following officeholders (assuming, of course, that they are Democrats): the territorial Governor of American Samoa the Mayor of the District of Columbia the territorial Governor of Guam the Governor of Puerto Rico the territorial Governor of the Virgin Islands

Democratic Senators and House members from the 50 states plus the following Non-voting members of the U.S. Senate and House of Representatives (again, assuming that they are Democrats): the House Delegate from American Samoa the House Delegate from the District of Columbia the two "Shadow" Senators from the District of Columbia the House Delegate from Guam the Resident Commissioner (House Delegate) from Puerto Rico the House Delegate from the Virgin Islands

Distinguished Party Leaders (current and former U.S. Presidents and Vice-Presidents who were elected as Democrats, former Democratic Leaders of the U.S. Senate and U.S. House [including former Democratic Speakers of the House and former Democratic Leaders in both houses of Congress], and former chairmen of the Democratic National Committee.

The number of "Unpledged" delegates to the Democratic National Convention is subject to change due to deaths, resignations from office (for those PLEOs who hold an elective office) or accession- by a Democrat- to an elective office through an intervening election or special election. In addition, any Unpledged PLEO who shall subsequently become a Pledged PLEO may further alter the number of Unpledged National Convention delegates within a given delegation.

Unpledged Delegate Preferences

Clinton 571 delegates, 568.5 delegate votes.

Sanders 44 delegates, 43.5 delegate votes.

O'Malley 1 delegate, 1 delegate vote.



Unpledged Delegate Preferences by State