Call to Action: FL THRs, email Gov.Crist!!!! [Archive]
View Full Version : Call to Action: FL THRs, email Gov.Crist!!!!

camacho From the NRA.



Alert: Critical Help Needed On Appointment of Florida Supreme Court Judges



DATE: August 20, 2008

TO: USF & NRA Member and Friends

FROM: Marion P. Hammer

USF Executive Director

NRA Past President



Very soon, Governor Charlie Crist will appoint two new members to the Florida Supreme Court to fill the vacancies created by the resignations of Justice Raoul Cantero and Justice Kenneth Bell.



These appointments are critical to Florida gun owners.







We need judges who respect all our freedoms, especially our Second Amendment freedoms. We need judges who will strictly uphold the Constitution, and not legislate from the bench.



Therefore, we need to let Governor Crist know that we SUPPORT:





Judge Charles Canady for the At-Large Seat Vacancy on the Florida Supreme Court,



and





Judge Ricky L. Polston for the First DCA Vacancy on the Florida Supreme Court.





Please email Governor Crist IMMEDIATELY and urge him to appoint Judge Charles Canady and Judge Ricky Polston to the Florida Supreme Court.



Send your email to the Governor at this address:



Jason.Gonzalez@eog.myflorida.com

ChrisVV done, thanks for the heads up.

Chester32141 Thanks for the notice.



Chester



http://banners.wunderground.com/banner/gizmotimetemp_both/language/www/US/FL/New_Smyrna_Beach.gif

markk Done.

DS Gun Glad you said something. :)

fearless leader E-mail sent, and a heads up to my distribution list.

Thanks.

onebigelf Done.

GeorgeR Done. Thanks for notifying us.

camacho Quick update: Crist has already picked Canady, but on the other seat a decision hasn't been made. Keep contacting Crist's office regarding the other judge.



http://www.sun-sentinel.com/news/local/florida/sfl-flfjustices0829sbaug29,0,4452184.story

CrawdaddyJim Thanks for the information.



Jim

camacho Thanks for the information.



Always a pleasure!

Benzene ...and every one of my more than 30 employees have been notified and has shown positive intent on this important matter.



Thanks for the heads-up.

camacho important matter.



Absolutely! As we saw from the Heller vs. DC, it sure matters who sits in these courts (US as well as the States Supreme Courts).

Daryll in NW FLA Done.

Cohibra45 Done and here is a copy of the email I sent...



Dear Gov. Crist,



My name is Kelly Robinson and I live in Melbourne, Florida. I would like to give you my support and my choices for your consideration for the Florida Supreme Court.



Judge Charles Canady for the At-Large Seat Vacancy and Judge Ricky L. Polston for the First DCA Vacancy.



Thanks for your time and consideration.



Kelly S. Robinson





If anyone would like to copy and change the name/place, your more than welcome to!!!;)

camacho Update:



Gov. Charlie Crist on Wednesday named Judge Ricky Polston to the Florida Supreme Court. Polston replaces Justice Kenneth B. Bell, who stepped down to return to private practice in Pensacola.



Polston, 52, is Crist’s second appointment to the high court.



Justice Raoul Cantero also stepped down earlier this year to return to private practice. He was replaced by Charles T. Canady, who joined the bench last month.



Polston has served on the 1st District Court of Appeal in Tallahassee since 2001. He is a Panhandle native who graduated from Florida State University College of Law, where he also has taught as an adjunct professor.





http://www.bizjournals.com/southflorida/stories/2008/09/29/daily16.html



I am sure that all of us who wrote the governor have small but invaluable contribution towards achieving the goal of putting in the Florida Supreme Court judges who would not engage in social engineering but rather strictly interpret the rule of law.

mallc is, in the strictest sense, "social engineering". An attempt to organize and place structure in civilization.



You really don't mean the "rule of law". You mean interpret the law as you believe it should be interpreted. Otherwise we'd still have a handgun ban in DC and you would agree with it.

camacho You mean interpret the law as you believe it should be interpreted.



It's not what I believe but what the Founding Fathers believed!

pilot teacher I believe Gov. Charlie Crist did appoint Polston to the Florida Supreme Court.:)



There was a tiny,tiny article in the St. Petersburg Times, a far left fringe lunatic newspaper.

vBulletin® v3.8.5, Copyright ©2000-2010, Jelsoft Enterprises Ltd.