U.S. Senate rejects &quot;killer&quot; amendments
Sridhar Krishnaswami

Several laws requiring specific assurances, foreign policy guidelines defeated

Rejecting amendment would be "dangerous," says Senator Feingold Not a good deal for America, world: Democrat Barbara Boxer

Washington: Five "killer" amendments that had the potential to wreck the India-United States civilian nuclear deal, including one that sought a cap on fissile material production, were defeated in the U.S. Senate, which overwhelmingly approved the accord. Wisconsin Democrat Russ Feingold proposed an amendment that required a pre-condition of Presidential determinations that the nuclear cooperation does nothing to assist, encourage or induce India to manufacture and acquire nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. The amendment was defeated by a margin of 71 votes to 25 votes, after a spirited debate on the floor involving Chair of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee Richard Lugar. Another amendment proposed by California Democrat Barbara Boxer required India to suspend military cooperation with Iran and was defeated by a bipartisan vote of 59 votes to 38 votes.

Democrat Jeff Bingaman also moved an amendment that sought to link nuclear exports to India to a Presidential determination that New Delhi has halted production of fissile materials. It was rejected by a margin of 73 to 26.

Feingold Amendment

The Feingold Amendment stated that India could not use or replicate and subsequently use U.S.-made "equipment, technology or nuclear material in an unsafeguarded facility or nuclear weapons related complex" or for any activity related to the research, development, testing or manufacture of nuclear devices.

During the debate, Mr. Feingold stressed that his amendment was completely "in line" with the nuclear deal. "My amendment only makes it a binding requirement," the Democrat said and warned that rejecting it would be "dangerous."

However, Mr. Lugar stressed the amendment was "truly a killer amendment" that, if passed, would force the re-negotiation of the agreement or make implementation "impossible." He also pointed out that a similar amendment offered by Senator Feingold at the Committee Markup was defeated by a margin of 13 to 5.

Cooperation with Iran

The Boxer Amendment required India to "suspend military to military cooperation with Iran, including training exercises until such time the Government of Iran no longer supports acts of international terrorism as determined by the Secretary of State ... ."

"I thought my amendment would be the obvious," Ms. Boxer said, adding that New Delhi turned out to be a "better negotiator" than Washington. "This deal is not a good deal for America; this deal is not a good deal for the world," she said.

Mr. Lugar acknowledged that Iran was a "destabilising force," but argued that the amendment was a "killer amendment that would require renegotiation of the nuclear deal." "An effective solution to the Iran threat must include India," he said.

Intervening in the debate, Senator Joseph Biden, who will assume the Chair, said that while lethal weaponry cannot be supplied to Iran, India had voted to sanction it at the International Atomic Energy Agency. He also said Washington would be in a difficult position if New Delhi asked the U.S. to stop dealing militarily with Pakistan. By way of assuring Ms. Boxer, he said that the civilian nuclear deal would be "gone" if anything surfaced of India dealing with Iran in nuclear weapons or sensitive technologies.

"The downside of rejecting this treaty is so much further down than any other downside disclosed from ratifying or supporting the changed law allowing us to go forward. So in that sense it is not a close call," Mr. Biden said.

The amendment proposed by Mr. Bingaman was characterised as a "killer" condition by Mr. Lugar, who said it imposed an unacceptable pre-condition. "India will regard this as moving the goal posts, an unacceptable re-negotiation of the deal and a bad faith effort on our part. As a consequence this is a deal killer," he said.

Prominent lawmakers who voted against the amendment included Senators Lugar, John Cornyn, John Rockefeller, John Kerry, Joseph Lieberman and Hillary Clinton. Those who supported the amendment included Senators Russ Feingold, Edward Kennedy and Barbara Boxer.

The amendment called for a verifiable fissile material cut-off treaty prior to the shipment of fuel and equipment, apart from the Presidential determination.

In the final stages of deliberations prior to voting, Mr. Lugar pointed out India had made it clear that it would not accept any unilateral caps, and that senators would have to consider an environment where Pakistan continued producing fissile materials and China had not committed itself to a moratorium on fissile material production.

Rejected amendments

The other two amendments rejected were proposed by Democrat Senator Byron Dorgan. His first amendment, rejected by a vote of 71 to 27, had proposed that the U.S. administration continue to support a U.N. resolution adopted after India's nuclear tests in 1998, asking New Delhi to stop producing fissile material for nuclear weapons and cap its nuclear weapons programme.

Mr. Dorgan's second amendment, rejected by a voice vote, pertained to the President making a determination to Congress that India has committed all reactors supplying electricity under IAEA inspections regime, a binding obligation on India not to assist, induce or encourage non-nuclear weapons states to manufacture or acquire nuclear weapons and a Presidential determination that India is reducing stockpiles. PTI