Length of secondary schooling and risk of HIV infection in Botswana: evidence from a natural experiment
The key exposure in our analysis was the total years of schooling at the time of the survey. Our outcome of interest was HIV status at the time of the survey. HIV status reflects a binary stochastic realisation of an underlying probability: the cumulative probability of HIV infection up to a respondent's age at the time of the survey. We defined an indicator—taking the value one if the respondent was born in a cohort exposed to the 1996 education policy reform and zero otherwise. Given that children were historically expected to start primary school at age 7 years, children were expected to enter junior secondary school at age 15 years. Therefore, individuals born in 1981 or later would have entered junior secondary school in 1996 or later, and were classified as exposed. We included in our analyses controls for age in years, year of birth, sex, and district of birth.

As a benchmark for our analysis of policy reform, we assessed the naive association between years of schooling and HIV status in the BAIS II and BAIS III sample. We assessed the crude bivariate relation graphically and then adjusted for covariates in descriptive multivariate ordinary least squares (OLS; linear probability) regression models.34x34Wooldridge, JM. Introductory econometrics: a modern approach. Michigan State University, East Lansing;

See all References We estimated several specifications, modelling years of schooling as a continuous covariate; allowing for different slopes for 0–9 years and 10 years to 13 years and more of schooling; and with separate indicators for each additional year of schooling completed. We present linear probability models (ie, as opposed to logistic models) to allow comparison with the two-stage least squares (2SLS) instrumental variable models used to analyse the policy reform.35x35Angrist, JD and Krueger, AB. Instrumental variables and the search for identification: from supply and demand to natural experiments. J Econ Perspect. ; 15: 69–85

Crossref | Scopus (715)See all References

We analysed the policy reform in three steps. First, we assessed whether birth cohorts exposed to the reform (reform cohorts) had higher educational attainment than had those not exposed. We estimated the effect of exposure to the reform on total years of schooling completed in multivariate OLS regression models (first stage). We also assessed the effects of the reform on the probabilities of completing at least 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13 or more years of schooling and show graphically how this distribution changed across birth cohorts. Second, we assessed the intention-to-treat (ITT) effect of being in a reform cohort on HIV status in multivariate linear probability models. Natural experiments that change the probability of an exposure can be analysed like randomised controlled trials with non-compliance.36x36Little, RJ and Rubin, DB. Causal effects in clinical and epidemiological studies via potential outcomes: concepts and analytical approaches. Annu Rev Public Health. ; 21: 121–145

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (328)See all References Third, we estimated 2SLS regression models using exposure to the reform as an instrumental variable (IV) for total years of schooling and adjusting for covariates. Under plausible assumptions, the treatment effect among so-called compliers is the ratio of the ITT and the difference in the probability of receiving treatment (ITT/first stage=IV). We interpret our IV estimates as local to the subpopulation who complied with their treatment assignment—ie, individuals who increased their years of schooling because of the reform.37x37Angrist, JD, Imbens, GW, and Rubin, DB. Identification of causal effects using instrumental variables. J Am Stat Assoc. ; 91: 444–455

Crossref | Scopus (1905)See all References

In all models, we controlled flexibly for age with a full set of single-year age indicators to account for the non-monotonic pattern of HIV infection across ages in Botswana and lower expected years of schooling for individuals at younger ages.38x38Central Statistics Office and National AIDS Co-ordinating Agency (Botswana). Botswana AIDS impact survey III: statistical report. Central Statistics Office, Gaborone;

See all References We also included indicators for district of birth. Finally, we adjusted for a continuous linear term in year of birth to account for continuous trends in HIV infection risk across birth cohorts. Exposure to the reform was modelled as an intercept shift for participants born in or after 1981. We estimated all models first for women and men separately, and then on the pooled sample. When pooling sexes, we included indicators for sex and the interactions of sex with all other covariates; however, we did not interact sex with the main exposure, so that the coefficient of interest reflects a weighted average of effects for men and women.

For our effect estimates to have a causal interpretation, four assumptions must be satisfied (appendix p 9appendix p 9). First, the instrument (reform cohort [Z]) must have had an effect on schooling (E); this is testable and we found large effects. Second, the instrument (Z) must be independent of unobserved confounders such as socioeconomic status (U), conditional on observed covariates (age, birth cohort trend, sex, and district of birth [X]); in our application this implies that people born before and after 1981 were similar, after controlling flexibly for age, district of birth, and a linear trend in HIV risk across birth cohorts. The availability of two survey years enables us to identify these cohort effects, while controlling flexibly for age and period effects. Our models control for period effects implicitly by simultaneously adjusting for age and a continuous term in year of birth. For a diagram encoding the assumptions behind the study design, see appendix, p 9appendix, p 9.

To allow for potential non-linearities in underlying cohort trends, we did robustness checks including quadratic terms for year of birth, reducing the window of observation to a narrower set of birth cohorts, and allowing the slope of the trend across birth cohorts to differ before and after 1981. Identification comes from the fact that the policy reform led to a discontinuous change in schooling across cohorts. Our identifying assumption is that no other unobserved factors led to a discontinuous change in HIV risk for precisely the same cohorts. To generate added confidence in this assumption, we did a placebo test, assessing the effect of the reform on individuals with fewer than 9 years of schooling—a population that was not affected by the reform. We also estimated difference-in-differences models, exploiting the fact that the policy reform was expected to have a larger effect in some districts than others, based on the share of the district populations with exactly 9 years of schooling pre-reform. Third, for our 2SLS estimates to have a causal interpretation, we assume that exposure to the policy reform (Z) affected HIV risk (Y) only through changes in schooling (E; exclusion restriction); this assumption is highly plausible given that the reform was a supply-side intervention that would not have specifically affected the reform cohorts except through their increased access to grade ten. Fourth, to interpret our results as complier causal effects (also known as local average treatment effects), we assume monotonicity—ie, that exposure to the reform (Z) only caused individuals to obtain more schooling or to have no change in schooling and did not lead some individuals to obtain less schooling. Violations of this assumption are possible but unlikely (eg, a person with a very strong preference for small class size might have continued to grade ten pre-reform but dropped out after grade nine after the reform).37x37Angrist, JD, Imbens, GW, and Rubin, DB. Identification of causal effects using instrumental variables. J Am Stat Assoc. ; 91: 444–455

Crossref | Scopus (1905)See all References, 39x39Hernan, MA and Robins, JM. Instruments for causal inference: an epidemiologist's dream?. Epidemiology. ; 17: 360–372

Crossref | PubMed | Scopus (323)See all References

In addition to the robustness checks described above, we conducted a range of sensitivity analyses including sampling weights, using alternate functional forms for age, modelling the outcome using a Probit link function, and imputing HIV status for respondents who did not consent to biomarker collection using two different methods. We also assessed whether the policy reform was associated with changes in consent rates and sample size that could bias results.

To compare the cost-effectiveness of secondary schooling versus other proven HIV prevention interventions, we calculated the costs per HIV infection averted and per disability-adjusted life-year (DALY) averted using estimates of the annual per-pupil costs of secondary education published by the UN Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Institute for Statistics (appendix pp 2–3appendix pp 2–3).

This study was reviewed by the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health institutional review board and considered exempt from full ethics review because it was based on an anonymised dataset.