Bush Taps Pensacola Judge For Florida Supreme Court
TALLAHASSEE -- Gov. Jeb Bush appointed Circuit Judge Kenneth Bell of Pensacola as a state Supreme Court justice Monday, saying he would enhance the court's geographic diversity as the first justice since 1917 to live west of Tallahassee.



Bell has been a trial judge in Pensacola since January 1991.



"The people of northwest Florida have gone far too long without representation on the Supreme Court," Bush said. Bell's family has lived in Pensacola for seven generations.



Bell, 46, replaces retiring Justice Leander Shaw, 72, who is stepping down next week after 20 years on the state's highest court.



He will be the only justice on the state's highest court who has served on the trial bench.



"This kind of perspective, I think, is important on our state's highest court," Bush said, noting that Bell has presided over more than 27,000 cases in 12 years on the bench.



Bell agreed, having written in his application that he understands what the public, attorneys and judges face at the trial level.



"I think that's one of the most vital things I can bring," Bell added Monday. "It's hard to read a trial transcript and really get a full picture."



Bell is Bush's second solo Supreme Court choice, following the appointment of Miami lawyer Raoul Cantero to the high court this summer. Justice Peggy Ann Quince was appointed jointly by Bush and then-Gov. Lawton Chiles during the transition period between their terms in 1998.



Republicans, particularly those in the state House, have accused the Supreme Court in recent years of stepping on the role of the Legislature in broadly interpreting the law -- in effect making new law in some cases.



Bell said his general judicial philosophy was more conservative.



"I don't believe in activism of the court, either from the left or the right," he said. "My philosophy would be one of judicial restraint."



As a trial judge, Bell sentenced a Panhandle physician after the nation's first manslaughter conviction of a doctor in an OxyContin case. The physician was sentenced to 63 years in prison for the deaths of four patients who overdosed on the painkiller.



Because he could have to rule on them, Bell declined to discuss some specific issues, such as what his beliefs are about abortion and the death penalty. He also said he think being a judge is about interpreting the law, and not imposing his views into judicial decision-making.



Still, he noted he has imposed the death penalty.



"Pragmatically, since capital cases consume the vast majority of the Supreme Court's docket, any justice should have proven his ability to handle such cases," Bell wrote in his application for the position, pointing to Supreme Court decisions upholding his decisions on death cases.



Bell earned his law degree from Florida State University after earning a bachelor's degree from Davidson College. He was a real estate attorney until he became a trial judge 12 years ago.



Bell's law school roommate, Lawton Langford, said Bell is a family man who has a strong work ethic and is willing to put in lots of hours.



Bell, who is white, replaces one of the court's two black justices.