Florida Budget for 2011-2012: Threaten Worst, Take Step Back
Since his inauguration as governor Jan. 4, and during his campaign through much

of 2010, Rick Scott promised cuts in taxes and fees across Florida totaling $2.4 billion. At the same time, the Legislature was toiling to cut down a budget deficit of $3.8 billion.

Since his inauguration as governor Jan. 4, and during his campaign through much of 2010, Rick Scott promised cuts in taxes and fees across Florida totaling $2.4 billion. At the same time, the Legislature was toiling to cut down a budget deficit of $3.8 billion. Under the Florida Constitution, the Legislature had to balance the budget and pass it by Friday at midnight. The Senate passed the budget, but the House got tangled up in last-minute kinks and missed the deadline — working into Saturday. Nonetheless, all but the finest of budget details were set.



Although Scott held to his tax-cut threat well into the two-month annual legislative session in Tallahassee, House and Senate leaders focused on the deficit throughout.



By the time a series of secret budget negotiations were finished Tuesday, the cuts had dwindled to $308 million, mostly in property taxes. The state's corporate tax was cut $30 million, far from the total of nearly $2 billion.



Cynics will say that Scott's big tax-cut stick was intended to make the heavy spending cuts needed to balance the budget look relatively moderate. He says he is simply spreading cuts to the corporate tax over seven years.



The $69.7 billion budget contains substantial reductions in vital areas — such as Medicaid reimbursements for hospitals and nursing homes — and cuts funding for public school districts across the state by $1.35 billion.



The 2011-2012 budget, tacitly endorsed by Scott, is nearly $1 billion less than the current budget. The new budget, which takes effect July 1, is about $4 billion less than the largest budget of $74 billion in 2006-2007.



Recession and post-recession reductions in revenue — combined with tax cuts from previous years and increased costs — helped create a budget gap that legislators and the governor had to overcome.







DANGEROUS SCENARIOS



According to some scenarios that unfolded early in the legislative session, affordable, community-based mental health and substance-abuse programs would have been eliminated or substantially scaled back. Public hospitals could have lost millions of dollars in Medicaid payments. Additional cuts to social and public-safety programs were threatened.



Reimbursements for nursing homes that accept indigent Medicaid patients will be reduced by 6 percent — an amount that will force even nonprofit providers to gradually reduce its percentage of patients who qualify for the program.



It's frustrating that Florida has failed to diversify and modernize its tax structure in order to fairly generate the revenue needed to fund a large state, and protect the health, safety and welfare of its people.



An improved tax structure would not have eliminated the requirement to make difficult budget decisions, but it would have mitigated the impacts on the public.



A system that generates adequate revenue to fund mandates — from both the government and the public — would also enable the state to fund beneficial regional economic-development projects without resorting to such substantial reductions in social services and education.







FLORIDA'S BEST HOPE



The budget could have been worse if Scott's big-stick cuts had been taken seriously.



For instance, funding for the Medically Needy and aged/disabled (for chronically ill poor patients needing health care) remained intact. So did revenue for community-based mental health and substance-abuse treatment. In these cases, the legislators who worked to preserve the funding deserve Floridians' thanks.



Improvements in the national and state economies provide, as usual, the best hope for generating the revenue needed to meet Florida's basic obligations, and smartly invest in programs, people and infrastructure. Policies and spending that encourage private-sector success and job growth make sense.



However, it is critical to remember that in many areas of government Florida relies upon the private sector to provide services — from road building to medical care to substance-abuse treatment. Providing funding for these services and fulfilling the state's responsibilities to public education are vital to economic recovery.



Let's hope our economy — locally, statewide and nationally — recovers soon, so that big-stick tax-cut tricks no longer are used to shape Florida's budget.