Last Days And Last Chance For Bills
Today begins the ninth and final week of the 2013 session of the Florida Legislature.

The Ledger has been inundated with calls from people asking, "What going on with the bill that ... "

No calls from lobbyists, of course. Many of them know before individual legislators do.

Most of the crucial money issues were settled during the weekend as House and Senate budget chairs worked to make their budgets identical so that they can be passed and sent to the full chambers for a vote and then on to Gov. Rick Scott. Scott, of course, has the line-item veto.

Teachers will get a raise. So will the state workers, those folks who keep every state agency and state law enforcement working, but who get vilified when politicians see a rhetorical advantage to themselves.

Originally promised about a $1,400 raise, state workers will get about $1,000 but a chance for an additional bonus.

In Polk County, with extra money this year, some delegation members are checking on requests they made for local projects. Sen. Denise Grimsley, R-Sebring, confirmed that her request for funding for badly needed renovations to the Peace River Center made it through the budget process.

And the decades-old mess with Skyview Utilities in Lakeland will be funded. But Rep. Ben Albritton, R-Wauchula, who originally asked for $3.5 million, has been debating with the Senate, which had $550,000 for Skyview. Albritton said he believes the figure is now higher than he originally put in the budget, thanks to a little help from House Appropriations Chairman Seth McKeel, R-Lakeland. It could be as high as $4.5 million to end, once and for all, the almost three decades of problems with the utility system.

There are still other bills out there to be approved. The Florida High School Athletic Association bill likely will be sent back to the House this week, because senators want their stricter rules in the bill.

The relaxing of alimony guidelines, sponsored in the Senate by Kelli Stargel, R-Lakeland, is on the way to the governor to be signed into law as opponents rally to get him to veto it. Some social welfare groups and an opposition group dubbing itself as "the First Wives Club of Florida" say it would harm stay-at-home moms and elderly ex-spouses.

So, the dances will continue even after the gavels come down sometime Friday evening to end the session.



PUTNAM: IMMIGRATION BILL CRUCIAL TO U.S. FOOD PRODUCTION

Florida Commissioner of Agriculture Adam Putnam said he supports the immigration compromise being developed by the "Gang of Eight," four Democratic U.S. senators and four Republicans, including Marco Rubio of Florida. The "gang" has tried to create a law securing the borders, creating a guest worker program and, down the road, a path to citizenship.

The compromise immigration bill has caused a breach among some Republicans. This especially true of members of the tea party faction, many of whom believe there should be no road to citizenship without each of the 11 million immigrants in the country illegally going back to their home countries and waiting in line to come back, and then waiting while being fully employed to begin the citizenship process.

Those close to manufacturing and agriculture — especially Florida agriculture, which could be drained of a workforce — can't adhere to the stock conservative line. That could put some in the GOP in trouble with some of their core voters. Recently some tea party members openly criticized Rubio, the darling of the ultraconservative movement in 2010, for his part in the bill.

But Putnam is standing behind Rubio's and the "Gang of Eight's" Plan, according to his aides.

In an emailed statement responding to Ledger questions about his stance on the plan, Putnam stated, "It makes improvements at the border and employee verification, while also creating a more modern visa program so that jobs in our economy can be filled when there is a shortfall of domestic labor. That has been particularly acute in agriculture."

Opponents have been focusing on border control and argue the compromise is too quick to focus on guest workers and on the potential for a road to citizenship. But Putnam disagrees and warns of major problems for the nation's food basket if the plan is not adopted.

"If Florida agriculture does not have access to a stable workforce, then that agriculture will move overseas, predominantly to Latin America, and we will be as dependent on Central and South America for our produce as we are on the Middle East for our oil," he said in the emailed response.

Putnam said both chambers of Congress "are moving in the right direction with a balanced immigration bill that tightens our borders and also creates stronger legal opportunities to enter this country and perform some pretty important jobs."

Many in the U.S. House, where Putnam served as the third most powerful Republican, are not supportive of the Senate version, however. It is still a fine line some conservatives must walk.

A group of immigration activists and ministers will begin a monthlong vigil at the Lakeland office of U.S. Rep. Dennis Ross and at offices of other members of Congress in hopes to get them on board with the citizenship portion of the compromise Senate bill.



[ Ledger Political Editor Bill Rufty can be reached at bill.rufty@theledger.com or 863-802-7523. Read his blog at www.polkpolitics.blogs.theledger.com. Follow on Twitter @LedgerBill. ]