Congressman Mike Rogers: Representing Michigan's 8th District
Terrorist suspects are being read Miranda rights just after being taken from the battlefield in Afghanistan ? “Yes, as shocking and unbelievable as it may seem, it is true that under the new Administration’s ‘Global Justice Initiative’ special agents of the FBI are administering Miranda rights to enemy combatants caught trying to kill American soldiers or our Afghan partners in Afghanistan ,” said U.S. Rep. Mike Rogers, R-MI-08. “As a former FBI agent myself, and member of the House Intelligence Committee, the bad implications of Mirandizing terrorist suspects immediately raised concern when I learned of it while traveling on a mission in Afghanistan in late May. As an American citizen, it chills my blood to think that these foreign fighters from other nations who enter Afghanistan to kill our soldiers and allies are being given the same rights as American citizens accused of a crime. “These terrorist suspects are not accused of a common crime, they are suspected of acts of war against the United States and her allies. Miranda rights should not apply for dealing with enemy combatants.” Rogers introduced a Resolution of Inquiry in the House this week requesting that President Barack Obama direct Attorney General Eric Holder to transmit to the House of Representatives all information relating to specific communications regarding detainees and foreign persons suspected of terrorism who are afforded Miranda rights. The information would be required to be presented to the House no later than 14 days after adoption of the “Resolution of Inquiry” by the full House. Rogers said applying criminal law on the battlefield slows down the process of gathering crucial intelligence. “Battlefield intelligence is highly perishable and must be obtained immediately,” Rogers said. “By introducing Miranda rights to terrorists, this process is slowed to a dangerous pace that makes actionable intelligence tough if not impossible to obtain. This could have deadly results for the men and women fighting for America and our Afghan allies.” Rogers ’ resolution is supported by House Republican Leader John Boehner and Judiciary Committee Ranking Republican Lamar Smith. “The idea of reading Miranda rights to terrorists captured on the battlefield is sheer lunacy,” Boehner said. “It’s so far outside the mainstream, in fact, that President Obama himself mocked it on “60 Minutes” a few months ago. Now it is the policy of his White House. “This plan to treat our terrorist enemies like common criminals smacks of a pre-9/11 mindset, and it’s dangerous. I’d like to thank Mike Rogers for taking the lead on highlighting this vital issue.” The resolution has been referred to the Judiciary Committee.