Hanaway, Brunner talk to Phelps County Republicans
Catherine Hanaway, who wants the GOP nomination for Missouri governor, told Phelps County Republicans Friday night that state government is impinging on small businesses.

Catherine Hanaway, who wants the GOP nomination for Missouri governor, told Phelps County Republicans Friday night that state government is impinging on small businesses.

“You can’t get to be a much smaller businessman than a barber,” said Hanaway, keynote speaker at the Lincoln Day banquet at Matt’s Steakhouse. “I was shocked to learn the regulation governing barbers in Missouri is 10,000 words long. It’s as long as the book of Revelation. It takes as many words to govern barbers as it does to describe the apocalypse.”

Hanaway, who said the Republican party is “the party of work” and “not the party of the rich,” can do something to “get government out of the way” of small-business prosperity, and she pledged to take that lead.

“On day one as governor, I’m going to freeze every regulation. I’m going to freeze hiring and we’re going to reassess what this state really needs,” said Hanaway.

Hanaway, Missouri’s first female speaker of the House, served in the Legislature from 2002-2004. She was the U.S. attorney for the Eastern District of Missouri from 2005-2009. She lives in St. Louis and is a partner in the Husch Blackwell legal firm. She declared her bid for governor on Feb. 11.

Hanaway opened her talk with a brief mention of her former opponent, State Auditor Thomas Schweich, who shot himself in the head on Feb. 26, possibly as the result of political bullying by fellow Republicans who supported Hanaway.

“Tom Schweich was my opponent in the race for governor. He was a tough competitor and tough auditor. But I always admired his intellect, his work ethic, his commitment to the principles of this party and the values of this country.”

She spoke of Schweich’s energy and passion for what he believed, and his face “just beamed” on nights his kids were with him at speaking engagements.

Also, she mentioned Spence Jackson, Schweich’s media director, who shot himself in the head March 29, leaving behind a note saying he could not face being without a job again.

Hanaway asked the Republicans to join her in “keeping Tom and Spence and their families in our prayers ... for peace and grace and the mercy of our dear Lord.”

She declared that if she is elected governor, “I’m going to be guided by that document that I think was given to us by our creator. That document is the Constitution.”

She said the Founding Fathers fought for life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, and she will continue that fight. “I will always stand up for the rights of the unborn,” she said.

She also said she would “always stand up for your Second Amendment rights” because life without liberty is hardly worth living. And she said that she would stand against any attempt to force Obamacare on Missouri or a federal attempt to force expansion of Medicaid.

Attorney General Chris Koster is the only Democratic candidate for governor at this time, and Hanaway urged the Republicans to be wary of what he says.

“He will talk about how pro-law enforcement and pro-Second Amendment he is,” she said. An examination of his record shows otherwise, she claimed, citing the Missouri turnover of concealed carry permit lists to the federal government by the governor’s office.

That was against the law, she said, but “they did it anyway.”

“There is one guy in this whole state who took an oath and swore to enforce the laws. What did he do when the governor violated the law and sent the personal information to the federal government?” she said of Koster. “Absolutely nothing.”

She also noted that other state governments are suing the federal government over such issues as immigration and clear air rules, but Koster “consistently refuses to join them.”

Moreover, she said, after the riots in Ferguson that included looting and burning that “damaged property, (Missouri’s) reputation and our liberties,” no charges have been filed by the attorney general.

“If he can’t do the job of attorney general, I don’t think you should give him a promotion to governor,” Hanaway said.

Koster also was a Republican when he held office as county prosecutor and state senator, but he switched in 2008 to slip into office on the coattails of Barack Obama, she said. “His values are not our values,” she said.

In closing, Hanaway told the story of her and husband Chris’ return from Belarus with their 17-month-old adopted son. As they returned to the United States and came through customs, the agent said, “Congratulations, Mr. and Mrs. Hanaway, your son is an American.” Hanaway said she had known all her life what that meant in her head, but that agent’s declaration struck into her heart the value and importance of being an American.

“We were once the beacon of hope for the entire world,” she said. “Join me in this fight to have Missouri lead the nation in freedom and liberty and respect for the rule of law. I ask you to support me for governor.”