Rep. Keith Frederick Capitol Report for April 24
This Capitol Report will give you an account of what is transpiring in your State Capitol, from the perspective of a citizen legislator. I try to give you a feel for the process and the substance of what is being talked about with an "Inside Baseball" approach.

This Capitol Report will give you an account of what is transpiring in your State Capitol, from the perspective of a citizen legislator. I try to give you a feel for the process and the substance of what is being talked about with an "Inside Baseball" approach.



HB 150, Unemployment Reform

House Sends Unemployment Reform Legislation to Governor (HB 150)

The governor will have the opportunity to sign legislation that supporters say will keep Missouri’s system of unemployment financially stable. House members gave final approval to a bill that would link unemployment benefits to the rate of unemployment, and ensure the state keeps more money in the unemployment trust fund.



Supporters of the bill said it is meant to protect the state’s unemployment system from insolvency in the event there is another economic downturn. Missouri is the only state that has been forced to borrow money from the federal government to pay for unemployment benefits during each of the last five economic downturns. Borrowing federal dollars has the added negative impact of taking away a portion of a federal tax credit businesses normally receive.

The legislation is designed to make sure the state has enough money in its unemployment trust fund so that businesses don’t have to pay a penalty. Specifically, it would increase the minimum amount of money in the fund before employers’ contribution rates decrease. For example, Missouri businesses would see their contribution rates decrease by 12 percent if the fund has a balance greater than $870 million.



The bill also ties unemployment benefits to the average unemployment rate so that more benefits are available when unemployment is high. If the state were in a position of high unemployment (9 percent or higher) benefits would be available for 20 weeks. In periods of low unemployment (lower than 6 percent) benefits would be available for 13 weeks. Supporters noted that a similar system is already in place in states like Georgia and Florida. They call the change an important step toward ensuring Missouri can afford to help its citizens during times when they are without work.



The bill lost some support in the House after key changes were made in the Senate. Several House members who had supported the House version of the bill changed their votes to no because of a Senate amendment that would define severance pay as wages. Opponents said the change would make it even more difficult for unemployed Missourians to obtain the financial support they need to pay their bills and keep food on the table.



The governor now has the option to sign or veto the bill. The legislation received 88 yes votes in the House, which is 21 votes short of the number needed for a successful veto override.



SB 239 Medical Malpractice Reform



Medical Malpractice Reform Legislation Receives Final Approval (SB 239)

The House and Senate this week approved a compromise version of legislation designed to contain ever-escalating medical costs and to keep medical professionals from fleeing the state.



The legislation would limit the amount an individual can receive for noneconomic damages in a medical malpractice lawsuit. In effect, it would reinstate the limits that were put in place in 2005 and then struck down in 2012 by the Missouri Supreme Court, which ruled that a cap on noneconomic damages violates the constitutional right to a jury trial. However, the compromise version of the bill increases the damage limits from where they were originally.



A version of the plan that was approved by the House in March restored the limits to the original level of $350,000. The compromise version of the legislation would cap most noneconomic awards at $400,000. For catastrophic injuries such as paralysis or even death, the bill would cap noneconomic damages at $700,000. The bill also includes a provision to increase the caps by 1.7 percent annually.



Supporters say putting the caps back in place is a necessary step to limit the cost of medical malpractice insurance for physicians. They say keeping costs down is vital to efforts to prevent doctors from leaving Missouri for other states with reasonable limits in place. They also point to the fact the bill would limit only noneconomic damages such as pain and suffering, and not the amount an individual can receive for medical costs or lost wages.



While the House version of the bill had numerous critics, the compromise version received strong bipartisan support in both chambers. The bill now moves to the governor’s desk where he can either sign or veto it. The bill received 125 votes in the House. A successful veto override requires only 109 votes.



Municipal Court Reform Bill Receives House Approval (SB 5)

The members of the Missouri House also took action this week to protect Missourians from some municipalities that have exhibited what House Speaker Diehl called “predatory practices” to raise revenue through excessive traffic tickets. The bill approved by the House is designed to shut down “speed traps” by limiting the amount of revenue municipalities can generate from traffic violations.

The plan that now has to move back to the Senate for another round of approval would limit the amount of revenue municipalities can generate from traffic tickets to 20 percent, which is down from the current limit of 30 percent. The bill further limits municipalities in St. Louis County, which has been plagued by excessive traffic violations, so that only 15 percent of their total revenue can be derived from traffic tickets.



The House version of the bill inserts additional protections for Missourians by ending the process of courts issuing failure to appear charges against defendants for missing court dates on minor traffic violations. The bill also would prevent courts from ordering jail time for individuals who fail to pay traffic fines. In addition, the bill now includes provisions to ensure accountability from municipalities in St. Louis County by requiring they meet minimum standards – police services, balanced budget, insurance, etc. – or face dissolution.



The bill drew strong bipartisan support as members from both parties said it will ensure municipalities act in the best interests of their citizens rather than treat them as sources of revenue.



MS&T Students

Students from MS&T and MU came by to visit with me this week. We discussed a variety of issues important to the students.





Fiscal Year 2016 Budget

House and Senate Reach Agreement on Fiscal Year 2016 Budget (HBs 1 – 13)

After several long days of negotiations and discussion, the House and Senate finally worked out their differences and gave final approval to the Fiscal Year 2016 state operating budget. The bills now move to the governor’s desk a full two weeks ahead of the constitutionally-mandated budget deadline.



During the budget process, the Senate made significant changes to the House version of the state spending plan, including a lump-sum budgeting approach that included 4 to 6 percent cuts to health, mental health and social services programs. These changes drew the scrutiny of some on the House side and even lost the backing of leadership in the Senate as negotiations progressed. The final version of the budget approved by both chambers moves much closer to the original House spending plan, but does take some fiscally responsible steps to rein in the growth of the state’s social welfare programs. The final version of the budget does include the Senate’s plan to move Missouri’s Medicaid population to a system of managed care, but the transition will occur slowly and only after the plan has been reviewed.



The $26 billion spending plan that will take effect on July 1 of this year does include record levels of funding for elementary and secondary education. In total the state is now spending just under $5.8 billion on public K-12 schools, which represents more than 22.2 percent of total state spending. More than $3.2 billion of that funding is state general revenue, which represents more than 36 percent of the $8.85 billion state dollars over which the legislature has direct spending authority. The budget also includes significant boosts to several important education programs, and sizeable funding increases to the state’s public colleges and universities.



Some of the funding highlights contained in the FY 2016 budget include:



· An additional $84 million for the School Foundation Formula for K-12 public education;

· An increase of more than $2.4 million to the Parents as Teachers Program;

· Full funding for virtual education;

· Funding to create a state dyslexia coordinator;

· A $12 million increase for performance funding for Missouri’s public institutions of higher education;

· More than $5 million in new equity funding for Missouri’s two-year colleges;

· Funding to establish a state military advocate;

· A 3 percent funding increase to providers who care for elderly and developmentally disabled Missourians

· A 3 percent provider rate increase for autism projects; and

· Additional funding for MoHealthnet adult dental benefits.



HB 769, Direct Primary Care

Earlier this session I spoke about HB 769, Direct Primary Care. This bill was heard today (Thursday) in the Senate in the Senate Veterans' Affairs and Health Committee chaired by Senator Dan Brown. We had a good hearing and interested Senators. I have worked closely with the legislative liaison for the Missouri Academy of Family Physicians, Pat Strader who worked tirelessly to help move HB 769 through the process. This direct primary care legislation was a priority for her organization and she helped me a great deal to navigate the bill through the process. We are not finished with it yet, but I like our chances of getting this one across the finish line.



HB 11, Budget and Managed Care

Today, Thursday, on the House floor I made the case why the House should defeat a budget bill, which is just about never done. Budget bills usually are passed by wide margins. By the time the budget bills get to the floor there has usually been much discussion, much compromise and the members are generally satisfied that a reasonable compromise has been made where possible. Not so on Budget Bill 11. This is a bill that the Senate put in a provision that will change the MoHealthNet program substantially by eliminating the Fee for Service program and replacing it with Managed Care statewide. We already have managerd care in the I-70 corridor, but this bill takes it statewide. There are many problems with doing this. The Missouri Hospital Association, the Missouri State Medical Association and the Missouri Association of Osteopathic Physicians and Surgeons oppose this measure. Basically a managed care product over rides physician decisions made with the patient's best interests in mind and replaces his or her judgement and the consensus that is developed with the patient about how to proceed with a decision about treatment or testing that comes off of an algorithm. The doctors' offices have to play mother may I with the managed care company to get approval for many things they want to do for the patient, often with denials or the need to call back and talk to someone else. The administrative cost of the managed care company is 4 times the administrative cost of our state run Medicaid program. There is a new tax that the state will have to pay to the Federal government that is a part of ObamaCare if we go to managed care statewide. There is a 2.8% tax on managed care insurance premiums that will be added to the bill the state has to pay to provide this coverage, and our taxpayers in Missouri who have expressed their displeasure with ObamaCare on several occasions at the ballot box will have to pay this tax to fund ObamaCare. This to me is like Hobby Lobby having to pay for abortion drugs or services since our taxpayers have spoken on the issue of ObamaCare. Ironically the money that would have been spent on care for the indigent in our state will now have to go the Feds as an ObamaCare tax where it could possibly be used to provide subsidies on the exchange for families making over $90,000 per year. Fee for Service patients have better health measures than Managed Care patients on 5 out of 6 quality measures. The managed care patients end up in the emergency room more often and they have fewer visits for preventative care services. There is also no Medical Loss Ratio Requirement for managed care in Missouri for Medicaid so what that means is there is no limit on the percentage of premiums that can be spent on administrative tasks rather than on patient care- that is a bad deal for patients and for taxpayers who are not getting a very good value for their dollars. When these administrative costs are tallied, over 95 million dollars will be sent out of Missouri to the Headquarters of the Managed Care Companies and that is money that will not be returned to communities around our state like it is now. Under this plan, access to care will go down. With the increased hassles for doctors offices and the very low reimbursement rates I believe many doctors, who are continuing to take Medicaid patients our of a sense of duty or moral obligation will simply say they can't do it any more if they have to run the mine field that is managed care for all of their Medicaid patients. When that happens we enter the land of unintended consequences, wherein the idea was to make care more available and the care gets harder to find. It is like someone giving you a bus ticket for a bus that is not coming. The other thing I did not like about this vote was that the issue is really big, and it should have been vetted through our normal committee system, but it wasn't. It was stuck in a budget bill like a poison pill in a meatball with very little distribution of information to members of the House. I said during my debate on the floor that it reminded me of walking behind a manure spreader or following a cattle truck, It Stinks!! The final vote in the House was 85 Ayes' and 68 No's. That is a very low vote total for a budget bill and it is nowhere close to a veto proof majority. The Senate on the other hand passed it by 23 Aye's and 9 No's, which is a veto proof majority since they only need 22 to over ride a veto. that sets up a very interesting scenario in the event that the Governor ends up vetoing budget Bill 11. The Senate usually has much more power than the House, but in this case if the House fails to over ride the Governor's veto, the House will have trumped the Senate's point of view-- quite unusual. We shall see how it works out. I have learned to silo various issues and maintain good relationships with those who disagree with me on a particular issue. In spite of the floor leader seeing this issue differently than I we visited before and after the heated debate and discussed how we can work together on health care issues going forward regardless of how the vote turned out. In fact right after this contentious debate, he went to a bill that I was carrying regarding licensing of physicians and we took it up and passed it. I guess that's what is meant by you win some and you lose some!.



HB 867, Medical School depression and Suicide Prevention

This week I was able to get HB 867 to the floor for debate. This is the bill that addresses the issue of medical student suicide and depression, which is a big problem nationally. There was an article published last month in the Psychiatry Journal of the AMA titled Medical Student Suicide and Depression: National Response Needed. We lose over 400 physicians per year to suicide. That means that the yearly output of three med schools is necessary just to replace the doctors that take their own lives. Just last week Dr. Jon Azkue, a resident in Chicago, overdosed with Helium and took his own life. Sadly this is all too common, and it starts in Med School. My bill facilitates screening of med students, voluntarily, working with the American Medical Student Association and the Student Osteopathic Medical Association (of which I am a past President) to collect the data to asses how programs are working to prevent and treat this problem in Missouri medical schools. It also establishes a "Show Me Compassionate Medical Education Day" to be held on the first day of classes at St Louis University Medical School as a tip of the hat to SLU for the groundbreaking study they published last year on this topic and for the great progress they have made in modifying the academic experience in medical school to look after the well being of their students while they are working so hard. The bill passed by a large majority voice vote. It will be brought to the floor again Monday for what is called Third Read which is likely the last time we will need to vote on it, as long as the Senate does not make any changes to it. We shall see.