Canadian tourists boost Florida’s economy
Hollywood has long been a favourite Florida destination for Canadians, whose visits to the state in 2010 rose by 16.2 per cent from 2009. Nancy Wigston file photo/for the Toronto Star

Mike Fuhrmann The Canadian Press

Canadians were a big bright spot in Florida’s tourism economy in 2010.

An estimated 3.1 million Canucks visited the Sunshine State last year, up a whopping 16.2 per cent from 2009 and the highest number in more than a decade, according to preliminary figures released by Visit Florida, the state’s official tourism marketing corporation.

That jump came in a year when the number of American visitors was roughly unchanged from 2009. It also occurred in the same year the Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion in the Gulf of Mexico devastated the tourism economy of northwest Florida.

“We know Florida is one of the favourite places for Canadians to come, so this increase doesn’t surprise us,” says Visit Florida CEO Chris Thompson, asked to explain the exodus from the Great White North.

He says improved economic conditions after two rough years were a factor. Thompson also suggests that Canadians have a particular view of Florida — sort of the vacation equivalent of a pair of comfy, old flip-flops.

“In times when people are challenged financially they tend to fall back on things that are comfortable and reliable and trusted, and to a lot of Canadians Florida is that kind of destination.”

Overall, 82.6 million visitors came to Florida in 2010, up 2.1 per cent from 2009, according to the estimates. That reverses a two-year trend of decreased visitor numbers.

Canada is Florida’s single largest international tourism market, accounting for three per cent of visitors. Americans make up 88 per cent, while other international visitors contribute nine per cent. Tourists spend more than $60 billion in the state each year.

Beach and cruise vacations, Walt Disney World near Orlando and the vibrant urban scene in Miami are big draws, but Visit Florida is also promoting less traditional offerings such as winery visits in Panama City Beach, Saint Augustine and Clermont — yes, Florida has vineyards — spa vacations and lighthouse tours.

Meanwhile, a pair of U.S. carriers, Vision Airlines and Spirit Airlines, recently introduced service from Niagara Falls, N.Y., to Florida airports to capitalize on the demand from sun-seekers in southern Ontario.

Vision spokesman Bryan Glazer said he was on the airline’s Boxing Day flight to Miami, about a week after the service was launched.

“The flight was 95 per cent Canadian,” Glazer said. “I spoke to probably 30 passengers. Half of them were going to Hollywood, the other half were boarding cruises.”