THIRTEEN - New York Public Media
THIRTEEN is one of America’s most respected and innovative public media providers. A member of the WNET family of companies, THIRTEEN is a unique cultural and educational institution that harnesses the power of television and electronic media to inform, enlighten, entertain and inspire.

The flagship public television station of the New York City tri-state area and the most-watched public television channel in the nation, THIRTEEN reaches millions of people with programming that celebrates arts and culture, offers insightful commentary on the news of the day, explores the worlds of science and nature, and invites people of all ages to have fun while learning.

THIRTEEN’s broadcast schedule features a dynamic mix of programming, much of it created by THIRTEEN which is PBS’s flagship station, including: Nature, American Masters, Great Performances, Cyberchase, and PBS NewsHour Weekend. THIRTEEN also produces a range of local programming, including Reel 13, an on-air, online film series; Treasures of New York, NYC-ARTS, a weekly showcase for the city’s cultural offerings, and MetroFocus, the multi-platform news magazine focusing on the New York region.

In addition, THIRTEEN’s daily schedule features acclaimed PBS series such as Frontline, NOVA, Masterpiece, American Experience and Antiques Roadshow, as well as such beloved kids’ programming as Sesame Street.

A leader in connecting with audiences on emerging platforms, THIRTEEN offers programming for streaming on THIRTEEN Explore.

As part of its mission to use media to create lifelong learning opportunities, THIRTEEN’s Education department extends the life of on-air programming through online initiatives, supplemental teaching material and community outreach.

Largely supported by private and foundation contributions, THIRTEEN is among the largest membership organizations in the New York area. THIRTEEN receives annual contributions from hundreds of thousands of members. National and local corporations and foundations provide general support and underwriting for specific programs and projects. Major philanthropic donations from individuals are another key source of funds. Approximately one third of THIRTEEN’s operating budget is derived from government sources.

For information about our parent company WNET, please click here. All financial information about THIRTEEN is consolidated with WNET and can be found here.