Access Islam
ACCESS ISLAM is part of a larger initiative, ACCESS WORLD RELIGIONS, which is designed to help students gain awareness and understanding of the diversity of religions and religious experiences, and the reasons for particular expressions of religious beliefs within a society or culture.



Comprising over 100 minutes of digital video from the award-winning PBS series RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY the site also contains high quality, multi-media tools; downloadable lesson plans; and resources related to Islamic holidays, traditions and cultures. The video segments can be used alone, or in conjunction with any of 10 lesson plans which are aligned to national standards and vetted by an advisory committee of experts in education and Islamic cultures. We hope these materials will offer both students and teachers exciting new ways to bring to life a fuller understanding of Muslims the world over.



RELIGION & ETHICS NEWSWEEKLY is THIRTEEN/WNET New York's award-winning series that explores how religion shapes both national and international events, and examines the challenges raised by difficult ethical issues. Hosted by veteran journalist Bob Abernethy, this one-of-a-kind television newsmagazine provides insightful coverage and analysis of the news, people, events and trends behind the headlines in the rich world of religion and ethics.



Senior Producer -- Sandy Goldberg

Technical Producer -- Elizabeth Goodman and Mikki Monkolchayut

Associate Technical Producer -- Ariel Jacobs

Art Director -- Sabina Daley

Designer -- Stephanie Liu and Tavis Lofton

HTML Implementation -- Brian Santalone and Matthew Tarr

Production Assistant -- Gabriel Torres

Web Video Production -- Peter Tierney



Director, Interactive and Broadband -- Anthony Chapman



Project Advisors

Debbie Almontaser

James Antenore

Marcia Beauchamp

Joan Brodsky Schur

Shabbir Mansuri

Musa Syeed



Lesson Plan Writers

Kathleen Cochran

Adrienne Kupper

Traci Osterhagen

Greg Timmons



Timeline and Glossary Writer

Sehem Hazin



Intern

Mariam Salari



ACCESS ISLAM is a production of the LAB@Thirteen, Thirteen/WNET's Educational and Community Outreach department. Marsha Drummond, Director; Ronald Thorpe, Vice President and Director of Education.



Funding for ACCESS ISLAM was provided by the U.S. Department of Education in 2005.