Report: Illegal Immigrants Cast More Than 3 Million Votes In Presidential Election – MILO NEWS
More than three million illegal immigrants cast votes in the U.S. presidential election, according to a report from VoteFraud.org.

The organization’s founder Gregg Phillips said they reached that number after analyzing a whopping 180 million voter registrations from across the country.

Completed analysis of database of 180 million voter registrations. Number of non-citizen votes exceeds 3 million. Consulting legal team. — Gregg Phillips (@JumpVote) November 11, 2016

Phillips went on to say that his organization would be pursuing legal action in tandem with another voter fraud watchdog group.

We have verified more than three million votes cast by non-citizens. We are joining .@TrueTheVote to initiate legal action. #unrigged — Gregg Phillips (@JumpVote) November 13, 2016

Voter fraud had been a major concern heading into this election, especially after President Obama publicly declared

Some even refer to Obama’s statement as outright encouragement for illegal immigrants to get out and vote.

Data collected prior to Election Day revealed that illegal immigrants largely supported Hillary Clinton due to her lax immigration policies that would have granted millions of them protection from deportation.

There were even reports of illegal immigrants going door-to-door to campaign for the Democratic candidate.

Obama-deferred Illegal immigrants go door-to-door campaigning for Hillary Clinton https://t.co/v2M4nOFPRS pic.twitter.com/8yK1fqYHAl — Herman Cain (@THEHermanCain) October 26, 2016

Based on this information, the fact that 3 million illegal immigrants cast votes during this election calls into question Hillary Clinton’s proposed popular vote ‘victory.’

Hillary Clinton supposedly won the popular vote by 630,000.

With 3 million illegal immigrants having voted on Election Day, it’s not hard to see how – even with conservative estimates of how many actually voted for Hillary – that lead vanishes.

That becomes especially clear when you look at the states those illegal immigrants likely voted in – that is, the states that do not require some form of ID before voting. That includes California, New York and New Jersey – all states that ultimately went blue on election night.

How much of that is thanks to the help of illegal voters?

News of the VoteFraud.org findings has sparked much criticism on the internet regarding the liberal ‘Hillary Clinton won the popular vote, so she should be president’ argument.

So about 3 million illegal immigrants voted. Take that popular vote argument and shove it up your ass. — Genius Joshua (@jdude988) November 14, 2016

Take away the 3 million illegal immigrants that voted and Trump won the popular vote. — Burgers (@joe13rusch) November 14, 2016

3 million illegal immigrants voted in the presidential election. Donald Trump won the popular vote despite rampant voter fraud. — Deplorable Taylor (@TaylorReznik) November 14, 2016

Sources:

Red Flag News

Zero Hedge