Remove the Estabrook Dam from the Milwaukee River
a) Water Quality

The Dam causes major water quality problems. Dams impound or back up water upstream, which can increase water temperatures. Warm water holds less oxygen than cold water, whichharms fish and other aquatic life. Warm water, in combination with excess nutrients, exacerbates algae growth. When algae are broken down naturally in the stream by bacteria, more oxygen is consumed, which can decreaseoxygen levels.This segment of the Milwaukee River (as well areas north to Cedarburg and south to Lake Michigan) is part of the Milwaukee Estuary “Area of Concern,” designated as such in 1987 due toharmful historical modifications and pollutants that are considered toxic contaminants.

b) Sedimentation

Sediment is another concern. Dams cause sediment to build up in the impoundment area, which can negatively affect fish and mussels. The lack of sediment moving downstream of a dam starves downstream areas of sediment needed to create riparian habitats, sandbars, floodplains, and other river features. Eventually, an impoundment will fill up with sediment, impairing water quality and recreational use,andmust be dredged, which is very costly.

Historically, the County operated the Estabrook Dam by opening and closing the gates on a seasonal basis (open in the fall and close in the spring). When the gates were open, large amounts of sediment would be flushed downstream in one big release rather than slowly over time. These large volumes of sediment can cause harm to fish eggs, mussels, and other aquatic life downstream. While some sediment movement is natural and essential to create riparian habitat and to provide nutrients to downstream areas, these large flushes are unnatural and negatively impact the river system.

Sedimentation over the years has made the impoundment very shallow, even prior to 2009 when the Dam was ordered open. This can worsen water temperature and oxygen issues, as the depth of water column decreases in the impoundment.

c) Fish impediment

Impediment of fish passage is another harm caused by the Dam. Removal of the Dam would allow fish to swim upstream to spawning habitats. Healthy and sustainable fisheries are important to paddlers, fishermen, and the community at large. Ozaukee County spent over $8 million upstream to improve fish passage, and the removal of Estabrook Dam would expand the benefit of those projects.

d) Unnatural Water Levels

The historic Dam operations created unnatural water level manipulations. These abnormal seasonal fluctuations can cause “dry out” or “freeze out” of amphibians and other aquatic life that live in the impoundment. They lay their eggs along the shallow shoreline area and when that water disappears with the opening of the gates, the eggs or individuals dry and/or freeze. While the impoundment creates seasonal and limited recreational opportunities, it also increases flooding on properties located upstream of the Dam and within the Milwaukee River floodplain.Removing the Dam would also restore the natural and wild aspect of the Milwaukee River in the Estabrook and Lincoln Park areas.Overall, the ecological health created by a free flowing river offers greater long term value than maintaining the impoundment.

e) Recreation

Recreational opportunities, such as, paddling and fishing would be improved with Dam removal. Removing the Dam would eliminate motorized boating, however it would also remove safety hazards for other recreational uses such as swimming, fishing, kayaking and canoeing.

f) Cost

The estimated cost of repair ($5.13 Million) is three times the estimated cost of removal ($1.67 Million). Why? (see question 5 below).