Nicholas Naumkin wrongful death lawsuit settled before trial's end
window._taboola = window._taboola || []; _taboola.push({ mode: 'thumbnails-c', container: 'taboola-interstitial-gallery-thumbnails-4', placement: 'Interstitial Gallery Thumbnails 4', target_type: 'mix' }); _taboola.push({flush: true});



Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 Nicholas Naumkin of Wilton, who was killed Dec. 22, 2010. (Naumkin family photo) Nicholas Naumkin of Wilton, who was killed Dec. 22, 2010. (Naumkin family photo) Image 2 of 4 In this 2011 archive photo, Oksana and Yuri Naumkin talk about Nicholas, their son who was killed on Dec. 22, 2010, after a friend shot him accidentally. (Cindy Schultz / Times Union archive) In this 2011 archive photo, Oksana and Yuri Naumkin talk about Nicholas, their son who was killed on Dec. 22, 2010, after a friend shot him accidentally. (Cindy Schultz / Times Union archive) Photo: Cindy Schultz Image 3 of 4 In this 2011 archive photo, Oksana and Yuri Naumkin talk about Nicholas, their son who was killed on Dec. 22, 2010, after a friend shot him accidentally. (Cindy Schultz / Times Union archive) In this 2011 archive photo, Oksana and Yuri Naumkin talk about Nicholas, their son who was killed on Dec. 22, 2010, after a friend shot him accidentally. (Cindy Schultz / Times Union archive) Photo: Cindy Schultz Image 4 of 4 Nicholas Naumkin wrongful death lawsuit settled before trial's end 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

BALLSTON SPA – The sides suddenly settled a wrongful death civil lawsuit against a Wilton man in the death of 12-year-old Nicholas Naumkim, midway through the trial's third day.

Just after the parties returned from a lunch break Thursday, Naumkin's parents, Oksana and Yuri Naumkin, accepted a monetary settlement of $400,000 from the insurance company of Edward O'Rourke, the owner of the gun his son was handling when he accidently shot Naumkin on the evening of Dec. 22, 2010 in O'Rourke's home. The Times Union is withholding the name of O'Rourke's son, now 16.

O'Rourke stood up in the courtroom, turned and faced the Naumkins. With welling emotions he asked for their forgiveness.

"I'd like to at this time apologize," O'Rourke said. "Please accept this apology on behalf of myself and my family."

The Naumkins nodded to O'Rourke who then sat back down and wiped tears from his eyes.

"This settlement will now take away some of the emotion surrounding this matter and allow people to get on with their lives," Saratoga County Supreme Court Justice Robert Chauvin said.

Chauvin then ordered the settlement sealed and brought a surprised jury back into the room and dismissed them with thanks.

Several jurors later came up to the Naumkins and hugged them.

Oksana Naumkin said outside of court that the money means nothing to her family.

"If I could save just one life with this story of what happened to us, I'd be happy," she said. "Don't ever take a weapon for granted. It is meant for killing."

According to testimony earlier in the day, the boys were at the O'Rourke home alone and playing the combat style video games "Halo" and "Call of Duty" and shooting a Nerf dart gun when O'Rouke's son decided to show Naumkin the real thing, his father's Ruger 9mm semi-automatic pistol.

Jurors heard from officers who took depositions from the boy who told them he decided to get the pistol out of his dad's dresser drawer to play with it.

According to a deposition from the father, read to jurors by Saratoga County Sheriff Investigator Timothy Brown, he said his son never showed interest in the several guns he owned and had never handled a gun in his life.

The boy said that he and Naumkin both handled the gun and "dry fired" it, pulling the trigger when it wasn't' loaded, a couple of times, according to the deposition read by officers in court. At some point, the gun was loaded with a clip containing eight bullets, and according to testimony from the responding officers, as the boy walked in to the kitchen, he told officers he was holding the gun, accidentally pulled the trigger and it went off, hitting Naumkin in the eye.

First responding officers found Naumkin on the kitchen floor with a large pool of blood around his head. The victim's black hat with a bullet exit hole in it was found on the top of the kitchen stove, investigators said. The deadly round was pried from the wall behind the stove, officers testified.

The gun was found back in the drawer cocked and ready to fire with six bullets still in the clip and one round in the firing chamber, deputies said.

Deputy Joel Richardson, the first responding officer on the scene, testified that as he pulled into the driveway, "A boy came running out of the home and said his friend was hurt in his eye."

Richardson said the boy at first told him he was in another room, heard a bang and came into the kitchen to find the victim on the floor. The boy also told officers there was no gun. The child eventually admitted the boys took the pistol from his father's dresser drawer and a clip from a different drawer.

In August 2011, the playmate accepted responsibility for his actions. Saratoga County Family Court Judge Courtenay Hall ruled he must be supervised by the county probation department for two years, a sentence which has now been served.

"Nicholas' Law," a bill named for Nick Naumkin, is now before the Senate and Assembly. The proposed law would penalize gun owners who do not lock up their guns at home. Senator Jeff Klein is the sponsor.