Crossover Update from Richmond
Monday, February 17th, 2014 @ 5:25PM

As we have reached the mid-point of this 2014 legislative session, I would like to brief you on several of the actions taken in the General Assembly and my initiatives that I believe to be of particular importance to Virginia’s 40th District in Western Fairfax and Prince William counties.

Prioritizing Proposed Transportation Projects

With the passage of the transportation funding package during the 2013 General Assembly Session, I believe that it is vital that we spend new revenues wisely. I co-sponsored HB2, which would create a process to prioritize proposed transportation projects with congestion mitigation being the most important criteria. It is critical that projects, including the I-66/Route 28 intersection, be prioritized to address our most serious traffic concerns so that people can get home to their families. I believe that when it comes to major transportation projects, we need to focus on projects like I-66/Route 28 rather than projects like the North-South Corridor/Bi-County Parkway.

Education Reform

We need an education system that provides every child the opportunity to succeed in school and in life. When Virginia’s Standards of Learning (SOL) tests were first adopted, Virginia was a pioneer in educational assessments and accountability. While the SOLs set high standards and fostered a sense of accountability, it has become clear that changes are needed. HB930, which I co-patroned, would reduce the number of SOLs in grades 3-8 from 22 to 17, a 23 percent decrease. This legislation would improve the SOLs by encouraging a larger focus on problem solving, critical thinking and knowledge application skills, rather than just memorizing facts. With broad consensus among teachers and education leaders, the House unanimously passed HB930.

Repealing the Hybrid Tax & Preventing New Tax Increases

As Vice Chairman of the House Finance Committee, as well as a subcommittee chairman, I work with my colleagues on a number of tax issues. I wanted to highlight a few pieces of legislation that were defeated by the Finance Committee:

HB117: A bill that imposes a five cents tax on paper and plastic bags. – Defeated

HB569: A bill that reinstates the Virginia estate tax (also known as the death tax) on entities such as small businesses and family farms. – Defeated

HB623: A bill that establishes a $64 annual road usage fee on any motor vehicle that has a combined city/highway fuel economy rating greater than 40 miles per gallon. – Defeated

Additionally, I was the chief co-patron of HB975, which would repeal the annual $64 hybrid tax that was part of last year’s transportation bill. HB975 passed the House of Delegates and now heads to the Senate for further consideration.

As I have done in the past, I will continue to fight to keep taxes low for all Virginians.

No Expansion of the Affordable Care Act/ObamaCare in Virginia

We are in the process of reforming our Medicaid services here in the Commonwealth to ensure that current recipients are not negatively affected by the Affordable Care Act/ObamaCare. Currently, Medicaid accounts for 22 percent of the state budget, costs are out of control, patients are not receiving the quality care they deserve, and the program is plagued by waste, fraud and abuse. It is estimated that 30 percent of all healthcare spending in Virginia is waste. Just last year, the previous Attorney General’s office won nearly $200 million in Medicaid fraud settlements.

If Virginia expands ObamaCare, starting in 2016, the federal government will no longer cover 100 percent of the new costs and Virginia taxpayers will be responsible for the difference; roughly $200 million a year. This means, we will need to either raise taxes or cut spending to vital services such as education and public safety. In the face of this evidence, Medicaid is in need of serious reforms before any expansion of the Affordable Care Act/ObamaCare should occur.

My Legislative Highlights

HB144: Mandates that 75 percent of admissions slots at public universities and colleges in Virginia go to Virginia students. According to the Kiplinger Report, two of Virginia’s public universities were named the best public college values for out-of-state students. We must provide more opportunities for our students living in Virginia to attend our stellar in-state schools.

An outcome from this proposed legislation is that an additional $6 million were appropriated in the Budget for additional slots for in-state students.

HB485: This bill would give law enforcement the authority to access records of Internet service providers when investigating suspects in cases of soliciting prostitution. I am dedicated to ensuring child sex traffickers remain behind bars longer for such horrific behavior, so that no child in Virginia falls prey to those who seek to do them harm.

· Passed the House of Delegates 99-0

HB770: Would mandate that “navigators” for the Affordable Health Care Act (ObamaCare) be held to the same standard that is required of insurance agents, including background checks. It is important to protect the private information of Virginians who might attempt to purchase health insurance using a navigator.

· The bill was incorporated into a similar bill ( HB1043 ), which passed the House of Delegates 98-0

HB904: Requires that VDOT provide, in writing, notice of pending major transportation projects to all owners of the property that could be affected by such projects. This would ensure property owners are notified of transportation projects that could affect their property and property values.

· Passed the House of Delegates 94-5

HB1268: Requires public institutions of higher education to establish policies and procedures for their respective violence prevention committees to encourage all faculty and staff to report threatening or aberrant behavior that may represent a threat to the college campus. This bill, universally supported by Virginia colleges and universities, is currently before the Virginia Senate. If enacted, it will create a safer and more supportive environment for students at our universities and colleges. I would like to thank the Angel Fund for working with my colleagues and I to craft this legislation.

· Passed the House of Delegates 98-0

If you have not yet done so, please fill out my 2014 legislative survey at www.timhugo.com as it will aid me in my ongoing efforts to address the needs and concerns of the citizens of the 40th District.

For additional updates on the General Assembly session, please sign up for my newsletter at www.timhugo.com.

As the legislative session winds down, the challenges of the Commonwealth do not. I remain vigilant and ready to make the needed improvements to our transportation and education systems, as well as cutting taxes, while keeping in mind the virtues of small government and state efficiency.

If I can ever be of assistance, please don’t hesitate to contact me at (703) 815-1201 or at DelTHugo@house.virginia.gov.

Posted by Dean

Categories: Blog, News