Donald Trump joins TODAY Show for live town hall, answers voters' questions
Get the latest from TODAY Sign up for our newsletter SUBSCRIBE

April 21, 2016, 12:28 PM UTC / Updated April 21, 2016, 2:30 PM UTC / Source: TODAY By Eun Kyung Kim

GOP front-runner Donald Trump — with his family at this side — paid a visit Thursday morning to the TODAY Plaza to answer voters' questions in a live town hall.

After his wife, Melania, and adult children spoke on behalf of the candidate, Trump answered questions submitted by people in the crowd and through social media.

Here are some of the highlights:

Q: Tell us your views of LGBT and how you plan to be inclusive. Please speak about the North Carolina bathroom law.

A: "North Carolina did something that was very strong and they’re paying a big price and there's a lot of problems," said Trump, who would have left things as they were. "There have been very few complaints the way it is. People go, they use the bathroom that they feel is appropriate, there has been so little trouble."

He said that instead, the new law has brought tremendous economic "strife" for the state, including various boycotts by entertainers and major businesses. "Leave it the way it is."

Q: Regarding news that Harriet Tubman will replace Andrew Jackson on the $20 bill: Was the move an act of political correctness or a long-overdue gesture?

A: Trump hailed Jackson as a president with a “great history of tremendous success” and said he would rather leave Jackson on the bill. ”I think it’s pure political correctness. Been on the bill for many, many years and really represented somebody that was very important to this country,” he said. He suggested putting Tubman on the $2 bill or creating a new one altogether. “I would love to see another denomination, and that could take place, I think it would be more appropriate.”

Q: Would you want to change the Republican platform so that exceptions would be made on abortions in the case of rape, incest or to save the life of the mother?

A: “Absolutely, for the three exceptions, I would,” he said. Trump was then pressed further and asked if he would make an exception to protect the “health” of the mother. “I would leave it for the life of the mother, but I would absolutely have the three exceptions.”

Q: Do you believe in raising taxes on the wealthy?

A: "I do, I do, including myself. I do."

Q: Your wife, Melania, has suggested you act presidential. Can you tell us some of the things you’ve done to behave that way?

A: Trump admitted he’s had to “hit back very hard” at his opponents, particularly when there were more than a dozen of them in the Republican race. He insisted he had no choice.

RELATED: Melania Trump reveals the 1 habit she wishes Donald would give up

“I think if I didn’t, if I acted very presidential, I wouldn’t be sitting up here today, somebody else might be. It wouldn’t be me,” he said. But he promised to show more of his diplomatic side, particularly now that the race is down to three candidates, two of whom he predicted will be eliminated "very soon."

"At the right time, I will be so presidential, you will be so bored. You will say, 'Can he have a little bit more energy?' But I know when to be presidential."

On Wednesday, Trump campaigned in Maryland, ahead of the state's primary next Tuesday. Trump scored a campaign boost earlier this week when he easily won the Republican primary held in his home state of New York. He won with a higher percentage than in any other state, a victory that provided a crucial momentum shift after losing a major race in Wisconsin to rival Ted Cruz.

New York gave Trump a boost in convention delegates, but whether he could win the nomination outright before the summer remains uncertain.

Donald Trump at TODAY's Town Hall meeting, April 21st 2016 Samantha Okazaki / TODAY

Despite winning numerous state primaries and caucuses, polls continue to show Trump as the single most unpopular Republican candidate.