Senator Pryor: Tom Cotton Is Helping Spread The Ebola Virus
Coming soon to a TV near you: Tom Cotton hates puppies, baseball, and apple pie

First they said Tom Cotton is against seniors. Then it was farmers. Then he was hurting sick children. Now, according to a new ad from Senator Pryor’s campaign, Tom Cotton is helping spread the Ebola virus. Senator Pryor’s latest attacks are not only false, they show the level of desperation the two-term Senator is reaching after trailing in 10 of the last 13 publicly released polls. In fact, Pryor has been mired in the low-to-mid 40’s in nearly all of the 40 polls released to date on the Arkansas Senate race.

Cotton spokesman David Ray responded to the ad, saying: “Senator Pryor’s desperation is comical. In Senator Pryor’s world, he doesn’t have to take responsibility for rubber-stamping the Obama agenda over 90% of the time, but wants Arkansans to believe Tom Cotton is responsible for everything from Ebola to crabgrass and male-pattern baldness.”

The Cotton campaign isn’t alone in deriding the ad as a desperate Hail Mary.

Sam Baker from National Journal wrote: “Health care has always been a magnet for campaign scare tactics…But Sen. Mark Pryor has taken it up a notch: He’s thrown the Ebola outbreak into the mix.”

Aaron Blake from The Washington Post wrote: “On Monday, a Republican Senate candidate in New Mexico launched a campaign ad featuring an image of James Foley’s murderer. Not to be outdone, Sen. Mark Pryor’s (D-Ark.) campaign is out with a new ad … featuring the Ebola virus…It might not be the ‘Daisy’ ad, but Pryor’s ad is certainly in the same genre of scare-tactic political advertising.”

Then there’s the truth of the matter. Tom Cotton voted for passage of the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Reauthorization Act of 2013 – the same bill Senator Pryor supported in the Senate.

Prepare yourself for more desperate attacks from Senator Mark Pryor. We aren’t even to Labor Day yet, and he already has an Ebola virus on the air. You can expect him to become even more unhinged from reality as he realizes that voters will hold him accountable this November for rubber-stamping President Obama’s agenda over 90% of the time.

The next time you turn on your TV, don’t be surprised to hear more nonsense about Tom Cotton hateing puppies, baseball, and apple pie.

Background:

In March 2013, Cotton Voted For The Same Version Of The Pandemic And All-Hazards Preparedness Reauthorization Act The Senate Passed. “Pitts, R-Pa., motion to suspend the rules and concur in the Senate amendment to the bill that would reauthorize through 2018 the National Disaster Medical System, which helps manage the government’s medical response in emergencies and disasters, and the Public Health Emergency Preparedness Cooperative Agreement, which provides grants to state and local health departments to aid in the response to public health hazards.” (H.R. 307, CQ Vote #56: Motion agreed to, thus clearing the bill for the president 370-28: R 192-28; D 178-0, 3/4/13, Cotton Voted Yea)