Cotton Releases New TV Ad: “Listened”
U.S. Senate candidate Tom Cotton released a new ad today titled “Listened,” that highlights his farm background and outlines his stance on the farm bill.

The ad shows voters scenes of Tom Cotton on his family’s farm in Yell County where he was raised and still helps out today. Cotton talks about the lessons he learned growing up on the farm: “On our family farm, we have a few dozen head of cattle, and one old guy with a head full of common sense – my dad. He taught me early that farmers can’t spend more than they take in, and I listened.”

Cotton also outlines his decision to stand up to President Obama after he loaded down the farm bill with billions in new spending for food stamps, adding: “When President Obama hijacked the farm bill and turned it into a food stamp bill with billions more in spending, I voted no. Career politicians love attaching bad ideas to good ones. Then the bad ideas become law, and you pay for it. I’m Tom Cotton. I approve this message. I think you’ve paid enough already.”

Cotton voted against a bill that would be more appropriately titled a “Food Stamp bill,” considering the bill was nearly 80% food stamps and only 20% agricultural programs. The food stamp program has exploded under President Obama, ballooning by more than 70% since 2007.

“Listened” will run statewide and will be backed by a six-figure ad buy.

Cotton Communications Director David Ray said, “Senator Mark Pryor has simply rubber-stamped every big-spending item on the Obama agenda, including a 70% increase in food stamp spending. We need a Senator who will fight for spending reform in Washington, who will be an independent voice for Arkansas willing to stand up to President Obama or his own party when necessary. Tom Cotton has a proven record of fighting for the kinds of spending reform and accountability that Arkansas taxpayers deserve.”

Background:

Tom Cotton Voted For A True Farm Bill That Renewed Agricultural Programs That Give Farmers The Certainty They Need. (H.R. 2642, Roll Call Vote #353, Passed 216-208, 7/11/13, Cotton voted Yea)

Food Stamps Make Up Nearly 80% Of The 2014 Farm Bill. “The food stamp program, formally called the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, was 80 percent of the original bill’s cost, and it remains the centerpiece of the Senate’s bipartisan farm bill.” (Jonathan Weisman and Ron Nixon, “House Republicans Push Through Farm Bill, Without Food Stamps,” New York Times, 7/11/13)

The Food Stamp Program Has Exploded Under President Obama. “The Congressional Budget Office said Thursday that 45 million people in 2011 received Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program benefits, a 70% increase from 2007.” (Damian Paletta, “Food Stamp Rolls to Grow Through 2014, CBO Says,” Wall Street Journal, 4/19/12)