Meet the Staff
David L. Andrews, ICMA-CM, Town Manager

David was raised in Tyler, Texas and earned a Bachelor’s degree in Business Administration from Stephen F. Austin State University. After working in state government and the private sector in Austin, David moved to Tucson, Arizona where he earned a Master of Public Administration degree from The University of Arizona in 1990. He then served as a Finance Director, Assistant Town Manager, and Town Manager for three municipalities in the Tucson and Phoenix metropolitan areas. David has been a member of the International City/County Management Association for almost 25 years and has also been certified as a Credentialed Manager by that organization.

He is also a past member and served on the Board of the Arizona City/County Management Association and is now a member of the North Carolina City and County Management Association. David was appointed Town Manager of Carrboro in March 2012.

Julie Eckenrode, MPA, Assistant to the Town Manager

Originally from Asheboro, NC, Julie made her way to the Triangle when completing a B.A. History at North Carolina State University in 2007. With that, she earned a Secondary Social Studies Teaching License and taught high school social studies in Harnett and Wake counties from from 2007-2014. Julie attended UNC-Pembroke and earned a Master's in Public Administration while teaching. She joined the town of Carrboro in June 2014.

G. NICHOLAS (NICK) HERMAN, TOWN ATTORNEY

Nick received his B.A. degree from UNC-CH in 1977 as a Morehead-Cain Scholar and his J.D. degree from Duke Law School in 1981. He has been practicing local-government law with The Brough Law Firm since 1997 and previously was a partner in the firm of Coleman, Bernholz, Bernholz, Gledhill, Hargrave & Herman in Chapel hill.

He is the author of five law books and over 40 articles on various subjects of civil litigation. He is an Adjunct Professor at NCCU Law School and Campbell Law School, and he has also taught on the faculties of Duke Law School, UNC-CH Law School, and Elon University. He has argued over 30 cases in the N.C. Supreme Court, N.C. Court of Appeals, and the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.