Deflategate: physicist discredits natural pressure-drop theories
It would take a 30C drop in temperature (or 54F) for an inflated football to naturally lose two pounds per square inch (PSI) of air pressure, a University of Toronto physicist says.

Two nations’ deflation preoccupation this week had me looking up the physics of how a football might lose two PSI without a surreptitious insertion of a pin.

Eleven of New England’s 12 footballs lost that amount of pressure by halftime of their AFC championship win last Sunday night against the Colts. Some quarterbacks find a slightly deflated football easier to grip and thus easier to throw, especially in the cold.

The controversy has prompted a full-bore NFL investigation. Patriots head coach Bill Belichick and quarterback Tom Brady held separate news conferences Thursday to deny knowledge of, or involvement in, any deliberate attempt to deflate the balls.

Before the game’s opening kickoff, the referee and his crew of officials found all 12 Patriots footballs to be within the NFL’s mandated range of 12.5 to 13.5 PSI.

By halftime 11 of the footballs were down, so the refs reinflated them to the proper range. Post-game checks showed that the balls had lost no pressure during the second half.

Now a personal note. Three decades ago I bombed out of first-year engineering at university. Figured I was forever done with physics equations, the Kelvin temperature scale and such terms as “absolute pressure.”

No such luck.

Finally, at the suggestion of good ol’ dad — the smartest man I know, and still an active chemical engineer — I sought the opinion of an expert in the field.

Stephen Morris is one. He’s a professor of physics at the University of Toronto.

I won’t bore you with all the details, but Morris on Friday let the air out of two theories on the pressure drop that have become favourites among speculators on the interwebs.

The first: that the Patriots inflated their footballs not with air but with some other gas — like helium, or a refrigerant such as Freon.

As speculation goes, these diabolically selected gases would deflate quicker than air over a couple of hours, then the rate of deflation would taper off as the ball’s inside pressure neared a state of equilibrium with the outdoor environment.

No pins required. Brilliant, right?

Well, no. Morris immediately discarded the theory.

“It doesn’t matter what the gas is, unless it’s a rare, special gas,” Morris said. “There’s a concept called an ideal gas law. All gases at that pressure are basically the same. They respond to pressure the same. Helium, or any gas, would have the same effect as air.

“It would take a special, heavily engineered coolant gas to have just the right properties to be non-ideal, and I don’t think that’s likely here.”

The second, much more popular theory is that the Patriots’ footballs naturally deflated by two PSI because of the temperature drop — from when the officials took a pregame pressure reading of each ball in their locker room, to halftime, right after the balls had been thrown and lugged around for more than an hour in the chill of a mid-January evening in Massachusetts.

Pressure is directly tied to temperature.

Never mind that the theory would fail to account for why only the Patriots’ footballs experienced such a drop in pressure. The physics don’t add up either, Morris said.

Morris said he has noticed amateur physics sleuths listing smaller temperature ranges to get a two PSI drop. Wrong. They’re forgetting to add the atmospheric pressure to the internal ball pressure before they do the (absolute) temperature calculation.

Morris arrived at his conclusion based on a 30C (86F) refs locker-room temperature, a 0C (32F) field temperature and 13 PSI initial pressure-gauge reading. Only such a wide temperature difference yields as much as a two PSI pressure drop, he said.

In reality, however, the officials’ locker room more likely was at a regular room temperature. If even significantly above (let’s say 24C, or 75F), the theory crumbles because the game-time temperature was far above 0C last Sunday: 11C (51F).

That’s a drop of only 13C (24F), far short of what Morris said would be necessary for a two PSI natural deflation.

“It would be hard to believe that you could get a 30-degree temperature change,” he said. “That ball would be so toasty it would be like it had been immersed in a hot bath.”

But what if the Patriots inflate their balls entirely with super-hot 30C air, right before turning them over to officials for gauging gbefore the game?

“Yes, of course. That would work too,” Morris said. “This would require a hot air pump.”

Would the Patriots go to that length? It’s inconceivable they would, or could, without Belichick’s knowledge.

Morris isn’t even a football fan, but he has followed this controversy with interest, along with most other North Americans. What does he believe happened?

“I think somebody let the air out. There’s no other realistic explanation,” he said. “There’s no temperature explanation, and there’s no special-gas explanation.

“And if it was simply a stark, accidental temperature change, then it must happen all the time. It could have been noticed years ago at any number of games.”

Morris did offer up these tiny-possibility asterisks.

“It’s possible somebody just screwed up. The Patriots filled them up wrong, or the officials measured them wrong. These numbers, they sound real precise.

“And how do they measure them, exactly? Do they do it exactly right every time? Maybe they screwed up.”

And that wouldn’t be outlandish, Morris said.

“You can do it wrong. It’s a little needle. Maybe he didn’t put the needle in properly, or didn’t wait long enough, or use the gauge properly. It’s not difficult to get a wrong reading.

“It’s pseudo-scientific to give out precise numbers — to within half of a PSI — without saying exactly how they measured the balls, and exactly what their precision is.”

Absent those unlikely scenarios, it’s probably just a matter of who let the air out, and on whose orders.

“The simplest explanation is usually right.”

john.kryk@sunmedia.ca

@JohnKryk

blogs.canoe.ca/krykslants/