Report: The IRS Must Do More to Reduce Improper Payments
Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration Press Release

October 22, 2013

TIGTA - 2013-33

Contact: David Barnes

(202) 622-3062

David.barnes@tigta.treas.gov

TIGTACommunications@tigta.treas.gov

Report: The IRS Must Do More to Reduce Improper Payments

WASHINGTON – The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) has made no significant improvement in reducing improper Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) payments, according to a report publicly released today by the Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA).

Executive Order 13520, Reducing Improper Payments and Eliminating Waste in Federal Programs, requires TIGTA to assess the IRS’s compliance with the Order on an annual basis. The objective of this review was to assess the IRS’s efforts to implement Executive Order 13520.

The IRS estimates that 21 to 25 percent ($11.6 billion to $13.6 billion) of EITC payments were issued improperly during Fiscal Year 2012. However, TIGTA found that the IRS’s Fiscal Year 2012 estimate for EITC claims and improper payments are understated because the laws extending increases in the EITC were not factored into the estimates.

TIGTA also found that the IRS has not established annual improper payment reduction targets as required by law. The IRS is also not in compliance with the quarterly reporting requirement for high-dollar improper EITC payments (payments totaling more than $5,000) to TIGTA and the Council of the Inspectors General for Integrity and Efficiency.

IRS management stated that they recently met with the Office of Management and Budget and agreed to develop supplemental measures and indicators in lieu of reduction targets. However, the IRS did not indicate when these measures would be in place.

“The IRS should be commended for implementing numerous processes to educate Americans and identify and prevent improper EITC payments,” said J. Russell George, Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration. “Unfortunately, it is still distributing more than $11 billion in improper EITC payments each year and that is disturbing.

“The IRS must do a better job of reining in improper payments in this and in other programs,” George added.

TIGTA recommended that the IRS develop processes to identify high-dollar improper EITC payments and report the information to TIGTA and the Council as required by Executive Order 13520.

IRS management agreed with TIGTA’s recommendation and plans to take appropriate corrective actions.

Read the report.