Trump Home Press Releases
Trump Home by Dorya and Dorya lines can be purchased exclusively at the Arteriors Showrooms at 1280 Castlefield Avenue in Toronto, Canada. These lifestyle brands are inspired by luxury, sophistication and elegance.

The intriguing collections are an exceptional compliment to both ultra-affluent residential and hospitality installations. “The demand for luxury furniture and interior brands are at an all time high in Canada. Arteriors has focused on providing Canadian’s with the internationally acclaimed brand of Dorya in order to exhibit an excellent harmony of furniture and interior elements that are one of a kind,” says Vanessa Caputo, Partner of Arteriors.

“The recognition that Dorya is experiencing in the international marketplace has made the brand a leader in luxury interiors and we are proud to partner with Arteriors for the official launch in Toronto,” said Mr. Doruk Yorgancioglu, President & C.E.O. of Dorya. “The brand brings an unparalleled understanding of global luxury to Canadian consumers. Our team is exhilarated that the Trump Home by Dorya and Dorya collections have made its way to Toronto.”

Other products showcase warmer tones featuring bronze and creams that exude rich contrast with black lacquer or espresso mahogany embellished with French gold detailing. There is a couture element achieved with a broad spectrum of eye-catching light coloured neutral patterns, reflective textures, and exotic leather detailing. The Trump Home by Dorya and Dorya fabric selections includes sixty exclusive European fabrics and over fifteen leathers.

With a brilliant and impressive mix of luxury materials and finishes, the lines are distinguished by an ultra-luxe collection that are unique to Dorya. The elegant assortment exhibits combinations of gray, metallic and fume tones meshed with stainless steel and marble.

Luxury interior brands Dorya and Trump Home, debuted in Toronto during a private event at the Arteriors Showroom in the Castlefield Design District. Arteriors will be the exclusive distributor for the Dorya & Trump Home lines in Toronto.

Bringing the name of quality and sophistication in fine furnishings and accessories, ARTERIORS is the exclusive Canadian distributor of ‘Dorya Home’ and ‘TRUMP Home by Dorya’. ARTERIORS offers a selection of luxury furniture and exquisite interior brand options from top furniture makers, deeply rooted in the tradition of the finest wood craftsmanship. The brands housed by ARTERIORS are known for luxury, sophistication and elegance with trend setting, international style and superior quality. For more information, visit www.arteriorsto.com

The Trump Organization encompasses global real estate development and global licensing, sales and marketing, property management, golf course development, entertainment, entertainment and product licensing, brand development as well as restaurants and event planning. The product licensing division of the company has selectively granted licenses for the manufacture and distribution of product under the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection brand (men’s tailored clothing, dress shirts, neckwear, jewelry, accessories, small leather goods and eyewear) and the Trump Home Brand (lighting, mattresses, crystal, utility bedding and custom wood flooring and paneling). Donald J. Trump is the Chairman and President of The Trump Organization, a privately held company in New York. For more information, visit www.trump.com.

A global luxury furniture and interiors brand, Dorya creates exquisitely handcrafted furniture and interior elements, with the philosophy that the pursuit of style is a way of life. All pieces are 100% handmade. The Dorya brand is firmly rooted in the tradition of the finest wood craftsmanship, luxurious materials, and attention to detail. Its three furniture collections are Heritage, Contemporain, and Executive available for both residential and commercial purposes. Over the years, Dorya has proudly supplied such lines to the affluent buyers as well as governments and embassies globally. To learn more about Dorya, please visit www.doryainteriors.com

TRUMP ORGANIZATION, ARCHITECTURAL DIGEST, AND DORYA HOSTED EXCLUSIVE NY PREVIEW OF TRUMP HOME BY DORYA FURNITURE LINE

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

November 5, 2014

Dorya International LLC

The Trump Organization and Dorya’s shared commitment to high quality standards and design excellence is seen in the exquisite handcrafted furniture collection, Trump Home by Dorya. Inspired by the diverse locations and architecture of Trump properties around the globe, the international style and exceptional quality are beautifully executed. The new partnership, producing luxury furniture under the Trump Home by Dorya brand, debuted in New York on October 29th during a gala event at the Trump Soho Hotel in New York City. Signature pieces were unveiled at the VIP event for special guests including AD100 designers Jamie Drake and Veere Grenney and HGTV’s Million Dollar Contractor Stephen Fanuka. The event was hosted by Donald Trump, Chairman and President of The Trump Organization, Margaret Russell, Editor in Chief of Architectural Digest, and F. Doruk Yorgancioglu, CEO and President of Dorya.

“The recognition that Dorya is experiencing in the international marketplace, as a leader in the luxury interiors segment makes Trump Home a synergistic partner,” said Yorgancioglu. “The Trump brand brings an unparalleled understanding of the global luxury consumer to inspire the spirit of the collection. Our team is exhilarated that the Trump Home by Dorya collection scores all marks for elegance and grandeur.” Inspired by the world-renowned entrepreneur Donald J. Trump, the Trump Home by Dorya collection is designed to offer the consumer exquisite handcrafted furnishings with high-style and custom quality. The international expansion of the Trump Home brand is a part of a strategic initiative to build the brand’s presence in targeted foreign markets. “Dorya’s reputation for impeccable quality, compelling style, and unique handcrafted design makes them a wonderful partner to create beautiful furniture that conveys the sophistication synonymous with the Trump name,” stated Cathy Hoffman Glosser, Executive Vice President of Global Licensing. A brilliant and impressive mix of luxury materials and finishes distinguishes this ultra-luxe collection. The elegant assortment exhibits combinations of gray, metallic, and fume tones meshed with stainless steel and marble. Other products showcase warmer tones featuring bronze and creams that exude rich contrast with black lacquer or espresso mahogany embellished with French gold detailing. There is a couture element achieved with a broad spectrum of eye-catching light colored neutral patterns, reflective textures, and exotic leather detailing. The Trump Home by Dorya fabric selection includes sixty exclusive European fabrics and fifteen leathers.

The Trump Home by Dorya V. 3000 Bar was recently nominated for the Pinnacle Design Achievement Award by ASFD, American Society of Furniture Designers. Designed by Dorya’s Creative Director, Megan Perry, the piece exhibits the luxurious elegance of modernism. The exquisite style, details, and finishes are signature design marks for the 50 piece bespoke Trump Home by Dorya collection that debuted during the High Point April 2014 International Furniture Market. “It was not only important for us to hit the high notes on the expectation for this collection, but to display our company’s range of extraordinary craftsmanship, talents, and abilities,” notes Perry. “There is an endless curiosity for us to uncover designs that complement the modern lifestyle. We wanted to create a collection that would be different and unique to the Trump name but still show Dorya’s superior quality.” Dorya has a well-deserved reputation for innovation, excellence in design, and production of high quality furniture in the world. The entire production process, from the moment the raw wood is cut until the product is finished or upholstered, occurs in Dorya’s Izmir, Turkey production facility using state of the art technology and conventional craftsmanship as the fundamental feature. All pieces are handmade and made to order. The intriguing collection is an exceptional complement for both ultra-affluent residential and hospitality installations. Trump Home by Dorya can be purchased through authorized Trump Home Galleries and exclusive architects and interior design firms. Trump Home is a lifestyle brand that is inspired by the luxury, sophistication and elegance of the Trump lifestyle. Products are inspired by Trump’s award-winning, five-star luxury properties around the world.



For more information, visit www.trumphomebydorya.com.

F. Doruk Yorgancioglu, President & CEO of Dorya. Margaret Russell, the Editor in Chief of Architectural Digest. Donald J. Trump, Chairman & President, the Trump Organization.

Donald J. Trump, Megan Perry Yorgancioglu, Melania Trump, F. Doruk Yorgancioglu

TRUMP HOME BY DORYA® BAR IS NOMINATED FOR THE PINNACLE DESIGN ACHIEVEMENT AWARD BY ASFD

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

Dorya International LLC

Trump Home by Dorya’s V.3000 Bar, designed by Dorya’s Creative Director Megan Perry, exhibits the luxurious elegance of modernism. The exquisite style, details, and finishes are signature design marks for the 50 piece bespoke Trump Home by Dorya collection that debuted during the High Point April 2014 Market. “We are very honored by the prestigious nomination and the ability to display our company’s range of extraordinary craftsmanship talents and expertise,” says Doruk Yorgancioglu, CEO & President of Dorya. “The Trump Home by Dorya Bar delivers the allurement and distinction of glamorous style to the design enthusiast.” “We are thrilled to be nominated for this distinguished award,” stated Cathy Hoffman Glosser, Executive Vice President Global Licensing, The Trump Organization. “We greatly value our partnership with Dorya and look forward to continued success.” The V.3000 Bar is constructed in mahogany solids and is available in eight finish options, and three metal accent finish options. The finishes include: Cocoa Mahogany, Espresso Mahogany, Satin Black as shown, Dusk, Titanium, Pearl, Fume and Gunmetal. Metal accent finishes include Matte French Gold (Brass), Brushed Stainless Steel, and Stainless Steel. All hardware accents are custom made showcasing the brands superior craftsmanship. The made to order bar measures W: 45 1⁄4/ 84 1⁄4, D: 18 3⁄4, H: 76 3⁄4. The interior includes glass shelving in the upper area, one large pull out tray, one small pull out shelf, wine rack and interior LED lighting. “The distinctive persona of the bar is defined in the details - the complex stylish framing on the doors, gem shape motif on the legs and paramount finish and accents are all captivating highlights for this exceptional piece,” notes Megan Perry, Dorya’s Creative Director. “Beyond expectations is the unsurpassed impression as the doors slide open to reveal the illuminated well-designed barware space.” This distinction scores Dorya’s third Pinnacle Design Achievement Nomination. Dorya introduced the Mybar at High Point’s April 2010 market which marked the brands debut into the United States, and the Trinity Sideboard in April 2012. The Pinnacle Awards provide the furniture industry the opportunity to recognize the work of talented designers. Winners will be revealed at the Pinnacle Awards Banquet on October 20 during the High Point Market. Trump Home by Dorya Trump Home is a lifestyle brand that is inspired by the luxury, sophistication and elegance of the Trump lifestyle. The Trump Home by Dorya collection is designed to offer the consumer beautiful handcrafted furnishings with trend setting style and superior quality. The bold architectural silhouettes, exquisite finishes, and brilliant materials highlight the new collection which is available in a range of sizes and exclusive fabrics. The 50 piece ultra-luxe collection is an exceptional complement for both residential and hospitality installations and is available through authorized Trump Home Galleries and exclusive architecture and design firms. The Trump Organization The Trump Organization encompasses global real estate development and global licensing, sales and marketing, property management, golf course development, entertainment, entertainment and product licensing, brand development as well as restaurants and event planning. The product licensing division of the company has selectively granted licenses for the manufacture and distribution of product under the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection brand and the Trump Home Brand. Donald J. Trump is the Chairman and President of The Trump Organization, a privately held company in New York. For more information, visit www.trump.com. Dorya International A global luxury furniture and interiors brand, Dorya creates exquisitely handcrafted furniture and interior elements, with the philosophy that the pursuit of style is a way of life. All pieces are 100% handmade. The Dorya brand is firmly rooted in the tradition of the finest wood craftsmanship, luxurious materials, and attention to detail. The 35 year old brand was introduced to the US market four years ago during the High Point Market and has been profiled in Florida Design Magazine, Traditional Home; featured in Architectural Digest Magazine, Luxe Magazine, Miami Home & Décor Magazine, Interior Design Magazine, and Robb Report. To learn more about Dorya visit www.doryainteriors.com

TRUMP AND DORYA INTRODUCE TRUMP HOME BY DORYA FURNITURE LINE

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

February 27, 2014 NEW YORK, NY

The Trump Organization and Dorya’s shared commitment to high quality standards and design excellence is seen in the exquisite handcrafted furniture collection- Trump Home by Dorya. Inspired by the diverse locations and architecture of Trump properties around the globe, the international style and exceptional quality is beautifully executed in this 50 piece collection.

The international expansion of the Trump Home brand is part of a strategic initiative to build the brand’s presence in targeted foreign markets. “We are thrilled to partner with Dorya, extending the Trump Home brand into the luxury market for furniture,” said Cathy Hoffman Glosser, Executive Vice President of Global Licensing. “Dorya’s reputation for impeccable quality, compelling style, and unique handcrafted design makes them a wonderful partner to create beautiful furniture that conveys the sophistication synonymous with the Trump name.”

“The recognition that Dorya is experiencing in the international marketplace as a leader in the luxury interiors segment makes Trump Home a synergistic partner,” says Doruk Yorgancioglu, CEO and President of Dorya. “The Trump brand brings an unparalleled understanding of the global luxury consumer to inspire the spirit of the collection. Our team is exhilarated that the Trump Home by Dorya collection scores all marks for elegance and grandeur.”

A brilliant and impressive mix of luxury materials and ten finishes distinguishes this ultra-luxe collection. The elegant assortment offers a striking contrast between light and dark for this stunning debut. Some vignettes will exhibit combinations of grey, metallics, and fume tones meshed with stainless steel and marble, while other settings will showcase warmer tones featuring bronze and cream tones that exude rich contrast with black lacquer or espresso mahogany embellished with French gold detailing. Fabrics are distinctive and sophisticated - warm and inviting, conveying a tranquil contemporary feel. There is a couture element achieved with a broad spectrum of eye-catching light colored neutral patterns, reflective textures, and exotic leather detailing on pillows. The Trump Home by Dorya fabric selection includes fifty exclusive European fabrics and fifteen leathers.

“It was not only important for us to hit the high notes on the expectation for this collection but display our company’s range of extraordinary craftsmanship talents and abilities,” notes Megan Perry, Dorya’s Creative Director. “There is an endless curiosity for us to uncover designs that complement the modern lifestyle. We wanted to create a collection that would be different and unique to the Trump name but still show Dorya’s superior quality.”

Donald Trump, Chairman and President of The Trump Organization said, “The Trump name and global brand recognition coupled with Dorya’s design and execution capabilities will make for a wonderful collaboration.” The 50 piece contemporary collection debuted February 27th, 2014 in Istanbul, Turkey at a gala event. It will be showcased in the United States during the International Home Furnishings Market at High Point in April 2014.

The Trump Home by Dorya collection is an exceptional complement for both residential and hospitality installations. The line can be purchased through authorized Trump Home Galleries, and exclusive TRUMP HOME is a lifestyle brand that is inspired by the luxury, sophistication and elegance of the Trump lifestyle. Products are inspired by Trump’s award-winning, five-star luxury properties around the world. For more information, visit www.trump.com and www.doryainteriors.com .

The Trump Organization

The Trump Organization encompasses global real estate development and global licensing, sales and marketing, property management, golf course development, entertainment, entertainment and product licensing, brand development as well as restaurants and event planning. The product licensing division of the company has selectively granted licenses for the manufacture and distribution of product under the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection brand (men’s tailored clothing, dress shirts, neckwear, jewelry, accessories, small leather goods and eyewear) and the Trump Home Brand (lighting, mattresses, crystal, utility bedding and custom wood flooring and paneling). Donald J. Trump is the Chairman and President of The Trump Organization, a privately held company in New York. For more information, visit www.trump.com .

Dorya International

A global luxury furniture and interiors brand, Dorya creates exquisitely handcrafted furniture and interior elements, with the philosophy that the pursuit of style is a way of life. All pieces are 100% handmade. The Dorya brand is firmly rooted in the tradition of the finest wood craftsmanship, luxurious materials, and attention to detail. Its three furniture collections are Heritage, Contemporain, and Executive available for both residential and commercial purposes. Over the years, Dorya has proudly supplied such lines to the affluent buyers as well as governments and embassies globally. To learn more about Dorya, please visit www.doryainteriors.com

TRUMP AND DORYA CELEBRATE TRUMP HOME BY DORYA® FURNITURE AT ISTANBUL LAUNCH

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

February 10, 2014 ISTANBUL, TURKEY

The Trump Organization and Dorya’s shared commitment to high quality standards and design excellence is seen in the exquisite handcrafted furniture collection, Trump Home by Dorya. Inspired by the diverse locations and architecture of Trump properties around the globe, the international style and exceptional quality is beautifully executed.

The new partnership to produce luxury furniture under the Trump Home by Dorya brand, will debut February 27th, during a gala event in Dorya’s Istanbul, flagship showroom. One of five exclusive Dorya showrooms worldwide - the striking space is set in a stately row house along Akaretler Yokusu. The 10,000 square-foot, three-story town house was completely refashioned in 2012, and offers a modern panache to one of Istanbul’s most historic and fashionable streets.

Inspired by the world-renowned entrepreneur Donald J. Trump, the Trump Home by Dorya collection is designed to offer the consumer exquisite handcrafted furnishings with high-style and custom quality. The international expansion of the Trump Home brand is a part of a strategic initiative to build the brand’s presence in targeted foreign markets. “Dorya’s reputation for impeccable quality, compelling style, and unique handcrafted design makes them a wonderful partner to create beautiful furniture that conveys the sophistication synonymous with the Trump name,” stated Cathy Hoffman Glosser, Executive Vice President of Global Licensing.

“The global recognition of the Trump brand for luxury and superior quality is a genuine fit,” said F. Doruk Yorgancioglu, President and CEO of Dorya International. “Dorya offers the best product in the market that does not simulate quality; it delivers it in every detail. We are very excited about launching the Trump Home line and to build a legacy that sets high standards for the future.”

Donald Trump, Chairman and President of The Trump Organization said, “The Trump name and global brand recognition coupled with Dorya’s design and execution capabilities will make for a wonderful collaboration. I look forward to Trump Home launching in Istanbul.”

Special guests and trade visitors will preview the luxurious Trump Home gallery on two floors that showcase a brilliant and impressive mix of luxury materials and finish options that distinguishes this 50 piece ultra-luxe collection.

Dorya has a well deserved reputation for innovation, excellence in design, and production of high qualityfurniture in the world. The entire production process, from the moment the raw wood is cut until the product is finished or upholstered occurs in Dorya’s Izmir, Turkey production facility. While using state of the art technology, conventional craftsmanship is still the fundamental feature in the production process. All pieces are handmade and made to order.

The intriguing collection is an exceptional complement for both ultra-affluent residential and hospitality installations. Trump Home by Dorya can be purchased through authorized Trump Home Galleries, and exclusive architects and interior design firms. It will premiere in the United States during the International Home Furnishings Market at High Point in April 2014.

Trump Home is a lifestyle brand that is inspired by the luxury, sophistication and elegance of the Trump lifestyle. Products are inspired by Trump’s award-winning, five-star luxury properties around the world. For more information, visit www.trump.com and www.doryainteriors.com To learn more about Dorya, or inquires to become a Trump Home by Dorya distributor please contact info@dorya.us

The Trump Organization

The Trump Organization encompasses global real estate development and global licensing, sales and marketing, property management, golf course development, entertainment, entertainment and product licensing, brand development as well as restaurants and event planning. The product licensing division of the company has selectively granted licenses for the manufacture and distribution of product under the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection brand (men’s tailored clothing, dress shirts, neckwear, jewelry, accessories, small leather goods and eyewear) and the Trump Home Brand (lighting, mattresses, crystal, utility bedding and custom wood flooring and paneling). Donald J. Trump is the Chairman and President of The Trump Organization, a privately held company in New York. For more information, visit www.trump.com .

Dorya International

A global luxury furniture and interiors brand, Dorya creates exquisitely handcrafted furniture and interior elements, with the philosophy that the pursuit of style is a way of life. All pieces are 100% handmade. The Dorya brand is firmly rooted in the tradition of the finest wood craftsmanship, luxurious materials, and attention to detail. Its three furniture collections are Heritage, Contemporain, and Executive available for both residential and commercial purposes. Over the years, Dorya has proudly supplied such lines to the affluent buyers as well as governments and embassies globally. To learn more about Dorya, please visit www.doryainteriors.com .

TRUMP AND DORYA INTERNATIONAL PARTNER TO INTRODUCE TRUMP HOME BY DORYA FURNITURE

FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

September 23, 2013 NEW YORK, NY

The Trump Organization and Dorya International are pleased to announce a new partnership to produce luxury furniture under the Trump Home brand for distribution initially in Turkey and to expand into key international markets. Inspired by the world-renowned entrepreneur Donald J. Trump, the Trump Home by Dorya collection is designed to offer the consumer exquisite handcrafted furnishings with high-style and custom quality.

The international expansion of the Trump Home brand is part of a strategic initiative to build the brand’s presence in targeted foreign markets. “We are thrilled to partner with Dorya, extending the Trump Home brand into the luxury market for furniture,” said Cathy Hoffman Glosser, Executive Vice President of Global Licensing. “Dorya’s reputation of impeccable quality, compelling style, and unique handcrafted design makes them a wonderful partner to create beautiful furniture that conveys the sophistication synonymous with the Trump name.”

“The global recognition of the Trump brand for luxury and superior quality is a genuine fit,” said F. Doruk Yorgancioglu, President and CEO of Dorya International. “Dorya offers the best product in the market that does not simulate quality; it delivers it in every detail. We are very excited to seize the opportunity to build a Trump Home line with a legacy and to set the standards for the future. We will design and build the line to perfection.”

The 50 piece contemporary collection will debut in February 2014 in Istanbul, Turkey at a gala event. It will premiere in the United States during the International Home Furnishings Market at High Point in April 2014.

TRUMP HOME is a lifestyle brand that is inspired by the luxury, sophistication and elegance of the Trump lifestyle. Products are inspired by Trump’s award-winning, five-star luxury properties around the world. For more information, visit www.trump.com and www.doryainteriors.com .

The Trump Organization

The Trump Organization encompasses global real estate development and global licensing, sales and marketing, property management, golf course development, entertainment, entertainment and product licensing, brand development as well as restaurants and event planning. The product licensing division of the company has selectively granted licenses for the manufacture and distribution of product under the Donald J. Trump Signature Collection brand (men’s tailored clothing, dress shirts, neckwear, jewelry, accessories, small leather goods and eyewear) and the Trump Home Brand (lighting, mattresses, crystal, utility bedding and custom wood flooring and paneling). Donald J. Trump is the Chairman and President of The Trump Organization, a privately held company in New York. For more information, visit www.trump.com .

Dorya International

A global luxury furniture and interiors brand, Dorya creates exquisitely handcrafted furniture and interior elements, with the philosophy that the pursuit of style is a way of life. All pieces are 100% handmade. The Dorya brand is firmly rooted in the tradition of the finest wood craftsmanship, luxurious materials, and attention to detail. Its three furniture collections are Heritage, Contemporain, and Executive available for both residential and commercial purposes. Over the years, Dorya has proudly supplied such lines to the affluent buyers as well as governments and embassies globally. To learn more about Dorya, please visit www.doryainteriors.com .