Warnings about HB-3200: Affordable Healthcare Act or Obamacare-Fiction!
PLEASE PASS THIS OUTRAGE TO EVERY ONE ON YOUR LIST!!! THIS should be read

by everyone, especially important to those over 75.......If you are younger, then it applies to your parents......

Your hospital Medicare admittance has just changed under Obama Care. You must be admitted by your primary Physician in order for Medicare to pay for it! If you are admitted by an emergency room doctor it is treated as outpatient care where hospital costs are not covered. This is only the tip of the iceberg for Obama Care. Just wait to see what happen in 2013 & 2014!



Age 76 Today, I went to the Dr. for my monthly B12 shot that I have been getting for a number of years. The nurse came and got me, got out the needle filled and ready to go then looked at the computer and got very quiet and asked if I was prepared to pay for it. I said no that my insurance takes care of it.

She said, that Medicare had turned it down and went to talk to my Dr. about it. 15 minutes later she came back and said, she was sorry but they had tried every-thing they could but Medicare is beginning to

turn many things away for seniors because of the projected Obama Care coming in. She was brushing at tears and said, "Some day they too will get old", I am so very sorry!!

YOU ARE NOT GOING TO LIKE THIS...

At age 76 when you most need it, you are not eligible for cancer treatment

* see page

272

What Nancy Pelosi didn't want us to know until after the healthcare bill was passed.

Remember she said, "We have to pass the Bill so that we can see what's in it." Well, here it is.

Obama Care Highlighted by Page Number



THE CARE BILL HB 3200

JUDGE KITHIL IS THE 2ND OFFICIAL WHO HAS OUTLINED THESE PARTS OF THE CARE BILL.

Judge Kithil of Marble Falls, TX - highlighted the most egregious pages of HB3200

Please read this....... especially the reference to pages 58 & 59

JUDGE KITHIL

wrote:

**

Page 50/section 152: The bill will provide insurance to all non-U.S. residents, even if they are here illegally.





**

Page 58 and 59: The government will have real-time access to an individual's bank account and will have the authority to make electronic fund transfers from those accounts.

**

Page 65/section 164: The plan will be subsidized (by the government) for all union members, union retirees and for community organizations (such as the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now

- ACORN).

**

Page 203/line 14-15: The tax imposed under this section will not be treated as a tax. (How could anybody in their right mind come up with that?)

**

Page 241 and 253: Doctors will all be paid the same regardless of specialty, and the government will set all doctors' fees. (no sense in going to Yale for a medical degree you will never be able to pay back)

**

Page 272. section 1145: Cancer hospital will ration care according to the patient's age.





**

Page 317 and 321: The government will impose a prohibition on hospital expansion; however, communities may petition for an exception.

**

Page 425, line 4-12: The government mandates advance-care planning consultations. Those on Social Security will be required to attend an "end-of-life planning" seminar every five years. (Death

counseling..)

**

Page 429, line 13-25: The government will specify which doctors can write an end-of-life order.

HAD ENOUGH????

Judge Kathie then goes on to identify:

"Finally, it is specifically stated that this bill will not apply to members of Congress. Honorable David Kithil of Marble Falls , Texas