Curtis Shelton and David Autry: Oklahoma budget crisis? What budget crisis?
Write A Letter To The Editor

Letters to the editor are encouraged.

Each letter must include the author's name, mailing address and daytime telephone number.

The author's name and city of residence will be used if the letter is used in print or online.

Addresses and phone numbers will not be published. Letters have a 250-word limit.

Letters may be edited for length, style and grammar. Send to letters@tulsaworld.com.

Mail to Tulsa World, Letters to the Editor, Box 1770, Tulsa, OK 74102.

For more information, call 918-581-8330 Monday-Friday from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.

Write a Readers Forum column

Op/ed space in the Tulsa World is limited. To preserve the space for the pieces we think our readers will most appreciate, we have these guidelines for submissions:

1. Op/eds should to be about public policy issues not personalities.

2. They should be debatable in nature: They should take a stance that some but not all of our readers would agree with.

3. They should not be in direct response to previous op/ed columns, syndicated columns, letters to the editor or Tulsa World editorials. The proper forum for such responses is our letter to the editor space.

4. They should come from authors who are authoritative on the topic or offer some unique identifiable perspective.

5. They should to be about 600 words long.

6. They cannot be election endorsements or un-endorsements, although at times the editorial department will solicit op/ed columns on both sides of an election for publication.

7. They cannot be product endorsement.

8. They should come from an author who lives within our circulation area.

9. They should not have been published elsewhere or submitted for publication elsewhere.

10. They cannot be libelous, incendiary or offensive to broad portions of our readership.

11. They should to be accompanied with an electronic photo of the author for publication.

These are not hard-and-fast rules. Sometimes, typically because of relative light demand for op/ed space, the editorial editor may waive one or more of the guidelines. At times of high demand, he may not be able to do so.

Columns should be submitted to: wayne.greene@tulsaworld.com