NY-19 Race: Teachout Dominated Democratic Primary
A woman in the 19th Congressional District, who picked up a lot of Upstate New York votes in a 2014 primary run against Andrew Cuomo, is now one step closer to a seat in Congress. Briggette Sayegh has more.

KINGSTON, N.Y. -- Zephyr Teachout dominated in Tuesday's Democratic primary for New York’s 19th Congressional District. The Fordham law professor beat out opponent Will Yandik by a double digit percentage.

“I am running for Congress to represent you and break down the doors of power in Washington D.C.,” Teachout said.

In her victory speech Teachout spoke specifically to voters in the Hudson valley, talking about her work against big oil and fracking, a key issue in the area.

“We have to take the energy we have here and stop fracking across the country. And triple down on solar and wind and micro hydro,” said Teachout.

She also railed against Washington corruption, and big money.

'I've been fighting well paid lobbyists on behalf of the working families for my entire life. And I will fight until we win for the people of the 19th Congressional District,” she said.

Teachout emphasized the importance of small businesses, and said she would work to grow the local economy.

"Fight for those midsized farms, the good jobs that we need against NAFTA. All of which is going to be critical to revitalizing this area,” Teachout said.

Looking ahead at the general election she had some pointed attacks on Republican John Faso.

"John Faso is an Albany assemblyman turned lobbyist. He is the ultimate insider,” she said.

But in the end – her main focus was on her vision for the future of the Hudson Valley.

"We've got an exciting future. Our future lies in the apple farmers of Ulster, in our fast growing tech industries, in construction jobs in film and TV in local processing plants in local solar manufacturing for our roofs,” said Teachout.

Will Yandik spoke to his supporters Tuesday night after his loss. He said though he knew the odds were stacked against him, it was still important for him to run.

"So we knew this race from the get go was a long shot for us. But it is not surprising that Will Yandik who was born in Hudson and raised in this community was not afraid to take on long odds because that is what this community has taught me how to do," he said.