5 Austin PD Officer-Involved Shootings in 2016 Have Left 3 Dead, 3 Injured
One man is dead in the latest of several officer-involved shootings in Austin. Five officer-involved incidents have taken place in the Capital City since February, leaving a total of three dead and three injured. Our Carlos Garcia takes a look at the timeline between then and now.

Tragedy struck Austin with the gunning down of an unarmed black teenager in February.

"It just didn't seem like we had no clue that it was going to turn into this," said resident Ernest Holloway.

Austin Police Officer Geoffrey Freeman, a 10-year police veteran, opened fire on the nude teen sparking protests and rallies on both sides.

"It may be someone else's child that it happened to yesterday, but it may very well be your and I child today," said activist Christina Muhammad.

Freeman was later fired from the force in March. But just as that chapter was closing another one opened with police shooting 34-year-old William Mann in the shoulder after they said he harassed people with knives.

Police were able to take him into custody after a stand-off. Now Mann faces charges of assault with a deadly weapon.

TEXT ALERTS | Sign Up For Breaking News/Weather Updates

Then a Sunday morning scuffle between a security guard, a man thought to be breaking into vehicles, and a police officer, resulted in the officer being shot, and the suspect killed.

"My first thought was it couldn't be gunshots. I said it's so odd. It just doesn't happen out here," said Mike Hutchinson of Hut's Hamburgers.

Fast forward 11 days later, when a team of SWAT officers with the Austin Police Department were serving a warrant in North Austin on 18-year-old Tyler Harrell on suspicion of selling drugs.

But when police arrived, they said Harrell opened fire with a long rifle, injuring one officer.

Harrell surrendered and now faces charges of attempted capital murder.

Details are still scarce in the latest in this string of officer involved shootings.

We know a 29-year-old man was shot and killed by a police officer in South Austin.

Police say the man charged at the officer with knives and didn't stand down when ordered.

APD Chief Art Acevedo called the incident a "suicide by cop."

"It's really easy for us to jump to conclusions and demonize our officers when they're trying to gain control of a resisting suspect that is not showing their hands," said Acevedo.

Each instance came with its own set of circumstances. Still, for officers the decision to use of deadly force is never an easy one.

There's no word yet from Austin police on the identity of the officer involved in Friday night's shooting.

---

Join the Discussion:

Follow TWC News Austin on Facebook & Twitter