Robert Brecha : University of Dayton, Ohio
Research Interests

Research in Progress

Most recently I have been concentrating on energy and environmental issues. During the summers since 2006 I have spent time at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Change Research in Germany working with economists and natural scientists using models to investigate transformation paths toward a more sustainable world energy system that avoid serious economic consequences while simultaneously reducing greenhouse gas emissions significantly. A particular interest of mine is tying together climate, economic and energy system models and thinking about the consequences of coming fossil-fuel depletion challenges. We have several recent publications, or papers in preparation or submission to journals.

In the past few years I have also built up a collaboration with colleagues in the School of Engineering's Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, with a focus on energy efficiency improvements to buildings. Our work is based on using data available from utilities to characterize both residences and commercial buildings and has resulted in publications, research grant money, and practical applications in the field. Previously I worked on laboratory experiments, with the main effort being experiments using diode laser spectroscopy to investigate molecular oxygen absorption strengths and to make absolute measurement of the transition frequency for the oxygen A-band. This experiment was the focus of my research efforts for several years, resulting in three papers published in refereed journals. Four senior honors thesis students worked on these experiments.

In addition to the experimental work carried out, in my laboratory I have actively collaborated with Dr. Perry Rice of Miami University in the field of theoretical quantum optics, investigating quantum dynamical effects of a few atoms in an optical cavity. We have also collaborated with Dr. Leno Pedrotti of the Department of Physics and the School of Engineering's Electro-optics Program.