Crimes Against Children Research Center
David Finkelhor, Ph.D., Professor

David Finkelhor is the Director of the Crimes against Children Research Center, Co-Director of the Family Research Laboratory and Professor of Sociology at the University of New Hampshire. He has been studying the problems of child victimization, child maltreatment and family violence since 1977. He is well known for his conceptual and empirical work on the problem of child sexual abuse, reflected in publications such as Sourcebook on Child Sexual Abuse (Sage, 1986) and Nursery Crimes (Sage, 1988). He has also written about child homicide, missing and abducted children, children exposed to domestic and peer violence and other forms of family violence. In his recent work, he has tried to unify and integrate knowledge about all the diverse forms of child victimization in a field he has termed Developmental Victimology. He is editor and author of 11 books and over 150 journal articles and book chapters. He has received grants from the National Institute of Mental Health, the National Center on Child Abuse and Neglect, and the US Department of Justice, and a variety of other sources. In 1994, he was given the Distinguished Child Abuse Professional Award by the American Professional Society on the Abuse of Children and in 2004 he was given the Significant Achievement Award from the Association for the Treatment of Sexual Abusers.

Curriculum Vita

Watch David Finkelhor sing a song about Murray Straus at the San Diego Conference on Child and Family Maltreatment.

Watch David Finkelhor receive the Pettee Medal at the University of New Hampshire (with award acceptance song!).

Watch David Finkelhor receive the first annual National Kempe Scientific Impact Award, with his acceptance remarks and a song!





Lyrics to David's Songs

Peer Review Song (2018)

My Favorite Stats (2012) YouTube Link

Grantmaker Farewell (2008)

Get it to the Feds On Time (2008)

Musical Instruments (2004)

Song of the Family Violence Researchers (2003)

Revise and Resubmit (2002)

Very Model of a FV Researcher (2001)

Murray Straus Anniversary Song