Wisconsin's financial reserves stronger but still lag behind other states'
Madison — Wisconsin finished last year with stronger reserves than it has typically had since 2000, but those funds are shrinking and are at barely half the levels of the average state in the country, a new study finds.

The report released Thursday by the Pew Charitable Trusts also projected that Wisconsin would finish the current fiscal year in June with less money in reserve than any other state in the nation. The think tank's cautionary study used data gathered directly from state budget offices, but it didn't include money outside general funds. In Wisconsin's case, the report didn't include money in a rainy day fund meant to help weather difficult times.

The study found Wisconsin ended the previous fiscal year in June 2014 with enough money in its main account to pay its expected bills for just under 13 days, a better showing than in any recent fiscal year except 2013 and 2000. But that was down from the 19 days the state held the previous year. The state's reserves from last year also are barely half the national average of 24 days.

Wisconsin's rainy day fund has about $280 million, or enough to sustain state government for about six extra days, bringing the state closer to the national average but still well below most of its peers.

A handful of states, including Alaska, Wyoming, North Dakota and West Virginia, had reserves of more than 100 days of spending last summer.

For this fiscal year, the report shows Wisconsin as projected to have a slight shortfall in its main account, equal to about one and a half days of spending. That made Wisconsin the worst of the 48 states providing data, since the rest of them projected a positive balance in their general funds.

Barb Rosewicz, co-author of the Pew Report, said her center released the 2015 numbers but that Pew didn't do an explicit comparison of them since they were just projections.

"We know there are a lot of changes to be done with those numbers," she said.

Department of Administration spokeswoman Stephanie Marquis said when looked at globally — beyond the state's main account — Wisconsin's finances are in great shape. "The state's pension system is fully funded, which cannot be said of many other states," she said.

Changes will have to be made in Wisconsin, which under its constitution cannot run a deficit over a two-year budget. Gov. Scott Walker also has pledged to make sure the state ends the current fiscal year on June 30 with a balanced budget, though so far his administration has not detailed publicly any of the potential spending cuts being made to ensure that.

The 2015-'17 budget starting in July will be more challenging financially for Walker and lawmakers. The most recent estimates by the nonpartisan Wisconsin Legislative Fiscal Bureau project an $824 million gap in the state's main account between the taxes the state expects to get and the cost of keeping up the state's current programs.