Capitol Hill Economist and Data Visualization Expert Jonathan Schwabish to Join Urban Institute
Abstract

Jonathan Schwabish, an economist with the Congressional Budget Office, will join the Urban Institute on May 7 as a senior researcher and data visualization expert. A leading voice calling for clarity and accessibility in research, Schwabish will boost the Institute's capabilities in data visualization and conduct research on older workers, people with disabilities, food security, immigration policy, and microsimulation modeling at Urban's Income and Benefits Policy Center.

CONTACT: Stu Kantor skantor@urban.org, (202) 261-5283

WASHINGTON, DC, April 21, 2014 — Economist Jonathan Schwabish will join the Urban Institute on May 7 as a senior researcher and data visualization expert.

Schwabish comes to the Urban Institute from the Congressional Budget Office, where he conducted and published research on earnings and income inequality, immigration, retirement security, data measurement, and food stamps. In recent years he has become widely recognized for his ability to present complex data in engaging ways.

A leading voice calling for clarity and accessibility in research, Schwabish will boost the Institute’s capabilities in data visualization and conduct research on older workers, people with disabilities, food security, immigration policy, and microsimulation modeling at Urban’s Income and Benefits Policy Center.

“There are still great strides to be made in translating complex information so it is meaningful to more people,” Schwabish said. “My role at the Urban Institute will create new opportunities for experimentation and innovation in data visualization—efforts that should contribute to better policy decisions.”

Schwabish, his work, and his techniques have been featured on the Visualizing.org, Visual.ly, and SlideShare websites. Named a “visualization thought leader” by AllAnalytics in 2012, Schwabish—largely self-taught as a data visualizer—conducts workshops about data visualization and presentation techniques and blogs on his website, PolicyViz.com.

After Rep. Chris Van Hollen, the Housing Budget Committee’s ranking member, used a Schwabish infographic in a 2013 hearing, Fast Company Design noted the occasion “represented a turning point in the way Congress understands the costs of public policy—all thanks to one go-getter in the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) who’s trying to visualize a more sensible future.”

The Urban Institute is a nonprofit, nonpartisan policy research and educational organization that examines the social, economic, and governance challenges facing the nation. It provides information, analyses, and perspectives to public and private decisionmakers to help them address these problems and strives to deepen citizens’ understanding of the issues and trade-offs that policymakers face.