President Trump Has Authorized Congress To Pursue Criminal Charges Against Hillary Clinton According To Jason Chaffetz!
Donald Trump has opened the door for Jason Chaffetz to intervene in the case of Hillary Clinton’s use of an unsecured, private computer server in her home for classified information.

After suggesting during the presidential debates that Clinton would end up in jail over her behavior, Trump stated that prosecuting her for the email scandal was not a priority.

However, he didn’t rule out legal steps that would be recommended by the Department of Justice.

Chairman of the United States House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, Jason Chaffetz, told members of the committee that a recent meeting between him and the President revealed a desire by Trump to ensure Hillary Clinton receives whatever justice she deserves.

Chaffetz told members:

“President Trump visited Philadelphia when we were at our planning and strategy session.

I went backstage with the President here’s what he said:

‘You do a great job. Listen, I understand I’m the president and you have a job. You do the oversight. Don’t slow down. Go after everything you want to go after. You look at everything you want to look at.’

If you sat there and heard what he said to me about pursuing oversight and government, you would be inspired. And for him to convey a message of ‘don’t slow down,’ I think was a good message.” (continue reading to view the video)

This interesting news comes just a day after a federal court ordered the State Department to produce the 30 Clinton email-related documents that had been blacked out under various privilege claims.

The January 24 order signed by U.S. District Court, District of Columbia Judge James E. Boasberg grants Judicial Watch’s Cross-Motion for Partial Summary Judgment for in a camera, non-public review of the documents by January 31 (Judicial Watch, Inc. v. U.S. Department of State (No. 1:15-cv-00687)).

Judicial Watch on November 23, 2016, asked the court to reject the State Department’s secrecy claims over the Clinton email documents on the grounds the documents relate to government misconduct.

Hillary Clinton will answer for her crimes after all! The video of Jason Chaffetz is below!









President Trump has authorized Congress to pursue criminal charges against Hillary Clinton according to Jason Chaffetz! Full story here- http://usasupreme.com/president-trump-authorized-congress-pursue-criminal-charges-hillary-clinton-according-jason-chaffetz/ Posted by USA Supreme on Tuesday, January 31, 2017

Unleash hell Jason – President and American people have your back. MAGA