Colbert explains Trump's Orlando response with swastika

Stephen Colbert went after Donald Trump for seven-and-a-half straight minutes Tuesday night in a critique that ultimately included the use of a Nazi swastika to explain the presumptive Republican nominee's comments following the mass shooting in Orlando.

The Late Show host rattled off a series of Trump’s responses after the shooting attack at a gay nightclub in Orlando over the weekend that killed 49 people and injured 53 others.

First, Colbert pointed to Trump’s tweet in which he said he appreciated "the congrats for being right on radical Islamic terrorism."

“As news of the attack was still coming in on Sunday, Donald Trump took to Twitter to express his solidarity with himself, tweeting 'I called it,'” Colbert said, referring to Trump’s response.

Then, Colbert went through the speech Trump gave on Monday where he attempted to make Orlando a campaign issue and doubled down on his call for a temporary ban on Muslims entering the country.

“This whole speech with its nativism, its fear mongering, and especially its self-aggrandizing in the face of tragedy feels like a new low,” Colbert said. He then added: “Trump’s speech, unbelievably, was the least controversial part about his reaction to Orlando — just listen to what he said about President Obama.”

A clip of Trump's phone interview with Fox & Friends Monday was shown, in which Trump said: "Look, we're led by a man that either is not tough, not smart, or he's got something else in mind. ... There's something going on. It's inconceivable. There's something going on,”

Later, Colbert aired an interview Trump had on Boston radio's Howie Carr Show where he was asked to exactly what he meant: “Well, you know, I’ll let people figure that out for themselves, Howie. Because to be honest with you, there certainly doesn’t seem to be a lot of anger or passion … There was certainly not a lot of anger so, you know, I’ll let that, we’ll let people figure it out.”

Colbert then decided he would try and “figure it out” himself. He pulled out a chalkboard where he connected phrases Trump had used — the pattern he came up with was a Nazi swastika.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1tqJVpQ