Co-chairman of NFL committee fights to clear name to Congress
A general view of stadium during the second quarter between the Denver Broncos and the Carolina Panthers in Super Bowl 50 at Levi's Stadium. (Photo: Robert Hanashiro, USA TODAY Sports)

The co-chairman of the NFL’s Head, Neck and Spine Committee is taking the fight to clear his name straight to Congress.

In a letter Tuesday to House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton and Ranking Member Frank Pallone Jr., Dr. Richard Ellenbogen decried a “basic lack of fairness” in the failure to contact him before the release of a report Monday that harshly criticized him and the NFL for alleged attempts to influence money granted for research on head injuries.

“The advancement of science and research in this field is of critical importance – and we must work to together to understand what it is telling us and how we must adapt accordingly,” Ellenbogen wrote in the letter. “I regret that your minority staff report did nothing to further momentum on these goals and the understanding of these important scientific questions.”

A pediatric neurosurgeon who chairs the department of neurological surgery at the University of Washington and has been involved in youth sports safety initiatives, Ellenbogen told USA TODAY Sports on Monday he never attempted to influence the grant selection process on behalf of the NFL.

Instead, Ellenbogen said, his two phone calls with National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke director Dr. Walter Koroshetz were about Ellenbogen’s belief in the need for a longitudinal study on the effects of concussion. Ellenbogen also denied telling Koroshetz not to give a $16 million grant to researchers at Boston University instead.

The full text of Ellenbogen’s letter is below:

May 24, 2016

Dear Mr. Chairman and Ranking Member Pallone:

Yesterday a report from the minority staff of your committee was released to the media alleging that I and others participated in an effort to influence an NIH grant selection process. Nothing could be further from the truth. Unfortunately, I was not afforded the simple opportunity to make this plain to your staff members, despite the fact that my contact information was provided to them and my willingness to engage with them on any question was made clear to them. I find this basic lack of fairness, combined with the disregard for the opinions and reputations of the medical professionals named in this report, to be unworthy of the important committee that you lead. At a minimum, I hope you can understand my profound objection to this maligning without so much as the courtesy of a direct question to me by your staff.

To be clear, I am not and never have been paid by the NFL nor have I ever received funding through the research grant dollars in question. I am a physician on the front lines of this issue, treating kids and counseling parents every day on understanding concussions and repetitive head injury. I feel passionately that there is urgent work ahead to fill the tremendous gap in funding and support on this issue.

Medical professionals can and always will discuss priorities and debate protocols; that is healthy and appropriate. I believe strongly that there is a vital need for a longitudinal study that tracks the impact concussions have over many years. We need to better understand the long-term risks of traumatic brain injury. I made clear to the NIH that this should be a priority. The advancement of science and research in this field is of critical importance – and we must work to together to understand what it is telling us and how we must adapt accordingly.

I regret that your minority staff report did nothing to further momentum on these goals and the understanding of these important scientific questions.

Sincerely,

Richard G. Ellenbogen, MD, FACS

Professor and Chairman

Department of Neurological Surgery

Theodore S. Roberts Endowed Chair

Director, UW Neurosciences Institute

Director, American Board of Neurological Surgery

President, American Society of Pediatric Neurosurgeons