U.S. Basel III Final Rule: An Introduction

The U.S. Basel III final rule is the most complete overhaul of U.S. bank capital standards in over two decades. It comprehensively revises the regulatory capital framework for the entire U.S. banking sector. The final rule implements many aspects of Basel III and incorporates changes required by the Dodd-Frank Act. The final rule was approved in July 2013 by the three U.S. banking regulators: the Federal Reserve; the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC); and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).

Why is the U.S. Basel III Final Rule Important?

Biggest Change in Over Two Decades: The U.S. Basel III final rule represents the most significant change to U.S. bank capital standards since the U.S. adoption of Basel I in 1989.

The U.S. Basel III final rule represents the most significant change to U.S. bank capital standards since the U.S. adoption of Basel I in 1989. Important Changes to June 2012 Proposed Rules: The U.S. Basel III final rule makes a number of important changes to the proposed rules that were issued by the U.S. banking regulators in June 2012. The U.S. banking regulators received more than 2,600 comments on their proposed rules.

The U.S. Basel III final rule makes a number of important changes to the proposed rules that were issued by the U.S. banking regulators in June 2012. The U.S. banking regulators received more than 2,600 comments on their proposed rules. Dodd-Frank Act: The U.S. Basel III final rule implements key provisions in the Dodd-Frank Act, including the Collins Amendment capital floor and the ban on references to credit ratings in federal regulations.

Which Organizations Will be Affected by U.S. Basel III?

U.S. Banking Organizations: The U.S. Basel III final rule applies to the entire U.S. banking sector, from community banks to regional banks to the largest and most global U.S. banking organizations. The final rule also applies to U.S. bank subsidiaries and U.S. bank holding company subsidiaries of foreign banks. Exclusions: The U.S. Basel III final rule does not apply to small bank holding companies, which generally include bank holding companies with less than $500 million in total consolidated assets. The final rule also does not apply to certain savings and loan holding companies that are substantially engaged in commercial or insurance underwriting activities.

The U.S. Basel III final rule applies to the entire U.S. banking sector, from community banks to regional banks to the largest and most global U.S. banking organizations. The final rule also applies to U.S. bank subsidiaries and U.S. bank holding company subsidiaries of foreign banks. Nonbank SIFIs: In a proposal to implement the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve has proposed to apply U.S. Basel III and other enhanced prudential standards to nonbank financial companies that are designated as systemically important by the U.S. Financial Stability Oversight Council, subject to any case-by-case tailoring.

In a proposal to implement the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve has proposed to apply U.S. Basel III and other enhanced prudential standards to nonbank financial companies that are designated as systemically important by the U.S. Financial Stability Oversight Council, subject to any case-by-case tailoring. Certain U.S. Operations of Large Foreign Banks: In a proposal to implement the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve has proposed to apply U.S. Basel III and other enhanced prudential standards to any U.S. intermediate holding company (IHC) that a large foreign banking organization would be required to establish for its U.S. banking and non-banking subsidiaries.

What is Basel III?

Developed by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (Basel Committee) in 2010, Basel III is an internationally agreed-upon set of reform measures to increase the quality and quantity of regulatory capital. Basel III is the latest in a series of bank capital standards issued by the Basel Committee. The first set of capital standards, known as Basel I, was published by the Basel Committee in 1988. Basel II was published in 2004.

Basel III increases the quality and quantity of regulatory capital through measures including, but not limited to, the following: increasing minimum risk-based capital ratios and introducing a new common equity risk-based capital ratio; introducing capital buffers above the minimum risk-based capital ratios; limiting the types of instruments that qualify as capital for regulatory purposes; introducing new regulatory adjustments to and deductions from capital, which focus regulatory capital on tangible common equity; increasing the capital charge for a certain types of assets, exposures and transactions; and introducing a leverage ratio that takes into account both on- and off-balance sheet assets and exposures.



What is the Basel Committee?

The Basel Committee is a committee of central banks and bank regulators from 27 major industrialized countries that meet under the auspices of the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, Switzerland to develop bank capital and other regulatory standards and guidelines. The Basel Committee includes representatives from Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, Russia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States.

The Basel Committee's standards and guidelines are not treaties and are not legally binding, but they are backed by the commitments of the senior officials who are members of the Basel Committee to implement those standards and guidelines in their home jurisdictions. The Basel Committee's capital standards are implemented in all major jurisdictions, including the U.S. and EU.

Davis Polk's Visual Memorandum

To learn more about the U.S. Basel III final rule, please refer to Davis Polk's visual memorandum, which uses diagrams, flowcharts, timelines, examples and comparison tables to illustrate key aspects of the rule.

USBasel3.com is a collection of informational products provided by Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP. In its capacity as provider of USBasel3.com and its component parts, Davis Polk is acting as an information provider. USBasel3.com and its component parts do not constitute, and are not intended to constitute, legal advice with respect to any particular circumstance, do not create an attorney-client relationship with Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP or any of its associated entities and should not be relied on or treated as a substitute for specific advice relevant to particular circumstances. Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP shall not be liable for any loss that may arise from any reliance on USBasel3.com or its component parts. If you have any comments or questions related to USBasel3.com, please contact basel3@davispolk.com.

©2013 Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP. Disclaimer and Notices | Attorney advertising. Prior results do not guarantee a similar outcome.