Commissioners
Kristina Arriaga, Vice Chair

Reappointed by: Hon. Paul Ryan (R-WI), Speaker of the House, for a term expiring in May 2020. Kristina Arriaga was first appointed to the Commission on May 13, 2016 by Speaker of the House Paul Ryan (R-WI). Arriaga has worked on the defense of Freedom of Religion or Belief in the United States and internationally for over 20 years as Advisor to the United States delegation to the United Nations Human Rights Commission, an appointee to the Civil Rights Commission, and as the Executive Director of a U.S.-based public interest law firm that defends all religious traditions. Kristina Arriaga's full bio here.



Gary L. Bauer, Commissioner

Appointed by: President Donald J. Trump, for a term expiring in May 2019. Gary L. Bauer currently serves as President of American Values, a public policy think tank, and as Washington Director of Christians United for Israel Action Fund. He held several positions in the administration of President Ronald Reagan. He was Deputy Under Secretary of Education from 1982-1985 and Under Secretary of Education from 1985-1987. He then was appointed Assistant to the President for Policy Development, a position he held until January 1989. After leaving the Reagan White House, Gary Bauer served as a Senior Vice President of Focus on the Family and President of the Family Research Council. Gary Bauer's full bio here.

Anurima Bhargava, Commissioner

Appointed by: Honorable Nancy Pelosi (D), House Leader, for a term expiring in May 2020. Anurima Bhargava is a civil rights lawyer with extensive experience in various roles advocating for members of underrepresented communities. Before founding Anthem of Us, where she currently serves as President, Bhargava was the Chief of the Educational Opportunities Section of the Civil Rights Division at the U.S. Department of Justice, where she led the Division’s efforts to provide equal educational opportunities for all students. Anurima Bhargava's full bio here.

Reappointed by: Hon. Nancy Pelosi (D), House Leader, for a term expiring in May 2020. Tenzin Dorjee (Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara, UCSB) is an Associate Professor at the Department of Human Communication Studies, California State University, Fullerton (CSUF). His primary teaching and research interests are intergroup, intercultural, and intergenerational communication, identity issues, peace building, and conflict resolution. Hon. Nancy Pelosi (D), House Leader, for a term expiring in May 2020. Tenzin Dorjee (Ph.D., University of California, Santa Barbara, UCSB) is an Associate Professor at the Department of Human Communication Studies, California State University, Fullerton (CSUF). His primary teaching and research interests are intergroup, intercultural, and intergenerational communication, identity issues, peace building, and conflict resolution. Tenzin Dorjee's full bio here.

Appointed by: Hon. Charles Schumer (D), Senate Minority Leader, for a term expiring in May 2020. Andy Khawaja is founder and CEO of Allied Wallet, a leading online payment service provider headquartered in Los Angeles. He founded Allied Wallet in 2005 and the company now has a presence in Germany, India, Macau, Hong Kong, and the United Kingdom. In addition to his work as an entrepreneur, Dr. Khawaja has shared his knowledge of various issues, including the Middle East, cybersecurity, and banking, with government officials at the national, state, and local leves. : Hon. Charles Schumer (D), Senate Minority Leader, for a term expiring in May 2020. Andy Khawaja is founder and CEO of Allied Wallet, a leading online payment service provider headquartered in Los Angeles. He founded Allied Wallet in 2005 and the company now has a presence in Germany, India, Macau, Hong Kong, and the United Kingdom. In addition to his work as an entrepreneur, Dr. Khawaja has shared his knowledge of various issues, including the Middle East, cybersecurity, and banking, with government officials at the national, state, and local leves. Andy Khawaja's full bio here

Appointed by: President Donald J. Trump, for a term expiring in May 2020. Nadine Maenza is a noted speaker, writer, and policy expert with more than two decades of experience as an advocate for working families and a champion for international religious freedom. Nadine is the founding Executive Director of Patriot Voices and also served as the Chairman of Hardwired Global, an organization working to stop religious oppression around the world. In this role, she was involved in advocacy efforts to have violence against religious minorities in Iraq labeled genocide by Congress and the Obama Administration. She has advised The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, The College Board, and The Anne E. Casey Foundation on policy development and strategic partnerships through her work with The Clapham Group. President Donald J. Trump, for a term expiring in May 2020. Nadine Maenza is a noted speaker, writer, and policy expert with more than two decades of experience as an advocate for working families and a champion for international religious freedom. Nadine is the founding Executive Director of Patriot Voices and also served as the Chairman of Hardwired Global, an organization working to stop religious oppression around the world. In this role, she was involved in advocacy efforts to have violence against religious minorities in Iraq labeled genocide by Congress and the Obama Administration. She has advised The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, The College Board, and The Anne E. Casey Foundation on policy development and strategic partnerships through her work with The Clapham Group. Nadine Maenza's full bio here.

Gayle Manchin, Vice Chair

Appointed by: Hon. Charles Schumer (D), Senate Minority Leader, for a term expiring in May 2020. Gayle Manchin is the former First Lady of West Virginia, where she served as the official hostess of the Governor's Mansion and an advocate for West Virginia children and families. She has spoken both at a state and national level on challenges of rural education, poverty, and the responsibility and accountability of teachers, principals, students and parents in raising student achievement. Hon. Charles Schumer (D), Senate Minority Leader, for a term expiring in May 2020. Gayle Manchin is the former First Lady of West Virginia, where she served as the official hostess of the Governor's Mansion and an advocate for West Virginia children and families. She has spoken both at a state and national level on challenges of rural education, poverty, and the responsibility and accountability of teachers, principals, students and parents in raising student achievement. Gayle Manchin's full bio here.

Johnnie Moore, Commissioner

Appointed by: President Donald J. Trump, for a term expiring in May 2020. Johnnie Moore is founder and CEO of the KAIROS Company, a public relations consultancy. Previously he served as Senior Vice President for Communications at Liberty University. He also served as Chief of Staff and Vice President of Faith Content for the United Artists Media Group. President Donald J. Trump, for a term expiring in May 2020. Johnnie Moore is founder and CEO of the KAIROS Company, a public relations consultancy. Previously he served as Senior Vice President for Communications at Liberty University. He also served as Chief of Staff and Vice President of Faith Content for the United Artists Media Group. Johnnie Moore's full bio here.