E-Verify Statistics

Statistics based on fourth quarter FY 2008 (July 2008 through September 2008) E-Verify program transactional data compiled by Westat.



Employees automatically confirmed as work authorized

96.9 percent of employees are automatically confirmed as work authorized either instantly or within 24 hours, requiring no employee/employer action.

This represents an improvement over the 96.1 percent statistic previously reported for the April through June 2008 time period.

Employees receiving initial system mismatches

3.1 percent of employees receive initial system mismatches (tentative non-confirmations - TNCs)

0.3 percent of employees who receive initial mismatches later confirmed work authorized after contesting and resolving the mismatch.

2.8 percent of employees receive final non-confirmations (FNCs)

How Enhancements Continue to Improve the Accuracy and Efficiency of E-Verify

Westat, an independent research firm, recently analyzed E-Verify queries and reports two positive developments.



First, Westat's improved methodology for detecting and deleting duplicate cases has led to more accurate E-Verify performance statistics: the previously reported 96.1 percent rate for automatic confirmation of work authorization has been revised upward to 96.4 percent for the April through June 2008 time period.

Second, the July through September 2008 data demonstrates that 96.9 percent of queries were automatically confirmed as work authorized.

E-Verify's already low mismatch rate dropped further when the program obtained access to U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services' (USCIS) naturalization database records in May 2008. This access increased E-Verify's ability to automatically verify naturalized citizens' status, reducing citizenship-related mismatches by 39 percent. In addition, providing the option for employees who received a citizenship-related mismatch to call USCIS directly to contest (in lieu of visiting a Social Security Administration office) has reduced SSA field office walk-ins for such mismatches by 56 percent.

USCIS is committed to improving the instant verification rate for those eligible to work in the United States as well as working to prevent false positives and negatives in the system. We continue to work to implement several enhancements to the E-Verify program to achieve this goal. Recently, the inclusion of passport data (February 2009) further reduced citizenship-related mismatches for naturalized and derivative citizens.