Mobile.Politico.com: Geithner confirmation expected
Geithner confirmation expected

By John Bresnahan | 1/14/09 @ 8:56 PM EST

Senate Democrats are planning to move ahead with a confirmation vote on Timothy Geithner as early as next week, despite concerns over the tax problems of the would-be treasury secretary.



The Senate Finance Committee has scheduled a hearing for Wednesday, at which it will begin considering Geithner’s nomination. Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus (D-Mont.) had hoped to schedule the hearing this week, but GOP Sens. Jon Kyl (Ariz.) and Jim Bunning (Ky.) objected, forcing a one-week delay.



Baucus expects to vote on the Geithner nomination as early as next Thursday if Republicans don’t raise further objections. Majority Leader Harry Reid (D-Nev.) would then bring the nomination to the floor for a full Senate vote as quickly as possible, meaning Geithner could be confirmed by the end of next week.



Geithner failed to pay some of the taxes he owed when he worked at the International Monetary Fund, resulting in nearly $43,000 in back taxes and interest. Geithner paid the bulk of that total in late November, just before his nomination was sent to the Finance Committee for official review. Obama transition team officials discovered the tax problem while vetting Geithner’s records.



Both President-elect Barack Obama and Senate Democrats remain committed to pushing through Geithner’s nomination.



“Look, is this an embarrassment for him? Yes. He said so himself,” Obama told reporters on Wednesday when asked about Geithner. “But it was an innocent mistake. It is a mistake that is commonly made for people who are working internationally or for international institutions. It has been corrected. He paid the penalties.”



“My expectation is that Tim Geithner will be confirmed,” Obama added.



Baucus called Geithner’s confirmation “a given.”



Geithner met with Democratic and GOP members of the Finance Committee on Tuesday to discuss the tax matter as well as questions on the immigration status of a housekeeper he once employed. The session appeared to defuse any threat that Geithner’s nomination would be derailed, although some Democrats are privately unhappy about the situation.



“There’s plenty of angst over it, but unless something unbelievable comes out in the next few days, he’s gonna escape,” said an aide to one top Senate Democrat. This aide said his boss would “reluctantly support” Geithner.



Reid and other top Democrats had been aware of Geithner’s problems for several weeks before they were disclosed publicly on Tuesday, according to a senior Democratic aide. But there was never an effort to ask Geithner to withdraw from consideration, the aide said.



Senior Republicans have made no decision on whether to try to filibuster Geithner’s nomination. The GOP leadership was not informed of Geithner’s tax problems until Tuesday, when The Wall Street Journal broke the story, according to Republican insiders.



Several key Finance Committee Republicans have already voiced strong support for Geithner, saying that Obama needs to have his full economic team in place quickly in order to deal with the ongoing financial crisis facing the country.



“I think he’s a very fine man,” said Sen. Orrin G. Hatch (R-Utah). “I’m not one who holds mistakes against people. And, I believe, having chatted with him personally about this, it was an error and a mistake that human beings can make.”



Another Finance Committee member, Sen. Olympia Snowe (R-Maine), said that the information about Geithner was “troubling and concerning” and that it was “critical” that members of the committee meet with him before his hearing to ask him about it. But, Snowe said, “Based on that review and his answers to our questions, I believe the process should move forward and that these regrettable issues ultimately should not preclude support for his nomination at this time of monumental challenges for our economy.”



Sen. Bob Bennett (R-Utah) joked that Geithner “was just cruising along with the traffic — he may have broken the speed limit, but he wasn’t weaving in and out of lanes, he wasn’t drunk and he wasn’t endangering anybody.”



Manu Raju contributed to this story.