Beer tanks barrel along canal as lawmakers trade barbs
LITTLE FALLS — Brewery tanks making their way along the Erie Canal — which have become a site for spectators curious about the barges transporting them and fans of Genesee beer — have been the subject of some controversy.

On Thursday, workers from Feldmeier Equipment, Inc. and others watched while the tanks — part of a $40 million expansion project under way at the Genesee Brewing Company in Rochester — went past the Little Falls plant. Some were there to show their disapproval of the tanks being made in China.

On Friday, Genesee Brewing Company issued a statement in response to the criticism, saying Feldmeier had a chance to bid on the project, while state lawmakers representing Herkimer County issued a statement saying they were upset work for a project with state tax credits didn’t stay within the state.

The lawmakers’ statement resulted in a response from Empire State Development that said Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Empire State Development “support New York state businesses, period.”

“Feldmeier was given the opportunity to bid on these tanks and declined,” Mary Beth Popp, director of corporate communication for Genesee Brewing Company, said in a statement. “We went back to them and asked them to reconsider and they chose not to. Quite frankly, we’re disappointed that one of our partners would represent the facts in this way.”

Elroy Moore, plant manager at Feldmeier Equipment, said Friday the company did have a chance to bid on the project when it came up approximately a year and a half ago.

“We declined because we couldn’t complete that amount of work in five months,” he said.

Since the tanks are just now coming up the canal this week, Moore said, “We could have easily had that work done in that amount of time.”

Moore said the objection isn’t that it wasn’t done at Feldmeier, but rather the work was taken outside the country. “There are multiple companies that could’ve [done the project],” he said. “It’s New York state taxpayer money — $9.5 million — that went overseas.”

The statement from Genesee said the company has purchased seven tanks from Feldmeier over the past three years and said they have “provided first-class tanks.”

“We had hopes that we could partner with them on additional work that would benefit their local workforce. Over the past couple of weeks, we reached out to the owner and talked with the vice president of sales. We had every intention of continuing our relationship,” said Popp.

The statement explained the “$40 million privately funded modernization project sustains the future of the Genesee Brewery and the 600 people who work there. This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to take New York state’s oldest brewery and revolutionize it. We have the chance to not only become more competitive, but to create an exciting platform for business expansion and job growth.”

The statement also noted “the $40 million in private investment, along with job creation milestones, triggers up to $9.5 million in New York state funding that will be used for the future expansion of the Genesee Brew House.”

According to a Sept. 2016 news release from Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s office regarding the project, “Empire State Development will provide up to $4.5 million in performance-based Excelsior Jobs Program tax credits in return for North American Breweries’ job creation commitments through the expansion project.” The release also stated that through the Upstate Revitalization Initiative, ESD will provide a $5 million capital grant. Up to $3 million of the URI capital grant is tied to North American Breweries hiring 64 persons impacted by poverty. Overall, the project will create 128 new jobs for the company.

A dozen 20-foot by-60-foot fermentation tanks for the expansion project arrived in the Port of Albany earlier this month. They are being transported 225 miles via the canal system to Rochester because of their size. The first of the barges passed through Herkimer County Thursday and the second one Friday.

State lawmakers issued a joint statement on Friday to comment on the tanks being made in China. Assemblyman Anthony Brindisi, D-Utica, Assemblyman Marc Butler, R-Newport, and Assemblyman Brian Miller, R-New Hartford, said the state tax credit dollars for the project should have stayed in the state.

“It disgusts me to know that state economic development dollars were used to support a project where goods were manufactured in China, when we have companies like Feldmeier Equipment that produce products like this right in the Mohawk Valley,” Brindisi said in the statement. “New York should put its money where its mouth is and support our state workers and state companies first, before they ship taxpayer’s money right out the door to China.”

“As we struggle to improve the economy of upstate New York, I think this administration has missed a tremendous opportunity to secure employment opportunities here in Little Falls and the Mohawk Valley,” Butler said in the statement. “I’m truly disappointed that a highly regarded company like Feldmeier has been by-passed by this process, and in particular when state funding is a part of the project. We must take steps to insure that does not happen again in the Mohawk Valley or anywhere in New York state.”

“It simply makes no sense to export economic development dollars to China, when by definition this funding is supposed to grow jobs here in New York,” Miller said in the statement. “New York has many long-time manufacturers like Feldmeier that are more than willing to produce quality products, and these companies deserve a chance to do business with the state.”

Brindisi said the Buy New York Act he is sponsoring, which is supported by Miller and Butler, would require state agencies to give preference to buying goods and services produced in New York state when handing out tax dollars, as well as requiring the use of New York state iron, steel, and manufactured products for many government contracts.

Little Falls Mayor Mark Blask said in the same news release that “It is extraordinarily disappointing in light of all of the efforts my partners in government and I are putting toward keeping jobs local and invigorating the upstate economy that more effort did not go into ensuring these incentives went to Feldmeier, a company that has been in Little Falls for more than six decades.”

Brindisi, Butler and Miller — who all represent portions of Herkimer County — signed a letter addressed to Gov. Andrew Cuomo and Howard Zemsky, chief executive officer and commissioner of the Empire State Development. In the letter, they state, “As things now stand, we must express our strong disappointment that this highly-regarded local company was not given more consideration in this project. We would hope, in the future, New York companies and businesses will receive stronger support from this administration.”

The response from Empire State Development spokesman Jason Conwall said ESD provided $750,000 to Feldmeier in 2013 in order to secure their expansion in Herkimer County, ensuring new operations and 80 new jobs came to Little Falls instead to going out of state, which was under consideration by the company.

“The bottom line is that while Feldmeier bid on a larger equipment package, the company declined (twice) to bid on the tanks in question and not one penny of state funds were spent on the equipment purchased by North American Breweries, from China or elsewhere. If local elected officials had contacted ESD with their concerns before issuing a press release, they would have known these indisputable facts instead of playing politics with inaccurate information," Conwall’s statement said.