University of Wisconsin Whitewater
EDUCATION

PhD, 1979 University of Illinois, accountancy, public economics, tax law

MAS, 1976, University of Illinois

CPA, 1976

BS, Carroll College (WI), accounting

AREAS OF EXPERTISE

Federal taxation

State/local taxation

International taxation

Tax education and technology

Not-for-profit organizations

Charitable gift techniques

BIOGRAPHY

Bill Raabe moved to UW-Whitewater after teaching graduate tax courses for over a decade in the Fisher College of Business of The Ohio State University. Previously, Bill was the Wisconsin Distinguished Professor of Taxation at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee. At UWM, Bill founded and brought to national prominence the master of science program in taxation.

Bill also has taught at Arizona State University, the Capital University (OH) Law School, and Samford University (AL). He has been active in the tax education functions of the major accounting firms, as a teacher, course designer and consultant.

His scholarly articles appear in journals for both academics and tax advisors. His books include undergraduate and graduate texts, as well as several professional reference works. Bill has testified as to tax matters before legislative committees and in the courtroom as an expert witness.

While at OSU, William Raabe founded and directed the Fisher Tax Clinic, in which his students volunteered to prepare federal and state income tax returns for low-income taxpayers. The Clinic's work was recognized by an award from Pres George W Bush.

At Capital, Bill was the Founding Dean of the School of Management, and the university's only Distinguished Professor. At Samford, he was the accounting program director and led curriculum changes for the five-year CPA program. At UWM, Bill was the business school faculty chair, he chaired the Athletic Board, and he was the university's NCAA Faculty Athletic Representative.

Over the years, Bill Raabe has advised finalist teams in the PricewaterhouseCoopers Tax Policy Case competition and the Deloitte Tax Consulting competition.

OTHER CAREER HIGHTLIGHTS

Educator of the Year, Wisconsin Institute of CPAs

Worked with Alabama governor to write regulations for consolidated tax filing

Worked with Wisconsin business leaders and legislative committee on corporate tax reform

Keynote address, Corporate Tax Reform, RATE Coalition, Columbus OH (2012)

Associate Editor, Journal of the ATA, Journal of Accounting Education

Fellow: American Accounting Association, University of Illinois, Ernst & Young, National Center for Tax Education and Research

Panel of "Master Teachers," AAA (2013, 2012, 2009), ATA (2009)

Editorial board: AICPA Tax Adviser, ATA Journal of Legal Tax Research, Advances in Taxation

SELECTED PUBLICATIONS

Hoffman, Raabe; 2014 edition; Southwestern Federal Taxation: Corporations, Partnerships, Cengage Learning textbook

Smith, Raabe, 2014 edition, Southwestern Federal Taxation: Business Entities, Cengage Learning textbook

Everett, Hennig, Raabe, Sonnier; September 2013; Using Individual Net Operating Losses; Journal of Taxation, lead article, professional journal

Raabe, Whittenburg; 9th edition, 2012; Federal Tax Research; Cengage Learning textbook

Raabe; 2013 edition; Case Studies in Taxation; PricewaterhouseCoopers online collection

Everett, Hennig, Raabe; June 25, 2012; Repatriating Offshore Earnings; Tax Notes policy journal, reprinted in Tax Notes International