Countdown to #MedicaidCharade: Myths and Facts for Speaker Howell
Republicans in the Virginia House of Delegates have been hiding behind fake excuses and baseless claims to avoid doing the right thing for 400,000 uninsured Virginians. It makes no sense -- why would Speaker Howell and House leadership fight so hard to block affordable healthcare for hard-working Virginians?

It's true that everyone's Medicaid expansion these days. Maybe in all the hubub, Speaker Howell just got a little confused about he rights and wrongs of Medicaid expansion. Here's a helpful cheat sheet that might help House leadership actually come to the table to discuss closing the coverage gap.

MYTH #1: We can’t afford Medicaid expansion – federal money for this will “dry up.”

FACT: This type of federal funding has never been cut, and, in fact has increased several times. Federal contributions to the Medicaid program have strong bipartisan support and have survived even the worst of Republican-manufactured crises, like the debt ceiling debate and federal government shutdown. One thing we can't afford? Wasting taxpayer dollars on a special session that won't address this healthcare crisis.

Republicans need to stop their partisan fear mongering around funding this vital program.

MYTH #2: Medicaid expansion doesn't work.

FACT: It’s simple: Medicaid expansion is lowering the number of uninsured people across the country. States like Arkansas and Kentucky have seen drastic decreases in uninsured people. Hospitals in Arizona aren’t losing money on uncompensated care. But here in Virginia, we’re one of only 3 states to see an increase in the number of uninsured.

Medicaid expansion works – it’s time House Republicans stop standing in the way.

MYTH #3: Not doing anything for 400,000 uninsured Virginians is a good idea.

FACT: We’re already paying to expand the Medicaid program. We’re just paying for people in other states. Republicans are sitting idly by as Virginia taxpayer dollars fund health care coverage for people in 27 other states. Virginia is losing $5 million a day by refusing our own money as one of just five states whose taxpayers Republicans are sitting idly by as Virginia taxpayer dollars fund health care coverage for people in 27 other states. Virginia is losing $5 million a day by refusing our own money as one of just five states whose taxpayers will pay $88 billion over the next eight years to provide healthcare in other states that have expanded Medicaid.. And as if that's not bad enough, hospitals have already begun layoffs, a direct result of Republican inaction. The more time Republican leadership wastes, the more taxpayer dollars go down the drain.

House Republicans need to get their heads out of the sand and do what’s right to ensure Virginia money goes to Virginians.

MYTH #4: Virginia Republicans have a plan to insure 400,000 Virginians trapped in the coverage gap.

FACT: While Governor McAuliffe and Democratic legislators have put forward multiple plans and offered many ways to compromise, Republican leadership has brought nothing to the table. They’re costing taxpayers thousands of dollars instead of finding a common sense solution for Virginians.

Speaker Howell needs to come to the table to put forward real solutions instead of partisan posturing.