Decoding Ivanka Trump’s Unusual Campaign Role
From day one, the public found ways to strike Donald Trump’s candidacy down as a joke. He would never release his financial disclosures, they said, and then he did. He would not make it through the first debate, but there he was. He could not recover from a series of seemingly unrecoverable remarks—saying he would bomb “the shit” out of ISIS, for instance, or berating John McCain for being a prisoner of war—and yet, here we all are. By winning three of the Republican Party’s first four nominating contests (and not just winning them, by the way, but all-out routing his opponents), Trump has indisputably become his party’s presumptive nominee leading up to Super Tuesday. His campaign is now, however controversially, playing the long game.

Part of Trump’s commander-in-chief rollout has, of late, involved a choreographed introduction to his family. Sure, the Trumps possess a less traditional family tree—one with branches broken by infidelities, a Three Mile Island–style divorce, several generations of children from several wives—but so far, his supporters are eating it up. Melania Trump has presented herself admirably in a Harper’s Bazaar profile, an Us Weekly personal essay, and, most recently, a much-ballyhooed interview on Morning Joe and another with CNN’s Anderson Cooper.

But the shining star of the Trump family ensemble is undoubtedly Ivanka, 34, Trump’s eldest daughter, who, despite being pregnant with her third child, has indefatigably schlepped across the country posting Instagram photos as she scrambles from campaign headquarters to diners to polling places to schools to senior centers.

Loading View on Instagram

Loading View on Instagram

Loading View on Instagram

At various campaign stops, and in numerous victory speeches, Trump has, quite literally, called Ivanka into the spotlight. On some level, this is entirely understandable. Ivanka Trump is beguiling, powerful, and hardworking, a proud mom and a devoted wife. Voters of a certain age also may admire the extraordinary grit she demonstrated as a kid, during the height of the Marla Maples tabloid circus, trotting into Trinity School each morning, chin up. (On some level, it is a sentiment akin to one bestowed upon Chelsea Clinton, her friend.) Before raucous crowds, Trump has persistently teased that Ivanka, now nearing the end of her third trimester, might have the baby on the stump. “I said, ‘Ivanka, it would be great if you had your baby in Iowa.’ I really want that to happen. I really want that to happen,” Trump told Hawkeye State supporters in January. “I’m sure there are great hospitals here,” Ivanka said days later, in New Hampshire. After winning the South Carolina primary, Trump told the crowd how much he hoped his daughter would give birth in South Carolina.

But unlike Chelsea Clinton, who is also pregnant, Ivanka Trump isn’t being presented by the campaign as a younger best friend or a precocious advisor or even an envoy to millennials. Instead, she has become more of a proxy wife. This owes, in part, to the fact that Melania Trump is a far less conventional campaign spouse than Laura Bush or Ann Romney—or, for that matter, moxie-laden professionals like Michelle Obama or Hillary Clinton in 1992, or Bill Clinton this time around. Her heavily accented English might recall Trump’s unwieldy immigration plan; her general bombshell-ness might raise other issues about his well-documented issues with women. Either way, the Trump campaign appears more comfortable using the candidate’s daughter to spread his message than his wife.

Sometimes this stage-managing is subtle, like in South Carolina, when Ivanka graciously took the mic after her father’s win, while he had to prod Melania to say something, anything. Other times, it crosses a cringeworthy line. “Yeah, she’s really something," Trump said of his daughter in September, “and what a beauty, that one. If I weren’t happily married and, ya know, her father . . . ”

Ivanka’s pregnancy has underscored a certain duality in her father—that he is the sort of guy who can both shamelessly exploit his daughter’s pregnancy yet nevertheless engender enough love that she would continuously travel to early voting states during the most frigid, brutal stretch of the race while near term (By Ivanka’s own account, her baby is due any day. She announced her pregnancy on Facebook in late September, posting incremental updates on Instagram throughout. “Four and a half months to go,” she posted four and a half months ago. “Just a few more weeks,” she captioned a photo on Valentine’s day.).

The Trump campaign and a spokesperson for Ivanka did not respond to requests for comment about her decision to travel so close to term. But most guidelines tell expecting mothers to stop air travel at the 36-week mark. “For a normal, low-risk pregnancy, air travel up to the 36th week is O.K. That is the general domestic flying guideline,” Dr. Cynthia Gyamfi-Bannerman, an ob-gyn with a specialty in maternal-fetal medicine and co-director of Columbia University’s Preterm Birth Prevention Center, said. Despite the guidelines, she said she still has patients ask her nearly every week if they can fly further along in their pregnancy—a question she strikes down every time. “There are more complications in pregnancy as you approach term, and if you’re up in the air, there’s no recourse,” she said.

Public perception dictates that commercial air travel is risky for women well into their pregnancies, but doctors agree that for most women, especially those flying relatively short distances, cabin pressure and altitude are not the concern. Rather, late-term women are actually advised to stay grounded to avoid going into labor in the friendly skies. “You do not want to go into labor or rupture membranes at 34,000 feet,” Dr. Hal Lawrence III, the executive vice president of the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, said.

Dr. Joanne Stone, director of maternal-fetal medicine for the Mount Sinai Health System, said that pregnant women face a greater risk with blood clots while in the air and, because planes are so dry, dehydration. If a healthy patient close to her 39th week came to her and proposed a flight halfway across the country, she said she would caution against it. “I’d advise her not to unless it’s some crazy emergency,” she said.

It is not as though Ivanka Trump is squeezing into a middle seat in the last row in coach on a commercial airline; Trump’s personal jet and her presumably top-notch medical team are also an unusual luxury. It is possible, too, that some of her journeys were not by plane, though her photos suggest there was at least some air travel involved as late as two weeks ago. For now, it seems, her dad could still get the on-the-road primary baby he’s been begging for.

All families make sacrifices during campaigns. But the question remains whether the candidate’s emphasis on his daughter’s pregnancy reflects the teddy-bear persona he would like to invoke, or a reputation for ruthlessness—and misogyny—that he is running away from. As with most things in this highly unusual election, the answer may come down to whether you support Trump or not.

Ivanka Trump FOLLOW Donald Trump FOLLOW Follow to get the latest news and analysis about the players in your inbox. See All Players