Trump’s Violent Campaign Rallies Come Back to Haunt Him
Even as Donald Trump’s inflammatory campaign-era rhetoric begins to fade into the past, replaced by fresh outrages in the present, specific incidents from his past rallies continue to haunt him in the present. On Saturday, members of a pro-Trump biker gang allegedly manhandled several people during the president’s rally in Pennsylvania, after Trump himself yelled “get him out of here” at a protester waving a Russian flag. Now, according to Politico, that protester is considering suing the president for allegedly inciting the crowd to violence. “When he sees that the crowd is riled up and he says these types of things, he’s sending a message to his supporters,” the man’s lawyer, Richard Rice, said.

It may seem like a stretch, but Rice is already representing two other protesters in similar claims against Trump’s presidential campaign, claiming that the then-candidate used his bully pulpit to persuade the crowd to assault protesters. In one case, two men are seeking damages for, among other things, injuries they sustained after they were allegedly “assaulted and beaten by an angry mob that had been incited by Donald J. Trump.” During that November 2015 Trump rally in Birmingham, Alabama, Trump had yelled “get him the hell out of here!” While a judge has yet to rule on a motion by the Trump campaign and the convention center to dismiss the suit, Rice told Politico that if his case proceeds, he would likely use the 2015 incident to establish a pattern of behavior that he could use to build a new case against Trump’s actions on Saturday.

It wouldn’t be the first time that Trump’s own words have gotten him in trouble in court. One of his first executive orders, which sought to ban immigration from several majority-Muslim countries, was shot down by the Ninth Circuit when a three-judge panel refused to reinstate the blocked ban based in part on Trump’s past statements indicating that the order was motivated by religious discrimination. More recently, when a district judge in California ruled against Trump’s attempt to pull federal funding from sanctuary cities, he specifically called out “public comments” by Trump and Attorney General Jeff Sessions that he said belied the administration’s argument that the order would be limited in scope.

Trump’s speech is almost certainly protected by the First Amendment. Lee Rowland, a senior staff attorney for the A.C.L.U., cited several Supreme Court cases—particularly Brandenburg v. Ohio, which set the precedent that an individual, whether a raging Klansman or a civil-rights advocate, can be charged with incitement “only when speech is intended and likely to cause imminent and serious lawlessness.” Trump, she wrote, did not meet that standard thanks to the Brandenburg Test, “designed to ensure breathing room for the messy, chaotic, ad hominem, passionate, and even racist speech that may be part of the American political conversation.”

“The final inquiry is whether Trump’s words were actually likely to incite violence,” Rowland continued. “Put another way, would a reasonable person have heard ‘Get ‘em outta here’ as code for ‘violently assault those protesters’?”

Still, that hasn’t stopped people from trying to blame Trump for their injuries—and, in one case, blaming him for their own actions. Matthew Heimbach, a white-supremacist leader accused of attacking a black woman at a Trump campaign rally in Kentucky last March, filed a defense answer to the plaintiffs’ complaint. last month laying the responsibility at Trump’s feet. “Defendant herein acted pursuant to the directives and requests of Donald J. Trump and Donald J. Trump for President Inc. and any liability must be shifted to one or both of them,” the answer reads. “Through out the course of the campaign, Trump defendants urged Trump supporters to assist in the removal of so called ‘demonstrators’ and ‘protesters.’” (A month before the Kentucky rally, Trump had promised to pay the legal fees for supporters “who knock the crap out of” protesters. Days later, at another rally, he suggested he wished he were closer to a protester being escorted from his rally so that he could “punch him in the face.”)