Sasha and Malia Obama Get in on Their Parents’ Year of Epic Vacations
Add Bali to the Obamas’ post-White House vacation list. So far this year, the former president and First Lady’s getaways have included spending time with Richard Branson in the Virgin Islands, lounging on a yacht with Oprah, Bruce Springsteen, and Tom Hanks, and traveling in Italy at the same time that Trump was making his first eventful foreign tour. Now Sasha and Malia are coming along on their parents’ great post-presidential tour, on what looks like an epic vacation in Bali.

The family arrived on the island last Friday with, as Conde Nast Traveler reports, little fanfare. The trip, expected to last until Wednesday, is a special one for the former president, who lived in Indonesia with his mother between the ages of 6 and 10. Per E! News, the family is staying at the Four Seasons Resort Bali, at $2,300 a night, and they’re getting in some major adventures while there.

Antara Foto Agency

Obama, who, after his presidency, can finally take part in his favorite x-treme sports, rafted Michelle and the girls down the Balinese rapids. Yes, the entire Obama family water rafts wearing those silly yellow helmets and big goofy smiles on their faces. Stylish First Families: they’re just like us.

The trip also included a visit to one of Bali’s famous rice terraces, and more recently, the family was seen at the Tirta Empul Temple, where Michelle, Sasha, and Malia all wore bright-yellow sarongs. Malia paired hers with an Alexander Wang shirt, keeping her high-fashion vacation look in place.

This trip follows Sasha and Malia’s trip to Europe earlier this month with their mother and grandmother, Marian Robinson, to promote the Let Girls Learn Initiative. Between this project and her gap year, Malia is going to be starting Harvard in the fall with some excellent world-travel stories to share with her dorm mates.

Get Vanity Fair’s Cocktail Hour Our essential brief on culture, the news, and more. And it's on the house. E-mail Address Subscribe