High Performance ELECTRONIC CIGARETTES
What are Electronic Cigarettes?

Electronic cigarettes (commonly referred to as e-cigs) are increasing in popularity. They are battery powered nicotine delivery systems. Electronic cigarettes come in a variety of styles and vary in size and performance. E-cigs work by heating a liquid and turning it into a colorless, odorless vapor that is inhaled by the user.

How are Electronic Cigarettes Different from Tobacco Cigarettes?

Cigarettes contain an estimated 7,000 chemicals. Over 600 of these chemicals are known carcinogens. Cigarettes contain ammonia, formaldehyde, tar, and cyanide to name a few. Smoking is responsible for causing 87% of all lung cancer deaths. E-cigs do not involve combustion, so there is no smoke. E-Liquid is heated to vaporize the solution. Unlike tobacco cigarettes, e-cigs do not contain carbon monoxide, offensive odors, or second-hand smoke.

How is Vapor Shark Different from Cigarette Style E-Cigs?

Vapor Shark has chosen to carry only high performance electronic cigarettes. Our batteries are rechargeable and include an LED battery life indicator. VS ONE batteries typically last all day. High performance models are superior in battery life, vapor production, and flavor when compared to cigarette style e-cigs.



Vapor Shark allows you to choose the flavor and desired nicotine strength. Many cigarette style e-cigs come with pre-filled cartridges with limited flavors.

What's Inside the Vapor?

The primary component of our E-Liquid is USP Grade propylene glycol. Propylene glycol is a clear, colorless liquid that is "generally recognized as safe” by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. PG is used in flavor solutions and extractions. For example, PG is used to extract vanilla from vanilla beans. It's also found in baby care products, mouth washes and toothpastes among many other personal care items. Chances are you've been using a product that contains propylene glycol without even knowing it.



We use only USP Grade vegetable glycerin which is extracted from vegetable oils. VG is clear and colorless with a naturally sweet taste. It is easily digested and is often used as a substitute for sugar in soft drinks and coffee and tea flavors. It is also classified by the FDA as "generally recognized as safe".



Our American made, gourmet flavors are what gives our Premium E-Liquid its delicious taste. From bold, complex flavors of heirloom quality tobacco to sweet fruity blasts of Jolly rancher, each flavor is crafted in-house to deliver a, satisfying, mouth watering experience. Because electronic cigarettes contain nicotine they are highly addictive. Therefore, electronic cigarettes are not recommended for non-smokers or persons under the age of 18.

How Long Will a 30ml Bottle of E-Liquid Last?

The amount of time it takes to go through a 30ml bottle of E-Liquid depends on the frequency of use. Typically, a bottle will last anywhere from 2 - 5 weeks.

What Nicotine Level Should I Get?

We have seven nicotine levels to choose from when ordering our premium E-Liquid. We usually recommend starting at 18mg; this amount of nicotine is comparable to that of a standard cigarette. However, nicotine levels are a matter of personal preference. The nicotine level is responsible for the throat hit associated with smoking. A higher nicotine level provides a stronger throat hit, while lower nicotine is smoother.



Click Here See A Nicotine Strength Chart.

How do I use a Vapor Shark Electronic Cigarette?

Check out our Help Page and select your Electronic Cigarette Herefor a more detailed explanation.

How to use the Vapor Shark® GLASS? 1) Unscrew the bottom of the Glass, the atomizer base, and screw the atomizer head into the atomizer base making sure it’s hand tight. 2) If your GLASS clearomizer tank is empty, fill the tank with E-Liquid through the bottom of the tank, allowing the liquid to leak into the reservoir on the sides. Be sure that you do not fill past the center stem and that you do not squeeze the liquid into the center stem, as it is hollow. 3) Screw the atomizer base with the atomizer head attached back onto the tank 4) Screw the GLASS tank onto the battery. 5) To turn on your GLASS, click the button quickly 5 times. By pressing it another five times you turn it off. 6) Hold down the button, take a puff and enjoy!

About How Many Cigarettes Would be Equivalent to a Full Tank?

There is no absolute way to quantify the number of cigarettes presents in a full tank of e-liquid given the fact that the usage frequency varies from person to person. Electronics cigarettes are essentially a nicotine direct injection system, and depending on the level of nicotine chosen, the amount of nicotine dispensed with each puff differs; as does the lung capacity of the each individual which also plays a role into how much nicotine is actually absorbed by the body. Use the electronic cigarette as needed until the craving is curved just as you would with traditional cigarettes. A tank, typically, last anywhere from 1 - 3 days depending on frequency of use.

How Long do the Batteries Last?

Depending on the user, a fully charged 900mAh battery will typically last a pack-a-day smoker one complete day. Our VS-ONE batteries have built in battery life indicators. Green indicates 100-80% charged. The battery will only stay on green for approximately 2-3 hours. Pink indicates a battery life that is between 79 and 30%. The LED battery life indicator will be on pink for the majority of the day. Lastly, red indicates below 30% charged. Our 900mAh and 1100mAh passthrough batteries charge through the bottom, allowing for continual use while your e-cig charges.

How Often Should I Change out my Atomizer Head or “Wick”?

Depending on the usage, each atomizer head (a.k.a. wick) will last approximately 3-6 weeks. This is roughly equivalent to the amount of time it takes a pack-a-day smoker to use a 30mL bottle of E-liquid. Change out the wick every bottle and a half to two bottles.

Why are the 1.8ohm Atomizer Heads Recommended? What's the Difference?

We recommend using a 1.8ohm atomizer head with our 900 and 1100mAh passthrough batteries. This is because these models perform at 3.7constant volts. Using a 1.8ohm atomizer head will provide the most satisfying throat hit and vapor production. 2.4 and 2.8ohm atomizer heads can be used with the VS-ONE batteries, but it will be produce a significantly reduced throat hit.



The ohms represent the resistance; the higher the ohms the more resistance. 2.4 and 2.8ohms are more appropriate for Variable Voltage batteries. Variable Voltage allows you to adjust the voltage anywhere from 3.2-4.6 volts. For those who are looking for an intense throat hit and maximum vapor production they can crank up the voltage on the Variable batteries. If the voltage is increased the 1.8ohm atomizer head will not perform optimally.

Do I Need to Turn my Battery On and Off?

Click the button 5 times quickly in succession to turn the device on or off. Vapor Shark Electronic Cigarettes have a built-in sensor which activates when you inhale and turns itself off when not in use. It was designed this way to enjoy a fluid smoking experience just like that of a traditional cigarette.

What is the Best Way to Care for my Battery?

Whenever possible use the protective carrying case included with every Starter Kit when your e-cig is being transported. We also recommend charging your battery BEFORE it is totally drained. When you feel your battery getting a bit weak, just switch to a charged, backup battery and recharge the weak one. You will actually increase the battery’s life if you don't run it totally down. This will ensure that your batteries last as long as they should.

Should I Charge my Battery Before I use It?

The batteries are shipped pre-charged, which is the best way to store lithium-ion batteries. You don’t need to charge it when you receive it, but for optimal performance it is highly recommended.

Where are Electronic Cigarettes Permitted?

Vapor Shark® electronic cigarettes do not produce any ash, odor, or cigarette butts the way traditional cigarettes do. Vapor Shark electronic cigarettes offer a smoking alternative that you can smoke in many non-smoking areas. It's advisable to ask permission before using your electronic cigarette in public places.

What is the Policy for Exchanges and Returns?

For a detailed outline of our policies concerning exchanges and warranties please refer to our Terms and Conditions .

When Can I Expect to Receive my Order?

Processing time is generally within 24 hours of when the order is placed. If an order is placed on the weekend it will be shipped on Monday. After your order has been processed and packaged it will be shipped priority mail and usually arrives within 1-4 business days. Terms and Conditions .