Vern Buchanan, United States Congressman
Vern Buchanan

United States Congressman Vern Buchanan is seeking his third term in Congress, representing Florida's 13th District. Congressman Buchanan is known as a strong fiscal conservative, and consistent with that philosophy, he introduced the Buchanan Balanced Budget Amendment Act to require a balanced federal budget. He also introduced the Earmark Accountability and Reform Act, designed to reform the process through which federal funds are "earmarked" for pet projects.

Buchanan also introduced legislation to stop automatic pay raises for Members of Congress until the budget is balanced. His priorities of low taxes, less spending, smaller government, veterans affairs and a strong economy have resulted in him being a co-sponsor of legislation to make permanent across the board tax cuts and to expand educational benefits for active duty U.S. servicemen and women.

He also secured federal funding for important public improvement projects in his district, including $28.8 million for the construction of a veterans' cemetery in Sarasota and $8.5 million to help alleviate flooding by dredging Wares Creek in Bradenton. Congressman Buchanan has also worked in a bipartisan manner to secure authorization for an additional $90 million to address Florida's red tide problem.

Buchanan has quickly established himself as a thoughtful and independent lawmaker, with a reputation for being a tireless advocate on behalf of his constituents, including fighting to lower the cost of homeowners insurance, and working to ensure that returning veterans receive the health care they deserve. Buchanan uses a common sense approach to solve the problems confronting his constituents. He has made it clear that he will continue to work to change the way Washington operates by putting an end to partisanship and the resulting gridlock.

Buchanan is a member of the House Committee on Veterans Affairs and Small Business and is the ranking Republican on the Subcommittee on Finance and Tax. During his first term in congress he passed legislation to improve health care for wounded soldiers and increase job opportunities for our nation's veterans. The Florida Congressman is also a member of the House Transportation Committee, and is fighting to get Florida and his congressional district its fair share of federal transportation funding. As a member of the Subcommittee on Surface Transportation, Buchanan plays a key role in all federal highway legislation.

As a result of his commitment and hard work, he has received many awards and accolades, the most recent award by the Veterans of Foreign Wars, who honored Congressman Buchanan by presenting him with their Legislative Achievement Award for his work on legislation improving the quality of life of active and reserve service members, military retirees, veterans and their families.

Congressman Buchanan is not a career politician. He is a self made businessman and a respected leader in Florida's business community. He chaired both the Florida Chamber of Commerce and the Sarasota Chamber of Commerce. He was also a member of the Board of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce. Congressman Buchanan has given both time and money to various community causes, including the Boys and Girls Club, the Community Foundation of Sarasota County, the Walk to Cure Juvenile Diabetes, the American Heart Walk, the Mote Marine Laboratory and the Ringling Museum of Art.

Vern Buchanan grew up with five siblings in a small town near Detroit. As the son of a blue collar worker, he served six years in the Air National Guard and worked his way through college. He met his wife of 31 years, Sandy, while in college. The Buchanans live in Longboat Key, Florida, and have two grown sons, James and Matt.