Read: Hillary Clinton’s victory speech was a turn to the battle against Donald Trump
With overwhelming wins in Ohio and Florida, Hillary Clinton gave the victory speech of someone well on her way to Democratic nomination.

"We are moving closer to securing the Democratic Party nomination and closer to winning this election in November," she said to supporters in Florida.

Clinton was projected to have blowout wins in both Florida and Ohio early Tuesday night — states her rival Bernie Sanders could not afford to lose by such large margins — further establishing her place as the Democratic Party's frontrunner.

Complimenting her rival for waging "vigorous campaign," Clinton delivered a speech that touched on her main talking points, but also catered to the issues close to Sanders's base, like affordable eduction.

"Young people across America struggling under the weight of student debt find it difficult to imagine the futures they want," Clinton said. "And they deserve a president who will help relieve them of that burden and help future generations go to college without borrowing a dime for tuition.

Below is a rush transcript of her victory speech:

---

Oh, thank you so much! Thank you! Thank you all so very much.

Well, I'll tell you, this is another Super Tuesday for our campaign.

Thank you, Florida, thank you, North Carolina, thank you, Ohio. We know we will add to our delegate lead to roughly 300, with over two million more votes nationwide. We are moving closer to securing the Democratic Party nomination and closer to winning this election in November.

And our supporters across the country, our campaign has won more votes than any other candidate, Democrat or Republican. And I want to congratulate Senator Sanders for the vigorous campaign he's waging.

Now today, all of you in the states where contests were held voted to break down the barriers that hold us all back, so every one of us can share in the promise of America. You voted. You voted for our tomorrow to be better than our yesterday. Tomorrow where all of us do our part and everyone has a chance to live up to his or her god given potential. Because that's how America can live up to its potential too.

Now we need you to keep working, keep volunteering. Keep contributing at Hillary clinton.com. Please, please join the 950,000 supporters who already have contributed, most less than $100 because our campaign depends on small donations for the majority of our support. We can't do this without you. So if you have been waiting for the right moment, now is the time to come join us.

Tonight it's clearer than ever that this may be one of the most consequential campaigns of our lifetimes, the next president will walk into the Oval Office in January and sit down in at that desk and start making decisions that will affect the lives and the livelihoods of everyone in this country, indeed, everyone on this planet.

Now I know that easy decisions don't make it to the president's desk. Only the hardest choices and the trickiest problems. I saw president Obama wrestle with the Navy SEALs after Osama bin Laden, to fight for the Affordable Care Act and so many more.

And so our next president needs to be ready to face three big tasks. First can you make positive differences in people's lives? Second, can you keep us safe? Third, can you bring our country together again?

Now making differences in people's lives comes first because Americans everywhere are hungry for solutions. They want to break down the barriers holding them back. So we can all rise together. Ask any parent, you'll hear nothing is more important than making sure their kids have a good school and a good teacher, no matter what zip code they live in. They deserve a president who understands that when we invest in our children's education, we're investing in all of our futures.

And young people across America struggling under the weight of student debt find it difficult to imagine the futures they want. And they deserve a president who will help relieve them of that burden and help future generations go to college without borrowing a dime for tuition.

And grandparents who worry about retirement deserve a president who will protect and then expand social security for those who need it most, not cut or privatize it.

Families deserve a president who will fight for the things that are our priorities at home but too often aren't priorities in Washington: affordable child care, paid family leave, and, something we have waited for long enough, equal pay for equal work for women.

And above all, above all, hard working Americans across our country deserve a president with both the ideas and the know how to create good jobs with rising incomes right here in our country. And I am absolutely convinced that we have the tools to do that.

That's why I have laid out a program to do what can be done: More good jobs in infrastructure, more good jobs in manufacturing, more good jobs in small businesses, More good jobs and clean renewable energy. Good paying jobs are the ticket to the middle class and we're going to stand up for the American middle class again.

We're going to stand up for American workers, and make sure no one takes advantage of us, not China, not Wall Street and not overpaid corporate executives. Now look, of course every candidate makes promises like this, but every candidate owes it to you to be clear and direct about what our plans will cost and how we are going to make them work – that's the difference between running for president and being president.

And I'll tell you, let me tell you the second big test for our next president is keeping us safe. We live in a complex and, yes, a dangerous world. Protecting America's national security can never be an after thought.

Our commander in chief has to be able to defend our country, not embarrass it, engage our allies, not alienate them, defeat our adversaries not embolden them. When we have a candidate for president call for rounding up 12 million immigrants, banning all Muslims from entering United States, when he embraces torture, that doesn't make him strong, it makes him wrong.

And, yes, our next president has to bring our country together. So we can all share in the promise of America. We should be breaking down barriers, not building walls. We're not going to succeed by dividing this country between us and them. You know, to be great, we can't be small. We can't lose what made America great in the first place. And this isn't just about trump, all of us have to do our part. We can't just talk about economic inequality, we have to take on all forms of inequality.

Together we have to defend all of our rights: civil rights and voting rights, workers rights and women's rights, LGBT rights and rights for people with disabilities. And that starts by standing with President Obama when he nominates a justice to the Supreme Court. Our next president will face all these challenges and more.

You know, running for president is hard, but being president is harder. It is the hardest, most important job in the world. And no one person can succeed at the job without seeking and finding common ground to solve the problems we face.

If we work together, we can make a real difference in people's lives. If we reach out to treat each other with respect, kindness and even love, instead of bluster and bigotry, if we lift each other up, instead of tearing each other down, there's nothing we can't accomplish together. So please, join me in this campaign, every vote counts, every volunteer hour counts, every contribution counts.

Eight years ago on the night of the Ohio primary, I said I was running for everyone who's ever been counted out, but refused to be knocked out. For everyone who has stumbled but stood right back up. For everyone who works hard and never gives up. Well, that is still true.

Our campaign is for the steelworker I met in Ohio on Sunday night, who's laid off but hoping to get back to work. It's for the mother I met in Miami whose five children haven't seen their father since he was deported. She dreams of a day when deportations end and families are reunited on a path to citizenship. And it is for the mothers I stood with in Chicago yesterday, who have lost children to gun violence.

They're turning their sorrow into a strategy and their mourning into a movement. Let's stand with people who have courage, who have resilience.

Let's stand with everyone who believes America's best days are ahead of us. For all of our challenges, I have never had more faith in our future and if we work together, if we go forward in this campaign, if we win in November, I know our future will be brighter, tomorrow than yesterday.

Thank you all so very much.