Wallace & Nordan LLP
John R. Wallace

John practices in the fields of commercial litigation and election law. He represents a variety of corporate clients, as well as trade associations, nonprofit organizations, political party committees, state and federal PACs, and candidate committees. As such, he is active in federal courts, state courts and in administrative forums, including the State Board of Elections and the Federal Election Commission.

John is a member of the North Carolina Bar and the Florida Bar and is admitted to the United States District Courts for the Eastern, Middle and Western Districts of North Carolina, as well as the Fourth, Seventh, and Federal Circuit Courts of Appeals. Mr. Wallace's litigation practice is concentrated in unfair trade practice, business tort, contract, ERISA and class action matters. In particular, he has litigated an ERISA class action matter in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas, an ERISA claim in the Northern District of Illinois, and a complex class action in the State Court of South Carolina. In addition, he has extensive experience litigating issues in the pharmaceutical industry, including challenges to Glaxo's Zantac patent, the second of which was successful, and a further challenge to FDA's delay in approving the generic substitute for Zantac. Mr. Wallace's experience in the pharmaceutical industry also includes litigation between various pharmaceutical manufacturers with respect to maintenance of quality standards and trade secrets.

In his election law practice, John represents the North Carolina Democratic Party as well as an array of Democratic candidates, state and federal trade associations and business affiliated committees, and various nonprofit organizations and their affiliated political committees.

John’s ethics law practice includes representation of lobbyists, lobbyist principals and grassroots organizations, including for-profit and non-profit entities. John advises his clients on compliance with state ethics and campaign finance laws and regulations and represents clients before the State Ethics Commission.

John began his career as antitrust coordinator for the National Association of Attorneys General. In this capacity, he coordinated multidistrict antitrust litigation brought by State Attorneys General and assisted in various appellate court matters. He then served as Assistant Attorney General in the Antitrust Division of the North Carolina Department of Justice.

John attended the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, graduating with a Bachelor of Arts degree in Political Science in 1973. He then attended the University of Florida School of Law, receiving his Juris Doctor degree in 1976.

John speaks frequently at continuing legal education seminars and other gatherings. Recent presentation topics included business litigation issues, unfair trade practices, fraud, election protests, campaign finance issues and I.R.C. § 527 political organizations.

Professional affiliations:

North Carolina Bar Association – Litigation & Antitrust Divisions

Wake County Bar Association

North Carolina Advocates for Justice

Community Activities:

Member of the Board of Trustees - North Carolina Symphony

Former Member of the Board of Directors - East Central Community Legal Services

Member - Citizens for Higher Education

Richard P. Nordan

Richard concentrates his practice in the fields of estate planning and administration and income taxation. He is also an expert in the incorporation and organization of small businesses and non-profits. Richard's research skills, knowledge, and experience in taxation and estate matters allow him to provide expert advice in those fields, and he is often called upon by CPAs and other attorneys. Richard joined the firm in 1985 and became a partner in 1991.

Richard Nordan was born in Wiesbaden, West Germany, while his father was serving in the Air Force, but his family roots are in Smithfield, North Carolina. Richard graduated from North Carolina State University with honors in 1978, and became a Certified Public Accountant in 1980. After several years of practice in this field, he returned to school, obtaining his Juris Doctor degree from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. He is a member of the North Carolina State Bar, the North Carolina and Wake County Bar Associations, and the North Carolina Association of Certified Public Accountants.

His deep interest and involvement in politics has led him to serve as counsel, campaign treasurer, and advisor to several Judges of the North Carolina Court of Appeals and the Supreme Court, and to the current Attorney General. Richard's interests include bluegrass music and North Carolina's tobacco heritage.

Dawn E.H. Lee

Dawn’s practice encompasses commercial litigation, tax exempt organizations, and election law. She has assisted representing individuals, corporate clients, nonprofit organizations, and political committees in state courts and administrative forums, including the North Carolina State Board of Elections, the Federal Elections Commission, and the North Carolina Judicial Standards Commission. She advises clients in lobbying and campaign finance compliance, business contract, and the incorporation of entities. Her litigation practice is concentrated in business tort and contract.

Prior to joining the firm, Dawn clerked for the Honorable Wendell P. Gardner, Jr. of the Superior Court of the District of Columbia and worked as a summer associate for Wallace & Nordan. She participated in the Wake Forest University School of Law Child Advocacy Clinic, Interdisciplinary Studies in Nicaragua and in Austria, and assisted with research on various issues, including jury selection data, racial prejudice, compliance with state and federal lobbying laws, and voter identification laws.

Dawn graduated cum laude from Tulane University with honors in English. Prior to attending law school, she worked as a nonprofit Community Engagement Coordinator and a legal assistant.

Dawn is from Centreville, Virginia, and currently resides in Raleigh with her husband and two dogs.

J.D., Wake Forest University School of Law, 2014

B.A., cum laude, Tulane University, 2009



Bar Admission: North Carolina