Mark R. Warner
Mr. President, I'd like to follow up on the comments of my friend, the Senator from Texas, on an issue that we will be voting on this afternoon regarding the construction of the Keystone XL pipeline.

Mr. President, I've been frustrated by the debate around this issue. Unfortunately, we are going to be confronted again with a bifurcated choice here that doesn't move us to the possibility of actually putting in placea comprehensive energy policy that will remove this nation's dependence upon foreign oil, start to look at our ability over the longer haul to bring down fuel prices at the pump, and to make sure that we are truly a participant in the opportunities of a growing, multifaceted energy policy going forward.

Mr. President, I support the construction of the Keystone pipeline because I believe that we need to have an energy policy that has an all-of-the-above approach. I believe there are appropriate regulatory reviews that need to be made, and I frankly think that construction of a Keystone pipeline should take into consideration the very serious environmental considerations that particularly affect the state of Nebraska so that we can find a route for this pipeline that would avoid that potential environmental damage.

However, because of the way this process is being played out, I will not be voting for the Keystone amendment today because, by making this a straight up-or-down issue without taking advantage of the opportunity to put together the beginnings of an energy package, we're missing a great opportunity.

As I've mentioned, if we are truly serious about energy security and if we are truly serious about reducing our dependence on foreign oil, we need an energy policy that has an all-of-the-above approach. Yes, that means more domestic oil and gas, but it also means that when we have an opportunity like this one regarding

Keystone, that we could have taken this opportunity to take a more rational approach, with appropriate environmental reviews, that gets us to a positive answer on Keystone by linking it with other energy policies that make sense.

I know, for instance, that the presiding officer has got in his state a number of wind facilities and solar facilities. Those also need to be part of our energy mix, yet the tax treatment that allows those projects to move forward has been put in limbo because of the failure of Congress to extend those favorable tax provisions going forward has been put in limbo. As a matter of fact, I was just visiting with some folks right before coming to the floor today who have a variety of wind projects

that have been stopped dead in their tracks because of this uncertainty regarding whether Congress will act.

The ability to get a Keystone pipeline passed in combination with passing an extension of these appropriate renewable energy tax credits could have begun to build the kind of bipartisan consensus around energy policy that is needed.

I also think the lowest-hanging fruit in terms of a rational energy policy in this country means a much greater involvement with energy conservation. There is a very strong bipartisan energy conservation bill -- the Shaheen-Portman bill -- that could have been included in this package as well.

I think if we're going to get serious about reducing our dependence on foreign oil, if we're going to make sure that we give American taxpayers a vision that in the future we're going to see an ability to reduce our dependence upon foreign oil that’s fueling higher gas prices, we could have put together a better proposal: a truly bipartisan consensus included construction of Keystone with the appropriate environmental reviews, inclusion of the energy tax cuts and tax provisions that would continue to allow wind and solar and other renewable energy production to continue in this country, and a meaningful and bipartisan Shaheen-Portman energy conservation bill.

Those three policies linked together, I believe, would have resulted in a vote that would have been overwhelmingly bipartisan. It would have been a demonstration to the American people that we're willing to get out of our respective foxholes and put in place the beginnings of a truly comprehensive energy policy.

Unfortunately, we're not going to have that opportunity. We're going to have a straight up-and-down vote on Keystone that dismisses any of the appropriate review process, that doesn't include the so-called energy tax extenders, and that doesn’t include bipartisan energy conservation legislation that was put together by Senator Shaheen and Senator Portman. We're going to end up with one more vote that, for the most part, will likely break-down on partisan lines.

I'm disappointed in that. I do believe that we need the construction of the Keystone pipeline. I believe we need meaningful energy conservation legislation. I believe we need meaningful tax policy that promotes renewable energies -- wind, solar, biomass – but unfortunately we’re going to miss an opportunity today to send that strong signal of a comprehensive, all-of-the-above energy policy that actually would move this nation forward.

My friend, the Senator from Texas, is no longer here in the chamber. But I would tell him I could have supported a package that was more comprehensive, that would have allowed the Keystone project to move forward, in conjunction with these other efforts. But that's not going to happen.

Perhaps later in the year, or in a future debate, we'll have the ability to cobble together something that includes more of an all-of-the-above energy policy and we can get around to making sure we have a national energy policy that includes all of the above, because there is no silver bullet on this.

We need to make sure we take advantage of all the potential energy resources that we have in this country -- oil and gas, offshore oil with appropriate revenue sharing for states like mine, nuclear, energy conservation, and greater use of renewables as well. The sooner we get to that kind of debate, the sooner we can build the kind of bipartisan coalitions that will allow that to move forward.