Sen. Warner Receives U.S. Navy Distinguished Public Service Award
WASHINGTON—U.S. Senator Mark R. Warner (D-VA) has been awarded the U.S. Navy’s Distinguished Public Service Award, the highest recognition the Navy can confer upon a civilian. In making the award, Secretary of the Navy Ray Mabus cited Sen. Warner’s efforts on both the Senate’s Budget and Intelligence committees to support military men and women and their families. The citation also cites Sen. Warner’s efforts to blunt the potential harmful impacts on the Navy from the rigid, across-the-board budget cuts mandated by the sequester.

“Supporting Virginia’s military men and women, their families and our veterans is a responsibility I take very seriously,” Sen. Warner said. “I am grateful to the Navy and to Secretary Mabus and accept this honor on behalf of all Virginians. In recent weeks, I have been working closely with military leaders and congressional colleagues to try to find a responsible and commonsense way to rationalize the across-the-board spending cuts mandated by the sequester. And I am pleased we now appear to be moving forward with a more pragmatic process—one that will provide the Navy and our other military services with the flexibility they need to make smarter budget decisions.”

"I am pleased to officially recognize Senator Warner's enduring commitment to the Department of the Navy," said Secretary Mabus. "As Virginia's senior senator, Mark Warner has strengthened the critical relationships between the Navy and the state and the people he represents. His support for the Navy and Marine Corps extends beyond the brave men and women in uniform. It includes their families, shipyard workers and other contractor personnel who are instrumental to our Navy and our national security."

In addition to Sen. Warner’s work to address sequester issues, the citation also credits his longtime support for military families, the Navy’s renewable energy initiatives, and his support for Virginia’s Navy and USMC veterans. The citation reads as follows:

“…For exceptional service to the Department of the Navy as a member of Congress and the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. Senator Warner’s selfless service to the Nation’s Sailors and Marines ensured they were provided the resources necessary to support and defend the Nation’s interests around the globe. His outstanding efforts as a member of the Budget Committee greatly contributed to the quality of the United States’ naval forces, continued support for quality of life for the men and women of the Department of the Navy, and ensured the Navy-Marine Corps team was the most lethal in history. Senator Warner’s tireless support for Navy energy initiatives assured the highest levels of sustainability and readiness for our combat forces with grateful appreciation for his four years of service to the Nation and for his outstanding contributions to the Navy and Marine Corps, the Honorable Mark Warner is awarded the Department of the Navy Distinguished Public Service Award.”

An image of the award is attached, and a photo of Secretary Mabus awarding the Distinguished Public Service Medal to Sen. Warner can be accessed here.