Did Obama's 'war on coal' really cost Mich. 50,000 jobs?
Donald Trump's claim Monday that Michigan has lost 50,000 jobs due to President Obama's "war on coal" is inaccurate, based on federal and business data, as the state doesn't have any coal mines and the state's power industry employs less than half that amount.

The prepared copy of Trump's speech cites a press release from the National Mining Association from 2011 as the source for the statistic. The press release targeted the Sierra Club's Beyond Coal campaign and never mentions Obama or Trump's Democratic opponent, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton.

Instead, the press release states Michigan could miss out on more than 53,000 construction and permanent jobs if the Sierra Club succeeded in blocking the construction of proposed coal power plants. Most of those jobs would have been building the plants and not permanent positions.

The Sierra Club says it helped play a role in defeating 10 proposed coal-fired power plants in Michigan through lawsuits and pressure on state officials.

Of those plants, three were built using natural gas or wood as a power source and seven others were scrapped due to a de facto moratorium on coal plants from Michigan's then-governor, Democrat Jennifer Granholm.

Michigan's current governor, Republican Rick Snyder, has pushed the state toward more renewable energy and has called coal power plants "outdated." He has set a goal for 30-40 percent of the state's energy to come from renewable sources by 2025.

Meanwhile, the two major power companies in the state, which serve more than 90 percent of the state's population, employ fewer than 20,000 people, meaning it would be a stretch to add enough power plants to cover 50,000 jobs.

DTE Energy has about 10,000 employees and Consumers Energy employs about 7,300 people, according to information from the companies' websites.

Michigan has never been much of a coal-producing state.

While the state produced "substantial" amounts of coal between 1860-1949, it does not have any active coal mines, according to the Energy Information Administration, the independent research arm of the Department of Energy,

The state imports much of its coal from Wyoming and Montana, and other states, such as West Virginia and Kentucky, also supply coal to the Great Lakes State, according to the administration.

As of 2014, the last year data was available, the primary source of power for the state was natural gas with coal coming in second.

The Trump campaign did not immediately respond to a request for comment.