Lawmakers strike budget deal to fund government through Sept. 30
Congressional leaders have reached a deal to fund the government through the rest of the government's fiscal year, a congressional aide has confirmed to the Washington Examiner.

Republican and Democratic lawmakers agreed to a $1.070 trillion package to fund the government through September 30.

Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., praised the budget deal as a "good agreement for the American people" that "takes the threat of a government shutdown off the table."

"The bill ensures taxpayer dollars aren't used to fund an ineffective border wall, excludes poison pill riders, and increases investments in programs that the middle-class relies on, like medical research, education, and infrastructure," Schumer said in a statement. "Early on in this debate, Democrats clearly laid out our principles. At the end of the day, this is an agreement that reflects those principles."

The government is currently funded until just before midnight Friday, after lawmakers struck a one-week continuing resolution to avert a government shutdown. Congress is expected to vote on the budget legislation this week.

The deal will include budget increases for national security and border security, which represents a victory for Republicans.

The bill is expected to include $1.5 billion for border security, but will not include money reserved for the construction of a border wall along the U.S.-Mexico border, which is what the Trump administration had initially wanted.

There is nothing in the deal that would remove funding for so-called "sanctuary cities," according to NBC News.

On the defense-side there will be a $12.5 billion increase, less than half of what President Trump requested in his budget proposal at $30 billion, with $2.5 reserved for the fight against the Islamic State.

The legislation provide a $2 billion boost to the National Institutes of Health budget, which would bring the total budget to $34 billion. This increase stands in contrast to the $5.8 billion in funding that Trump proposed slashing from the agency's budget.

Contrary to what Trump has been pushing for, the plan would largely leave the EPA budget intact and provide extra funding towards science and clean energy.

Democrats declared victory on the elimination of over 150 "poison pill riders" from Republicans.

"This bipartisan agreement eliminates more than 160 poison pill riders that would have been devastating to the environment, put restrictions on consumer financial protections and attacked the Affordable Care Act," said Senate Appropriations Committee Vice Chairman Patrick Leahy, D-Vt. in a statement. "Such riders have no place in a must pass spending bill."

Several lawmakers and local authorities in Florida and New York also had their concerns addressed in relation to Trump's travel expenses to the Mar-a-Lago and his residence in New York City. The deal provides over $60 million to reimburse local law enforcement for those trips, the Washington Post reported.

The bill also deals $600 million for combating opioid addiction, $100 million for infrastructure and $407 million in funds for fighting wildfires out West. A disaster relief package would put $2 billion towards California, North Carolina, West Virginia and Louisiana. Health insurance benefits for coal miners would be extended and there will be no cuts to Planned Parenthood funding.

The bill will reserve $295 million for Puerto Rico to pay Medicaid — a victory for Democrats and the cash-strapped territory. House Democrats have been pushing for payments covering a Medicaid shortfall in Puerto Rico, while the president referred to the measure as a "bailout."

The bill would restore students' access to year-round Pell Grants.

Congressional aides expect the text of the agreement to be released late Sunday night or early Monday morning. If the bill passes through the House and Senate, it will be up to Trump to sign it into law.

The GOP leadership, led by House Speaker Paul Ryan, have also been looking to pass a healthcare reform bill to repeal and replace Obamacare. Last Thursday night, they announced, after the latest round of negotiations, that there would be no vote on a bill due to lack of sufficient votes to pass it.

Read a summary of the omnibus spending bill below, and link to the entire text here: