Luther Strange says write-in candidacy is 'highly unlikely'
Sen. Luther Strange, R-Ala., who lost to Roy Moore in a primary runoff election in September, said it is “highly unlikely” he will pursue a write-in campaign during the December special election, even as pressure grows on Moore to drop out.

Strange, who has been floated as a write-in candidate amid sexual misconduct allegations against Moore, said “right now a write-in candidacy is highly unlikely,” according to multiple media reports.

Just now: Sen @lutherstrange says “right now a write-in candidacy is highly unlikely.” #ALSen— Frank Thorp V (@frankthorp) November 13, 2017

Luther Strange says a write-in candidacy “highly unlikely.” Doesn’t sound interested in running against Roy Moore— John Bresnahan (@BresPolitico) November 13, 2017

GOP lawmakers, including Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., have called for Moore to step down after a report was published that alleged Moore romantically pursued teenaged girls while he was in his 30s. Others, including Sen. Orrin Hatch, R-Utah, have suggested Strange as an alternative option.

“These are serious and disturbing accusations, and while the decision is now in the hands of the people of Alabama, I believe Luther Strange is an excellent alternative,” Hatch tweeted Monday.

I stand with the Majority Leader on this. These are serious and disturbing accusations, and while the decision is now in the hands of the people of Alabama, I believe Luther Strange is an excellent alternative. https://t.co/L7IallXhBc— Orrin Hatch (@OrrinHatch) November 13, 2017

Four women told the Washington Post on the record last week about their alleged interactions with Moore in a piece published Thursday. Three of the women said the former judge took them on dates and brought them back to his home, despite the fact he was nearly twice their age and they were between the ages of 14 and 18. A fourth woman, Leigh Corfman, said Moore initiated sexual contact with her when she was 14 years old at Moore’s home. She said she did not have intercourse with Moore and requested to be taken home.



A fifth woman, Beverly Young Nelson, came forward Monday and said Moore sexually assaulted her when she was 16. She said Moore offered to drive her home from work one night, but instead parked in a parking lot behind a restaurant. She alleges he groped her and grabbed her neck to “force my head onto his crotch."



Moore, who won Alabama’s GOP primary in September, has denied the accusations.