Trump: To make college affordable, 'we have to start some governmental program'
During a town hall Thursday evening in Iowa, Donald Trump told voters the "only way" to make college more affordable for low-income students is "to start some governmental program."

The Republican presidential hopeful was asked what measures he would take, as president, to ensure middle-to-low income Americans are able to "pay their tuition [and] afford books while they're going to school."

"Well the only way you can do it is you have to start some governmental program and you have governmental programs right now," Trump told the moderator during the forum, which was held at a local community college.

"They go, and they work, and they take loans, and they're borrowed up, and they can't breathe, and they get through college and the worst thing is, they go through that whole process and they don't have any job," the billionaire said, referring to the majority of undergraduates enrolled at U.S. colleges and universities.

He continued, "You know the one program that the U.S. makes a whole lot of money with is student loans, and that's maybe the one program they shouldn't be making money with."

"So we're going to have to start a program," he said. "We're going to do something very big with loans because you have to get these people going. They really feel down and out."

Pressed on what he would do to solve the burgeoning student debt crisis, Trump said, "we're going to do refinancing for people who have loans who literally can't do anything."

"We're going to do refinancing and extensions," he said. Both of Trump's leading Democratic opponents, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, have proposed refinancing existing student loans.

Last June, Senate Republicans blocked a vote on legislation sponsored by Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., that would have enabled students to refinance their student loans at lower interest rates.

Meanwhile, GOP candidates Lindsey Graham and Mike Huckabee have said during separate campaign events they would support allowing students to refinance their student loans.