The Washington Institute for Near East Policy
Also available in العربية

Jeffrey White is an adjunct fellow at The Washington Institute, specializing in the military and security affairs of the Levant and Iran.

Biography

Jeffrey White is an adjunct fellow at The Washington Institute, specializing in the military and security affairs of the Levant and Iran. He is widely sought out as a commentator on military issues involving Syria, Israel, Hizballah, the Gaza conflict, and Iran.

Before joining the Institute, Mr. White completed a thirty-four-year career with the Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA). He was a member of the Defense Intelligence Senior Executive Service (DISES), and served in a wide variety of senior analytical and leadership positions, including: imagery analyst, military capabilities analyst, current intelligence analyst, senior analyst for the Arab-Israeli confrontation states, chief of the Middle East current intelligence division, chief of the Office for Middle East/Africa Military Assessments, and chief of the Regional Military Assessments Group. In these capacities, Mr. White participated in operational and policy planning and wrote extensively for senior defense officials, including the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

As an intelligence officer in the DIA, Mr. White provided intelligence support during multiple Middle East crises, from the 1968 Arab-Israeli War of Attrition to the developing conflict with Iraq in 2002. He led numerous crisis intelligence response groups within the agency, including those dealing with the Lebanese civil war, the Israeli-Syrian conflict in Lebanon, U.S. operations against Libya, U.S. naval operations in the Persian Gulf, and multiple Iraq crises from 1994 to 2002. From 1995 to 2000, Mr. White provided extensive intelligence support to both Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-PLO negotiations.

Mr. White has received numerous awards for distinguished service as an intelligence officer, including the Secretary of Defense Medal for Meritorious Civilian Service, the National Intelligence Distinguished Service Medal, and the DIA Directors Awards for Exceptional and Meritorious Civilian Service.

Back to Top

Education

M.A., international affairs, George Washington University; B.A., University of Virginia

Back to Top

Publications

Back to Top

Most Recent Analysis

The Next Hizballah-Israel Conflict

September 19, 2017

The Paris Response: Answering Urgent Questions in the Anti-ISIS Fight

November 19, 2015

Russia's Military Strategy in Syria Becoming Clearer as Its Forces Engage in Combat

October 9, 2015

Russia's Military Escalation in Syria

October 1, 2015

Russia in Syria (Part 2): Military Implications

September 15, 2015

Expanded Syria Presence Would Carry Big Risks for Russia

September 8, 2015

The New Syrian Force: Down but Not Necessarily Out

August 11, 2015

The Crisis of the Assad Regime

May 28, 2015

Growing Rebel Capabilities Press the Syrian Regime

April 27, 2015

The ISIS Battle for Yarmouk Camp: Troubling Implications

April 10, 2015

See all analysis by this author