Will the health-care overhaul cause 87 million Americans to lose their current coverage?
The law will cause 87 million Americans to lose their current

coverage.

The debate that preceded passage of the health-care overhaul has returned as a heated issue in the midterm elections. Politicians and advocacy groups seeking repeal of the law are making dramatic claims about its cost and effects. How valid are they? We evaluate some of the most common criticisms.

SAYS WHO?

Republican House leaders assert this in the "Pledge to America" governing plan they released last month, adding that it contradicts President Obama's assurance during the health-care debate that "if you like your health plan, you can keep it."

HOW TRUE IS IT?

How True? The evidence is limited.

Obama was certainly obscuring the picture. The law exempts plans in existence before its adoption from key requirements such as offering free preventive services and eliminating penalties for out-of-network emergency care.

But insurers can lose this "grandfathered status" by making such changes as reducing the coverage of particular conditions or raising deductibles, co-payments and coinsurance shares above amounts set by formula. The same goes for employers that switch insurance carriers or reduce the share of employee premiums they cover by more than five percentage points. As a result, the administration estimates that by 2013, plans covering millions of workers will have fallen out of grandfathered status - not 87 million but 78 million workers according to the most recent figures.

Still, the Republican assertion that these workers will be forced to "drop their current coverage" implies the workers will be left with a worse plan or none at all. There's little evidence for that. Many currently grandfathered plans already offer some or even all of the consumer protections required of new plans. So losing grandfathered status wouldn't necessarily require them to raise premiums or make other changes. What portion of plans fall into this category? There are not enough data to say.

The research is also limited when it comes to assessing the impact on those plans that will need to add consumer protections as a result of losing grandfathered status. Republicans argue that the requirements could prove expensive and that many insurers or employers will be forced to pass the cost on to consumers or cancel the plans altogether.

However, government estimates suggest that the problem may not be widespread. For instance, including coverage of preventive services was estimated to increase a plan's premiums by less than 2 percent, on average.

- N.C. Aizenman