Climate Change
Climate change is having a profound impact on California water resources, as evidenced by changes in snowpack, sea level, and river flows . These changes are expected to continue in the future and more of our precipitation will likely fall as rain instead of snow. This potential change in weather patterns will exacerbate flood risks and add additional challenges for water supply reliability.

The mountain snowpack provides as much as a third of California's water supply by accumulating snow during our wet winters and releasing it slowly when we need it during our dry springs and summers. Warmer temperatures will cause what snow we do get to melt faster and earlier, making it more difficult to store and use. By the end of this century, the Sierra snowpack is projected to experience a 48-65 percent loss from the historical April 1st average. This loss of snowpack means less water will be available for Californians to use.

Climate change is also expected to result in more variable weather patterns throughout California. More variability can lead to longer and more severe droughts. In addition, the sea level will continue to rise threatening the sustainability of the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, the heart of the California water supply system and the source of water for 25 million Californians and millions of acres of prime farmland.

The Department of Water Resources (DWR) is addressing these impacts through mitigation and adaptation measures to ensure that Californians have an adequate water supply, reliable flood control, and healthy ecosystems now and in the future. Below are some of DWR's climate change activities.

Other Climate Change Activities

Adapting to the current and future effects of climate change is essential for DWR and California's water managers. DWR addresses climate change in its California Water Plan, which is updated every five years. The California Water Plan provides a framework for water managers, legislators, and the public to consider options and make decisions regarding California's water future. DWR continues to improve and expand the analysis of climate change in the California Water Plan. The 2013 California Water Plan Update includes multiple scenarios of future climate conditions and stresses the inclusion of uncertainty, risk, and sustainability.

Climate Change Technical Advisory Group