Tomah: A trail of secrecy, missed opportunities
CLOSE

The Tomah VA Medical Center. (Photo: Darren Hauck for Center for Investigative Reporting.)

In meetings with independent inspectors last summer, Veterans Affairs' officials from Tomah, Wis., and the regional office in Chicago that oversees them had a clear message.

Clinicians were being monitored now. A pain-management committee had been revamped to prevent over-prescription of narcotics. Relationships between doctors and pharmacists were on the mend. Everything was under control.

The independent inspectors had had "serious" concerns about "unusually high" amounts of opiates being prescribed to vets at the center. They took Tomah officials' word that the concerns were being addressed.

But less than seven weeks later, 35-year-old Marine Corps veteran Jason Simcakoski died in Tomah's care.

He overdosed as an inpatient on Aug. 30. He had been prescribed 15 drugs, including muscle relaxers, tranquilizers, anti-psychotic medicines and an opioid pain killer. All at once.

RELATED: Read past stories from this series and more from D.C.-based reporter Donovan Slack

Before he died, the inspectors from the VA's Office of Inspector General had closed a lengthy investigation of opiate-prescription rates in Tomah and did not release the findings publicly, deciding instead to just brief local and regional VA officials.

That was one of many behind-closed-door decisions by a number of federal officials that left the issue festering and patients potentially in danger for months, if not years.

Back in 2011, Democratic Rep. Ron Kind of La Crosse forwarded a whistleblower complaint about Tomah narcotics prescriptions to the inspector general but didn't follow up to see what happened. Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Oshkosh, received a complaint last fall, opened a constituent case file on it and shared it with a Senate committee, where it sat.

Tammy Baldwin (Photo: Steve Leonard)

Sen. Tammy Baldwin, D-Madison, got a copy of the previously unreleased inspection report last August, but didn't act on it, even when a whistleblower repeatedly pleaded with her office to make it public and call for an investigation. Veterans Affairs Secretary Robert McDonald referred concerns from the same whistleblower to a VA lawyer, who tried but was unsuccessful in getting more information.

RELATED: VA secretary sorry for false special forces claim

The Wisconsin lawmakers all have now called for an investigation, citing deep concerns, and McDonald launched a probe in January. The VA inspector general is investigating again.

Meanwhile, local officials at the Tomah VA medical center are still suggesting everything's under control. Tomah Medical Center Director Mario DeSanctis told the La Crosse Tribune last month that he had started looking into opioid prescription rates in 2012. He said he formed committees, appointed an "opioid safety champion" and began staff training on alternative treatments — long before the inspectors met with him to share their concerns last summer.

"We had already taken steps to institute solutions to the problems," he said, noting that he wouldn't have done anything differently.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-5644. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

An exhaustive probe

The anonymous letter that helped trigger the investigation by the inspectors at the VA Office of Inspector General arrived in Kind's office in September 2011.

The writer complained that Tomah VA practitioners were over-prescribing narcotics to patients, and employees feared retaliation if they raised concerns. The writer also said some patients kept getting early refills even though tests showed they weren't taking their medication - suggesting they may have been selling their pills.

"The use of narcotics is escalating at such a high rate it is scary," the letter stated. "Please, if you cannot help us, please pass this on to someone who can."

The allegations were so disturbing that Kind forwarded the letter the next day to the inspector general's complaint hotline in Washington. Over the next two-and-a-half years, investigators from the inspector general's office conducted dozens of interviews, pored through more than 225,000 emails, and analyzed opioid prescription rates at hospitals and clinics across the Great Lakes region, including Tomah.

They concluded that among 3,206 prescribers at VA facilities in the region – including large medical centers in Milwaukee and Chicago — three practitioners at the 266-bed facility in rural Tomah ranked among the top 10 most prolific prescribers of opiates.

They also found that at least five pharmacy staffers left their jobs in recent years, citing concerns about the narcotic prescriptions. One pharmacist feared he would lose his license if he had to keep filling prescriptions early. Another refused to fill them and was fired. A third, a clinical pharmacist, told investigators he was ordered to discipline pharmacists who raised concerns about dispensing such high doses of opiates.

The investigators also found that in some cases, patients who weren't taking their medications, as evidenced by a clean urine test, were still given more.

Still, when the probe was finished, Dr. John Daigh, the assistant inspector general for healthcare inspections, concluded in his 11-page report that inspectors could not find conclusive evidence of criminal activity, gross clinical incompetence or negligence or illegal administrative practices. And so Daigh decided to close the case without releasing the report publicly.

Assistant Inspector General for Healthcare Inspections John Daigh. (Photo: MANDEL NGAN, AFP/Getty Images)

"Because the inspection found that the prescription practices in question were within the standard of care, we could make no conclusive finding of inappropriate prescription practices," IG spokeswoman Catherine Gromek said. "Accordingly, a published report was deemed to be unnecessary."

Death by overdose

Just a few weeks after Daigh signed off on closing the case in March 2014, a constituent coincidentally contacted Baldwin's office and expressed concerns about veterans being treated with opiates in Tomah. The senator wrote to VA officials and to the inspector general, asking for an investigation.

On Aug. 29, the inspector general gave her a copy of the previously unreleased inspection report. Baldwin's office provided it to the constituent and apparently dropped the matter.

The day before inspectors sent the report to Baldwin, another crisis was brewing at the Tomah VA Medical Center. Patient Jason Simcakoski's father was growing increasingly concerned about his son's medication regimen, and so Marv Simcakoski went to the medical center August 28 to discuss his son's medications with a doctor and social worker.

Jason Simcakoski had checked himself in a couple of months earlier complaining of a painkiller addiction and severe anxiety. And yet, the center was still prescribing him painkillers. After the family meeting, doctors decided to add yet another opioid medication to the mix of 14 drugs he was prescribed. The cocktail already included anti-anxiety and anti-depressant meds, as well as a tranquilizer and an opioid painkiller.

Two days later, on Aug. 30, Marv Simcakoski and his son's wife, Heather Fluty Simcakoski, went to visit him.

"He was like talking but it sounded so just slurred, and just crazy," Fluty Simcakoski recalled.

"I couldn't even understand him," Marv Simcakoski said.

They left, but several hours later, Tomah staffers called them back. Jason's condition had taken a turn for the worse. By the time they got there, he was dead.

Tomah providers thought he had suffered an aneurysm – he had complained of having a migraine headache earlier in the day. But six weeks later, the Simcakoskis got the autopsy report with the actual cause of death: "mixed drug toxicity."

"I was mad and sad," Marv Simcakoski recalled. "Disgusted."

Blowing the whistle

A couple of weeks before Jason Simcakoski's death, a Gulf War vet and West Point grad named Ryan Honl started a job as a time and attendance secretary at the Tomah VA. But the job was short-lived.

He resigned two months in, after he said supervisors asked him to falsify attendance and training records for doctors. He had also heard concerns from current and former employees about the alleged over-prescription of opiates.

Before leaving, Honl wrote up a lengthy complaint outlining his concerns and theirs and fired it off to McDonald, the VA secretary, and to the offices of Kind and Baldwin on Sept. 26 and Sept. 27. He also sent a message to Johnson's office, noting he had "grave concerns" about "patient health and safety" at the Tomah VA.

Ron Kind (Photo: File)

Kind's office says the complaint — submitted through his website – wasn't processed properly by the computer system and so never showed up in anyone's email inbox.

Johnson, meanwhile, opened a case file and shared it with staff at a Senate subcommittee.

"At the time, we didn't have a copy of the inspector general's report, so we didn't understand the severity of the situation," Johnson said this month.

On Nov. 11, shortly after the election, Honl stepped up his outreach. He had found out from a friend that there had been an inspection, and a report on it had been given to Baldwin. He persuaded the friend to get him a copy.

Upon reading it, he discovered it generally backed up the most serious claims he had been making and he was furious. He began peppering Baldwin's office with a barrage of emails in November and December. He asked that she call for an investigation and make the report public.

She did not do either.

By late November, McDonald, the VA secretary, referred Honl's complaint to an attorney at VA headquarters, according to email correspondence obtained by USA TODAY. The lawyer reached out to Honl for more information. But by that point, Honl said he had grown frustrated and didn't think the VA should be investigating itself. So he never followed through.

VA spokesman James Hutton said last week that "out of respect for the privacy of this Veteran and former employee, (the) VA declines to discuss the communications."

A rush to act

After the Center for Investigative Reporting published a story last month detailing the contents of the previously secret inspection report and the death of Simcakoski, Baldwin, Johnson and Kind all called for an investigation of Tomah. McDonald launched a VA probe, sending top deputies to lead it. And the inspector general is conducting another investigation.

Baldwin has refused for more than a month to answer questions about what happened with the report, whether she read it or was briefed on it, and why Honl's pleas were not heeded. She did fire a top aide, Marquette Baylor, and offered her a severance package with a confidentiality clause. Baylor rejected the deal this month.

Baldwin's office and her attorney, Marc Elias, declined to answer questions for this report.

Kind, whose district includes the Tomah VA, has received and addressed a variety of complaints about the center over the years. But an aide said his office had no record of any specifically related to the over-prescription of opiates at the Tomah VA before the 2011 anonymous letter.

“I am on the case. The goal of our investigation and committee hearings will be to prevent another tragedy like the death of Jason Simcakoski and to bring about the accountability needed to provide our veterans with first-rate medical care they can trust.” U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Oshkosh.

Spokesman Peter Knudsen said Kind's office didn't follow up on that one because the congressman expected the inspector general would have notified him if anything had come of it. Knudsen said representatives from the inspector general recently met with Kind and "acknowledged dropping the ball, and apologized for failing to inform him."

Johnson, meanwhile, has launched his own investigation by the committee he now chairs overseeing Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.

"I am on the case," the senator said this month. "The goal of our investigation and committee hearings will be to prevent another tragedy like the death of Jason Simcakoski and to bring about the accountability needed to provide our veterans with first-rate medical care they can trust."

For the Simcakoskis' part, they envision legislation or at least big changes within the VA.

"This shouldn't have happened to our son," Marv Simcakoski said. "But hopefully when this is all said and done, with all the attention this has gotten, hopefully this doesn't happen to anybody else again."

Contact dslack@usatoday.com. Follow @donovanslack.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1EqQ1sq