Yes, Gov. Walker supported path to citizenship: column
CLOSE In a July 2, 2013 editorial board interview, Gov. Scott Walker discussed his views on immigration reform and endorsed a path to legal citizenship for those here illegally. The stance has attracted attention as Walker gears up a run for president.

He's walking it back now, but in our 2013 interview, Gov. Scott Walker favored immigration reform principles.

Buy Photo Gov. Scott Walker speaks with the Daily Herald Media Editorial Board on July 2, 2013. (Photo: Daily Herald Media file photo)Buy Photo

In 2013, just before the July 4 holiday, Gov. Scott Walker came to Wausau and sat down with us for an Editorial Board interview. We asked about a lot of things, most of which were topics he had probably been asked about a million times. But one question we asked the governor was about a debate that was then raging in Washington about immigration reform. As governor, did he have any insights into the issue?

In the context of the national debate, Walker's response was dovish in the extreme. He favored much more legal immigration, and he saw the breakdown of the legal immigration system as the main driver of illegal immigration. He noted that he has in-laws who come from Mexico — a politician's gesture of reaching out to an identity group that makes up a huge share of immigrants.

And, in the moment that is still making some right-wing activists very nervous, when asked whether he could, in principle, support a path to citizenship for those here illegally, Walker said, "I think it makes sense."

This week, Walker was asked about this statement in a Fox News interview with Bret Baier. Here's how the exchange went:

BAIER: In 2013, you said you supported a path to citizenship for people living here illegally, but recently you've —

WALKER: Actually, I'm glad you asked about that, because the Wausau newspaper erroneously quoted me on that. They listed a video on their website that actually showed that the person who asked the question said that, not me, and ever since then I've had to deal with reports over and over again.

BAIER: So that's wrong?

WALKER: That's wrong. It's not what I said. I have said I believe we need a legal immigration system. I have said repeatedly I oppose amnesty. I think we're a nation of immigrants, but we're also a nation of laws. We should have a legal way for people to come into this country either for work or for citizenship, just like we have for generations. Part of that deal is we need to make sure we have a border that's secure, not just for immigration reasons, but as I mentioned, for national security.

I'm "the person who asked the question." Walker is wrong. We have the video to prove it.

First: Daily Herald Media did erroneously characterize one portion of Walker's answer. In the initial news report following that interview, we wrongly claimed Walker had offered an endorsement of the specific comprehensive immigration reform bill then being considered in the U.S. Senate. He hadn't. We got that wrong. We corrected the error swiftly, but we took our lumps for it and we deserved them.

NEWSLETTERS Get the newsletter delivered to your inbox We're sorry, but something went wrong Please try again soon, or contact Customer Service at 1-877-424-5644. Delivery: Invalid email address Thank you! You're almost signed up for Keep an eye out for an email to confirm your newsletter registration. More newsletters

But the bit about endorsing a path to citizenship? Yeah, that definitely happened.

In the interest of transparency, here's the full transcript of the 2013 exchange, which you can also watch in the video above. Emphasis added in a couple of places:

WALKER: If people want to come here and work hard in America, I don't care whether they come from Mexico or Ireland or Germany or South Africa or anywhere else, I want 'em here. To me, if people want to come and live the American dream, if they want to work hard and self-determination and have their kids have a better life, I mean that's what — whether you're folks like my brother's in-laws who immigrated a generation ago from Mexico or whether it's people like my ancestors who came from places like Ireland and Germany and other parts of the world many generations ago, there's a similar pattern there. That is, people who came, who risk a lot, whether it's traveling across an ocean or across a national border.

So anyway, long story short to that, not only do I think they need to fix things for people who are already here, find some way to deal with that (but also) there's got to be a larger way to fix the system in first place. Because if it wasn't so cumbersome, if there wasn't such a long wait, if it wasn't so difficult to get in, you wouldn't have the other problems that we have with people who don't have legal status in the first place.

That seems to be, at least to me, what I hear in the national debate, largely overlooked. It all is about the 11 million — and I don't know how we get that exact number because people, if they're not here legally, I don't know exactly how you figure out when it's 11 million, or 25 million or whatever it is, but we've heard enough about it that it's a real issue. But, like I said, I don't know why — you hear some people talk about border security and a wall and all that. To me, I don't know that you need any of that if you had a better, saner way to let people into the country in the first place.

DAILY HERALD: That's definitely true, but we have these millions of people. You don't deal with federal (issues) and I understand you don't need to have a position on this specific bill, but on the broad question, it would be interesting to know your thinking. The biggest split is about what to do with those 11 million or whatever it is. Can you envision a world where, with the right penalties and waiting periods and meet the requirements, where those people could get citizenship?

WALKER: Sure. Yeah. I mean, I think it makes sense. But what I'm saying is, in the context of fixing it. Because otherwise we do this kind of Band-Aid approach, and the federal government is — it's why I'm not a big fan of a lot of things in the federal government, regardless of party. Not that we're perfect of the state, but you can get your hands around issues like that at the state. The federal government, it just seems — just the mere fact that they're having that debate without having a discussion about, why is the system itself, why aren't we fixing that, just seems to be kind of the vacuum of that decisions are made in at the federal level.

Some context for those remarks: In March 2013, the Republican National Committee, helmed by Wisconsinite (and Walker friend) Reince Priebus, put out a political strategy memo called the "Growth & Opportunity Project." It lavished praise on GOP governors and offered some sharp critiques of the "federal wing" of congressional Republicans.

And here's a key line from the memo: "We must embrace and champion comprehensive immigration reform. If we do not, our Party's appeal will continue to shrink to its core constituencies only. We also believe that comprehensive immigration reform is consistent with Republican economic policies that promote job growth and opportunity for all."

Walker's statements to us just a few months later were very consistent with the memo's advice, right down to the contrast he drew between states and the federal government.

The problem is that, like earlier efforts, the 2013 comprehensive immigration reform push failed, again, amid strong opposition from the conservative grassroots. The GOP senator most associated with the latest push, Florida's Marco Rubio, saw his own presidential prospects badly damaged by his association with the plan.

Today, Walker's presidential prospects may hinge on a strong showing in the Iowa caucuses, a place where opposition to comprehensive immigration reform is fierce. It's not surprising that he has backed away from his 2013 stance, has started saying he opposes "amnesty" and backs tight border security. Who knows? Maybe he's even genuinely changed his mind. It happens!

But on this, at least, he wasn't misquoted.

Robert Mentzer is engagement editor for Gannett Central Wisconsin Media. Contact: rmentzer@gannett.com, 715-845-0604; on Twitter: @robertmentzer.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1A3gBWC