Conversations with Allan Wolper
Allan Wolper talks to Letitia James May 6, 2016 New York City Public Advocate Letitia James is a fierce fighter for low income tenants facing eviction from predatory landlords. James is pained by the fact 60,000 people have to sleep in homeless shelters every night. She recently started a campaign to win equal pay for women working in City Hall. She is the first woman of color to hold citywide office in New York, a former city council member,a Legal Aid Society public defender and an assistant attorney general. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Mario F. Gallucci April 8, 2016 Mario F. Gallucci, a criminal attorney whose twitter handle is @MrAcquittal, has defended some of the most controversial clients in New York City history. Gallucci represented a dental surgeon who made millions of dollars harvesting and selling body parts, including the remains of Alistair Cooke, the late host of Masterpiece Theater. He is a legal analyst on the New York 1 Cable News station and has his own reality television show, Partners in Crime. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Father Brendan Forde March 25, 2016 Father Brendan Forde is a Franciscan priest from Ireland who preaches peace and serves the most vulnerable people in Central and South America. Father Forde, who was featured in the documentary, "The Friar in Blue Jeans," has helped the homeless caught in the cross fires of the Colombia drug wars, administered to people in the leper colonies of the Amazon, and counseled the poor in Chile, El Salvador and Guatemala. His father fought in the April 24 1916 "Easter Rising" in Dublin against the British by Irish Republicans. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Aracelis Lucero March 12, 2016 Aracelis Lucero, a former Wall Street executive who was raised in the South Bronx, has rededicated her life to mentoring the thousands of documented and undocumented Mexican children in New York City. Lucero, executive director of Masa-MexEd, says the youngsters live with the constant fear they will be pulled out of school and deported back to Mexico with their parents. She encourages the Mexican community to make their voices heard in Washington, D.C. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Robin Hirsch February 26, 2016 Robin Hirsch is the owner of The Cornelia Street Cafe, a venerable Greenwich Village institution that the city has proclaimed to be a "culinary and cultural landmark." The cafe has showcased some of the brightest jazz musicians, actors, artists, poets, and writers in New York City. Hirsch is an author, an Oxford Scholar and "minister of culture and wine czar." He is writing a memoir entitled "The world passes through: stories from the Cornelia Street Cafe." Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to David Dinkins About His Legacy February 19, 2016 David Dinkins made political history in 1990 when he was sworn in as the first African American mayor of New York City. Dinkins, now a professor at the Columbia University School of International and Public Affairs, reflected on his historic journey in a June, 2010 on line interview that is being broadcast for the first time. He discussed his legacy that is now winning admiration from journalists and historians alike. He explained his role in the 1991 Crown Heights riots in Brooklyn, and analyzed the administrations of Former Mayors Giuliani Bloomberg,Koch and Beame. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Dr. Brian Fallon February 12, 2016 Dr. Brian Fallon is the director of the Lyme and Tick Borne Disease Research Center at the Columbia University Medical Center. Dr. Fallon says each year hundreds of thousands of Americans are bitten by ticks and coming down with Lyme and other tick borne diseases. He says that vacation hot spots like Cape Cod, the Hamptons, Martha's Vineyard, Northern California, Western Massachusetts, and Vermont all are dealing with tick infestations. He warns that walks in the woods, picking blue berries, or cavorting in a pile of leaves, can be hazardous to your health. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Kejal Vyas January 29, 2016 Kejal Vyas is the regional correspondent in South America for The Wall Street Journal. He recently moved to Bogota, Colombia, after spending five years in Caracas, a city considered the most violent in the world. He explains in detail how he survived in a place where people drive through stop lights to avoid being held up, where police are killed for their weapons and residents are urged to stay in their homes after seven at night, even in upscale neighborhoods. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to George McDonald and Harriet Karr McDonald January 18, 2016 George McDonald and Harriet Karr-McDonald are the heart and soul of the Doe Fund, a non-profit organization that trains and houses homeless men in New York City and Philadelphia who are "Ready, Willing and Able" to work. The men are ex-drug addicts, ex-offenders and military veterans transitioning back into society. The organization was named in honor of a homeless woman known as "Mama Doe" who died of exposure on Christmas Morning 1985 in Grand Central Terminal. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Ken Thompson December 10, 2015 Ken Thompson, who recently died at 50 of cancer, made history in 2013 when he became the first African American to be elected Brooklyn District Attorney. Thompson's enduring legacy includes the formation of a Conviction Review Unit which overturned the wrongful imprisonment of 21 people, winning national applause and attention. He won international notice in private practice when he represented a hotel housekeeper who alleged she was sexually assaulted by Dominique Strauss-Kahn, the head of the International Monetary Fund. Strauss-Kahn was poised to run for President of France. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Dr. Michael Crane December 7, 2015 Dr. Michael Crane directs the World Trade Center Health program at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai that treats the devastating medical and psychological problems of the first responders to the 9/11 attack. The interview recently won an Associated Press award for public service. Congress finally allocated the money needed to to renew the James Zadroga 911 Health and Compensation Act that provides funds to treat the first responders. The law is named after a New York City detective who who died after spending more than 450 hours at Ground Zero. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Roma Torre November 27, 2015 Roma Torre is the Emmy Award winning anchor of Time Warner Cable's NY1 news and the theater critic for NY1 On Stage. She has used her celebrity to promote colonoscopies after she underwent successful colon cancer surgery. That campaign recently won an Associated Press Award. She is the daughter of the late Marie Torre who made journalism history in 1959 as a columnist for the now defunct New York Herald Tribune when she served 10 days in Hudson County Jail in Jersey City, New Jersey for refusing to disclose her source in a CBS controversy involving actress Judy Garland. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks with Martin Garbus November 23, 2015 Martin Garbus, a winner of the PEN First Amendment Award of honor, is one of the country's fiercest fighters for free speech. Garbus also received the James Joyce Award from the University of Dublin for Excellence in Law and the New York University Law Alumni Achievement Award. His boldface clients included Robert Redford, Nelson Mandela, Tom Brokaw, Spike Lee, Michael Bloomberg and the neo Nazis. He is writing a memoir of the Cuban Five, a case he calls the worst in American Legal history. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Michele Bratcher Goodwin November 13, 2015 Michele Bratcher Goodwin's investigative research in human trafficking, the black market for body parts, reproductive rights, the politics of organ transplants, and bioethics has won her wide acclaim. She discloses how women in Florida were forced to give birth by cesarean surgery. Goodwin is a Chancellor's Professor of Law and the Director of the Center for Biotechnology and Global Health Policy at the University of California, School of Law, Irvine. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Kim Friedman November 6, 2015 Kim Friedman,one of Hollywood's most successful woman television directors, is the Instagram sensation known as Crazy Jewish Mom. Her daughter, Kate Siegel, recently wrote a book, Mother Can You Not, based on her relationship with her "Crazy Jewish Mom." Kim's credits include cult favorite, Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman, Dynasty, Love Boat, Beverly Hills 90210 and Star Trek Voyager. McGuire. She has won two Los Angeles Drama Critic Awards. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Ed Kashi October 30, 2015 Ed Kashi is a photo journalist whose sensitive lens has captured the racial profiling in Europe, the turmoil in Syria and Iraq, the West Bank, the Niger Delta, as well as in the United States. His award winning work has been shown in numerous film festivals and published in The New York Times and National Geographic Magazine. His photography is also featured in The Newest Americans project at Rutgers - University Newark. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Greg Pardlo October 23, 2015 Gregory Pardlo, the winner of the 2015 Pulitzer Prize for poetry, is called "a different kind of Derek Jeter" by the Poetry Foundation. Pardlo debunks the theory that African Americans are disinterested parents. He is the second African American male poet to win the Pulitzer for poetry and the sixth African American poet overall to capture the highly coveted honor. The Pulitzer judges said his work "was rich with thought, ideas, and histories that were both public and private." Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Yukie Ohta October 16, 2015 Yukie Ohta has created a Soho Memory Project in New York City to educate the throngs of visitors who have turned the one time haven for mafia landlords, struggling artists and sweat shops into an international destination for fashionistas and foodies. She discusses the impact that the May 25, 1979 disappearance of six year old Etan Patz had on the Soho area and the country. He was declared dead in 2011. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Frank Casey October 12, 2015 Frank Casey was the first investment analyst to blow the whistle on rogue financier Bernard Madoff whose Ponzi scheme looted the savings of thousands of people around the globe. Casey, managing partner of Peaq Capital, testifies on behalf of victims who file law suits against banks and financial institutions allegedly involved in Madoff's corrupt enterprise. Casey is one of the featured investigators in Chasing Madoff, a documentary on a 10 year attempt to bring the Ponzi schemer to justice. He tells the tragic story of a French aristocrat who was ruined by Madoff Ponzi investment Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to James Reiss April 27, 2015 James Reiss has written six books of poetry. His critically acclaimed work has appeared in The New York Times, Esquire Magazine, The New Yorker, The Paris Review, Chicago Tribune The Nation, Atlantic Monthly Magazine, and Slate.His poems have been published in numerous textbooks, both in English and Spanish. Reiss is a Professor Emeritus of English at Miami (Ohio) University in Oxford, Ohio. He is a founding editor of The Miami University Press. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Steven Pagones April 20, 2015 In 1987, Rev. Al Sharpton accused Steven Pagones, then an assistant district attorney in Dutchess County, New York, of being one of six white men who raped Tawana Brawley, an African American teenager. A grand jury, after interviewing 180 witnesses, concluded the rape charges were a hoax. Pagones later won defamation suits against Sharpton and Brawley. But Sharpton refuses to apologize.Pagones recounts the impact the case had on his life. Listen Now

Allan Wolper Talks To Victoria F. Pratt April 6, 2015 Victoria F. Pratt, the Chief Judge of the Newark,New Jersey Municipal Court, has won an international reputation for her efforts to reform the criminal justice system. She recently returned from a London judicial conference where she discussed the Newark Community Solutions court project. Pratt is the first person in the city's history of Dominican descent to become a Municipal Court Judge. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Lacey Schwartz March 16, 2015 Lacey Schwartz has written, produced and directed a documentary, Little White Lie, detailing how she grew up as a white, Jewish girl in Woodstock, New York, only to learn in college that her biological father, Rodney Parker,was black and a friend of her mother. Parker, who was featured in a best selling book, Heaven is a Playground, was a legendary New York City college basketball scout. Lacey married, Antonio Delgado, an African American man she met when they were both students at Harvard Law School. She considers herself a woman of color, but retains her Jewish heritage. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Kim Ann Curtin March 9, 2015 Kim Ann Curtin, known as The Wall Street Coach, has written a book, Transforming WALL Street, a Conscious Path for a New Future, that she hopes will generate an ethical movement in the financial world. Curtin poses questions like this: "Can you work on Wall Street without selling your soul? She dedicated her book to Monsignor Tom Hartman, an associate of Rabbi Marc Gellman, who were moderators of a television show called The God Squad. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Gridlock Sam Schwartz February 23, 2015 Sam Schwartz is known worldwide as Gridlock Sam, a nickname the media gave him for his role in coining the term, Gridlock. As New York City's traffic commissioner in the 1980's, he designed routes for numerous crowded corners. Schwartz says New York would rather hand out parking tickets then crack down on illegal drivers because it brings in more money. He is also a columnist for The Daily News. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to David Carr in 2011 February 17, 2015 The late David Carr was posthumously named a Pulitzer Prize finalist this year for his 2014 columns on cable in the New York Times. He passed away on Feb.12, 2015. Carr was the most influential media and cultural writer in America. In 2011, he shared some of the most revealing moments of his personal and professional life, including his fight to overcome alcohol and drug abuse,chronicled in his memoir, Night of the Gun. One of his most cherished journalism moments? His first byline. A story in the now defunct Twin Cities (Minnesota) Reader on police misconduct. Listen Now

Allan Wolper Talks To Seth Redniss February 9, 2015 Seth Redniss is the lawyer for Reporters Without Borders, the French based organization dedicated to defending the world's most important freedom, freedom of expression. Redniss has been working with Reporters Without Borders for 12 years, devising legal strategy for journalists in trouble. The assassination of five cartoonists at Charlie Hebdo, the satirical newspaper in Paris, shows why journalists need his kind of help. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Robert Lipsyte February 2, 2015 Robert Lipsyte was a sports and city affairs columnist for The New York Times and host of an Emmy Award winning program on Channel 13, the PBS station in New York. Lipsyte recently completed an 18 month assignment as the ombudsman for ESPN. He is a lifetime achievement award recipient from the American Library Association and he co-author of Nigger: An Autobiography, a memoir of comedian and civil rights activist Dick Gregory. Listen Now

Allan Wolper Talks To Dr. Margaret Haney January 26, 2015 Dr. Margaret Haney, a Professor of Neurobiology in Psychiatry and Co-Director of the Substance Use Research Center at the Columbia University Medical Center, uses human volunteers to study the impact of marijuana on the brain. Research has shown that repeated marijuana use can affect the brain of a teenager. She says that California's laws on marijuana defacto legalize its use. Medical marijuana is permitted in 20 states and the district of Columbia. Colorado has legalized the drug for recreational purposes. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to New York Congressman Charles Rangel January 5, 2015 Charles Rangel: a legacy interview. He has been a congressman representing Harlem and the Bronx for more than 43 years. He was the first African American chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee Rangel. He became a major figure in black politics when he defeated the late, legendary Congressman Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. He responds to the House Ethics Committee charges against him and discloses the harsh treatment he received from police when he was a Harlem teenager. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks with Vanessa Neumann December 15, 2014 Dr. Vanessa Neumann has won an international reputation for investigating the relationship between criminal and terrorist organizations from Colombia to Southeast Asia. Dr. Neumann is President and CEO of Asymmetrica, which is a consultant to Fortune 100 companies and various government agencies concerned about illicit human trafficking and crime-terror pipelines. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to John CRASH Matos December 8, 2014 John CRASH Matos, a favorite of European galleries,is one of America's most important graffiti artists. Crash's incredible climb from spray painting New York City subway cars to being featured in the Museum of Modern,is a stirring one. He spray painted a design on a guitar for Eric Clapton that was auctioned at a charity for $300,000 and recently opened a gallery in the South Bronx called Wall Works New York to showcase young artists. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Hoboken Mayor Dawn Zimmer December 1, 2014 Dawn Zimmer, the mayor of Hoboken, New Jersey, became a major political figure when her city was overrun by Super Storm Sandy. Mayor Zimmer has charged that New Jersey Governor Chris Christie's administration threatened to hold back aid for Hoboken unless she withdrew her opposition to a project in her city. She recently won a large federal grant that the Christie Administration, ironically, will administer. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Ali Velshi November 17, 2014 Ali Velshi, host of Real Money with Ali Velshi, on Al Jazeera America, is one of the world's most popular television business correspondents. The former longtime journalist for CNN was born in Nairobi, Kenya. He is a Muslim of Indian descent who grew up in Toronto where he endured some harsh behavior from those who were prejudiced against his religion.He often speaks out for his faith. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Helen Benedict November 10, 2014 Helen Benedict is a novelist and journalist whose book, The Lonely Soldier: The Private War of Women in Iraq that provided vivid details of sexual assaults of women in the military that won the attention of the Pentagon and the White House. Benedict won the Ida B. Wells award given to writers who champion the causes of people of color. She is a professor of journalism at the Columbia University Graduate School of Journalism. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Biddle Duke October 27, 2014 Biddle Duke is publisher of the award winning, Stowe Reporter, a weekly newspaper in Stowe, Vermont, His paper disclosed that AIG, using a subsidiary, bought a ski resort in Stowe during the 2008 economic meltdown -- a scoop the mainline media never picked up. He is the scion of the American family that created Duke University. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Jeff Nunokawa October 20, 2014 Jeff Nunokawa,a professor of Victorian Literature at Princeton University, has published a volume of poetry and literary essays, culled from hundreds of pieces he wrote on his face book page. The work included literary exchanges with his students. The new volume,called Note Book, was published by Princeton University Press. Students have nicknamed Nunokawa's face book page, "Jeff Book." His personality and scholarship earned him the title, The Legend of Princeton, from the university's alumni association magazine. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Julio Medina October 13, 2014 Julio Medina's story is one of redemption. Medina spent 12 years in prison after he was convicted of running a major New York drug ring. But he earned a Masters Degree in the Sing Sing Correctional Facility through a special program administrated by the New York Theological Seminary. After he was paroled, he founded Exodus Transitional Community, an East Harlem organization that offers a second chance to former inmates seeking a new life and a job. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Judy Mauer October 6, 2014 Judy Mauer is an international award winning New York street photographer whose lens captures three dimensional pictures of store mannequins and the streets they live on.She was chosen as one of 164 artists from 25 countries to be part of the 3rd International Biennial of Fine Art and Documentary Photography at the Heritage Municipal Museum in Malaga, Spain. Her latest creation, Bing, is being featured at the Lawrence Fine Art Gallery in East Hampton, Long Island. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Bruce Cutler June 3, 2014 Bruce Cutler, one of the most flamboyant criminal defense lawyers in recent history, made his legal bones representing clients like the late Mafia boss, John Gotti. Cutler talks about how he met the so called "Teflon Don" and how their relationship became a personal one. Cutler believes that middle class criminal defendants can't afford to hire lawyers, denying them justice in courtrooms. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Choclatt Jared May 20, 2014 Choclatt Jared has played his bucket drums on 42nd Street, at the Grammy Awards, the Tony Awards, the Academy Awards, and on Saturday Night Live. He has also appeared in movies with Mel Gibson and Sharon Stone. A self taught musician, Choclatt was one of the creators of the four time Tony Award winning Broadway show, Bring in da Noise, Bring in da Funk. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Carl Locke May 13, 2014 Carl Locke, a detective in the internal affairs division of The New York City police department,is president of the Gay Officers Action League (GOAL). The organization protects the rights of 2,000 gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people in law enforcement in the New York metropolitan area.He warns that parts of New York are too dangerous for gay couples to visit. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO WIL HAYGOOD May 6, 2014 Wil Haygood's story in The Washington Post in 2008 about the late Eugene Allen, a butler who served eight U.S. presidents, inspired the 2013 film, The Butler. Haygood is a Distinguished Scholar at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio. He argues that Hollywood's mainly white judges for the Academy Awards have a "cultural blind spot" against black productions which hurt the movie's chances of winning a nomination. The film starred Oprah Winfrey and Forest Whitaker. Lee Daniels was the director. Haygood wrote a book that accompanied the movie and was an associate producer of the production. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO WILLIE REALE April 22, 2014 Willie Reale was awarded a MacArthur genius grant for starting a Manhattan theater project for inner city children, won an Academy Award nomination for writing the lyrics for Patience from the movie Dreamgirls, and collected two Tony Award nominations for his Broadway musical, A Year with Frog and Toad. He is the supervising producer for the hit CBS television police drama, Blue Bloods. He is married to Jenny Gersten, executive director of the Friends of The High Line. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO WALTER MOSLEY April 15, 2014 Walter Mosley is the creator of the Easy Rawlins mystery series. His first book, Devil in a Blue Dress, was later made into a film staring Denzel Washington. He is former President Bill Clinton's favorite mystery writer and one of the country's most prolific novelists. Mosley discusses Lift, a play he wrote about two people trapped in a building elevator hit by a terrorist missile. He also discussed his new book, Debbie Doesn't Do It Anymore, the story of a porn queen. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO KATHLEEN JORDAN April 1, 2014 Kathleen Jordan is finishing the memoir of her late father, Hamilton Jordan, who former President Jimmy Carter said was the man who devised the political strategy that got a peanut farmer elected to the White House. She read excerpts from the book, including a special testimonial by Carter,and her father's stunned reaction after learning his maternal grandmother's name was Gottheimer and was Jewish, making him Jewish as well. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO MELBA WILSON March 11, 2014 Melba Wilson is the comfort food queen of New York City. Her Harlem restaurant, Melba's, is an international destination for soul food aficionadoes. She learned the food business from her late aunt, Sylvia, who owned Sylvia's, the legendary Harlem restaurant. She tells how she beat Bobby Flay in a Food Network throw down. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO LINDA STASI February 18, 2014 Linda Stasi is a New York Daily News columnist who specializes in skewering celebrities and politicians. She recently won a prestigious Mystery Writers of America Edgar nomination for her first novel, The Sixth Station. She is co host of What A Week on Time Warner's New York 1 cable television station, and the author of five non fiction books. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO ROBIN STEINBERG January 21, 2014 Robin Steinberg is founder and executive director of The Bronx Defenders, which represents people in the criminal and civil courts who can't afford to hire their own attorneys. Steinberg says that New York police make most of their drug arrests in minority areas and ignore drug activity in affluent neighborhoods. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO MICHAEL CONNELLY December 17, 2013 Best-selling mystery writer Michael Connelly discusses Gods of Guilt, a book that is part of his Lincoln Lawyer series. He discloses the thinking that went into the production of his Amazon Studio on line series starring Titus Welliver. The series is based on City of Bones, his classic Harry Bosch detective book. Connelly is a master of chronicling the relationship between the police and the press and its impact on the public. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO KHALIL GIBRAN MUHAMMAD December 10, 2013 Dr. Khalil Gibran Muhammad is the Director of the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture, in Harlem that is part of The New York City Public Library system. He is the author of The Condemnation of Blackness: Race, Crime and The Making of Modern Urban America. He is the great-grandson of Elijah Muhammad, a founder of The Nation of Islam, and the son of Pulitzer Prize winning photographer Ozier Muhammad. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Rikki Klieman December 3, 2013 Rikki Klieman, a legal analyst for CBS This Morning, is a nationally known criminal defense lawyer, a Court TV anchor during the O.J. Simpson trial, and an actress on television crime dramas like Blue Bloods. She has lectured at Columbia Law School, Northwestern and Harvard and is married to New York City Police Commissioner police commissioner Bill Bratton. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO NANCY CANTOR November 26, 2013 Nancy Cantor is the new chancellor of Rutgers University in Newark. Cantor, the former president of Syracuse University, is a native of New York City. She says she is planning to reach out to the people of New Jersey's largest city in the hope of connecting with them. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Elizabeth Kiehner November 19, 2013 Elizabeth Kiehner, co-founder of Thornberg & Forester, shakes people up with her digital designs and storytelling techniques. She works with networks, actors such as James Franco, and nonprofit groups like The Malala Fund, which supports the work of activist Malala Yousafzai, the Pakistani teenager shot by the Taliban. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Sayon Soeun and Janet Gardner November 12, 2013 Sayon Soeun, once a child soldier kidnapped by Cambodia's Khmer Rouge government which killed over two million people, details his return trip to his homeland to search for his family. The trip is chronicled in the documentary Lost Child, Sayon's Journey directed by Janet Gardner. He also disclosed the prejudice he encountered when he came to the United States. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Jerry Capeci October 29, 2013 Jerry Capeci is the creator of GanglandNews.com, a web site that chronicles the lives and crimes of the Mafia and the law enforcement agencies that pursue them. He and journalist Tom Robbins are the co-authors of The Life of Little Al D'Arco: The Man Who Brought Down The Mafia. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Kristina Borjesson October 22, 2013 Kristina Borjesson is the writer/director of TWA Flight 800, a documentary that examines the July, 1996 crash off the coast of Long Island that took the lives of 230 people. The documentary cites evidence claiming the plane was downed by a missile, either by friendly fire or a terrorist organization. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Mayor Bill de Blasio and Chirlane McCray October 15, 2013 Bill de Blasio and his wife, Chirlane McCray, in their first joint interview 18 months before he was elected mayor, disclose why he changed his name. De Blasio was born and raised as Warren Wilhelm, Jr. They are the first bi racial couple to move into Gracie Mansion. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to James Braxton Peterson October 8, 2013 James Braxton Peterson, founder of Hip Hop Scholars, talks about misogyny and homophobia in Hip Hop culture, and the marginalization of blacks in America after the election of President Barack Obama. Peterson is director of Africana Studies at Lehigh University. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Rossana Rosado October 1, 2013 On the 100th anniversary of El Diario La Prensa, Rossana Rosado the first woman Publisher and CEO of New York's most famous Spanish language paper talks about how a former editor at the paper was killed by Columbian drug lords after an El Diario expose. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Holly Gordon June 19, 2013 Holly Gordon is the executive producer of Girl Rising, a feature film and worldwide project that is part of a campaign to improve educational opportunities for girls in developing countries. The film is narrated by a Hollywood A list that includes Meryl Streep, Ann Hathaway, Salma Hayek and Liam Neeson. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Jimmy Parker and Mary Beth Dooley June 14, 2013 Jimmy Parker and Mary Beth Dooley used their film and advertising background to create Red Hat on the River, a restaurant with smashing views of the Hudson and live jazz featuring legendary bass player Bill Crow. It is a magnet for celebrities like Bill and Hillary Clinton, both of whom held their birthday parties there. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to June Cohen June 7, 2013 June Cohen is executive producer of TED, formally known as Technology, Entertainment and Design, that has generated more than one billion views on the internet. Cohen launched TEDTalks, which features an international cast of people who present new and exciting ideas in just 18 minutes. She also co-hosts the annual TED conference in Long Beach, California Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Julie Menin April 24, 2013 Julie Menin is now the New York City consumer affairs commissioner. She was interviewed during her unsuccessful run for the Democratic nomination for Manhattan borough president. She is a community activist who had to rebuild her restaurant, called Vine, after the 9/11 attack on the World Trade Center. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Stephen B. Shepard April 17, 2013 Stephen B. Shepard, the founding dean of the City University of New York Graduate School of Journalism and the former editor-in-chief of Business Week Magazine, says newspapers will be profitable if they are voices for their communities. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Bill Bratton April 10, 2013 William J. Bratton is once again the police commissioner of New York City. Bratton, the former police commissioner in Los Angeles and Boston, has promised to scale back the stop, question and frisk campaign that the courts have ruled unconstitutional. . Listen Now

Allan Wolper and the late Edward Koch April 3, 2013 On February 1, New York City lost Edward Irving Koch, one of the most colorful and controversial mayors in its history. Koch was born in the Bronx, raised in Newark, and then returned to the Big Apple where he launched his political career. Koch, who was 88, ran City Hall from 1978 to 1989. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Christine Dennison and Tim Taylor February 27, 2013 Married underwater ocean explorers Christine Dennison and Tim Taylor, discuss their incredible discovery of the USS-R12, a World War II submarine, that had been buried in 600 feet of water in June, 1943 off the cost of Key West, Florida and cost the lives of 42 sailors. They presented their documented video to the internationally renowned Explorer's Club. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO JOHN CATSIMATIDIS February 20, 2013 Billionaire entrepreneur John Catsimatidis, President of the Gristedes and Red Apple supermarkets,spoke about his unsuccessful campaign for the Republican nomination for mayor of New York. Catsimatidis has a mixed political pedigree: his daughter is married to the grandson of the late President Richard Nixon. And Catsimatisdis is a good friend of Bill and Hillary Clinton. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Murray Weiss February 13, 2013 Murray Weiss, one of New York City's best crime reporters, has written about the city's most notorious murderers and mobsters, including John Gotti and, Paul Castellano, for the New York Daily News, The New York Post, and most recently DNAinfo.com, a new online news service. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Roland Betts February 6, 2013 Roland W. Betts, founder and Chairman of Chelsea Piers, is a close friend of former President George W. Bush. Betts was the former lead owner of The Texas Rangers baseball team. He was also a producer and financier for several movie classics including Gandhi, The Killing Fields, and Pretty Woman. He began his professional life as a teacher and assistant principal in Central Harlem. Listen Now

AllanWolper talks to Lisa Bloom December 26, 2012 Lisa Bloom, celebrity attorney, is the legal analyst for The Today Show and the founder and managing partner of The Bloom Firm. She is the daughter of noted civil rights attorney, Gloria Allred. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Joanna Wolper December 19, 2012 Joanna Wolper, an Emmy Award winning writer and documentary filmmaker, has uncovered the true identity of Santa Claus. She writes about her discovery in a children's book called "The Man Who Could Be Santa," based on a true family adventure. Her book has a web site, at www.themanwhocouldbesanta.com featuring the real children in the story. Original music written and performed by Gabrielle Gewritz. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Steve Seskin December 12, 2012 Grammy nominee singer songwriter Steve Seskin has written seven number one songs. His anti-bullying anthem, Don't Laugh At Me he co-wrote with Allen Shamblin was recorded by Peter Paul and Mary. It inspired the creation of Operation Respect, a foundation that teaches youngsters how to get along with each other. Harvey Rich and his daughter, Darrian, who perform on the program, sing the song at various community groups in New Jersey. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Michael Connelly December 5, 2012 Michael Connelly is the bestselling author of the Harry Bosch detective series that deals with murder and morality practiced by the police, the press and the public that is expected to become an online AOL television series. The series, starring Titus Welliver, is based on City of Bones, a Bosch classic. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Corinne Narassiguin October 31, 2012 Corinne Narassiguin is the first elected member of the French Parliament to represent French citizens living in the United States and Canada. Narassiguin, a member of the ruling Socialist Party in France, discusses US-French relations and comments on the American presidential race and its impact on the international community. Listen Now

AllanWolper talks to Ted Sod October 24, 2012 Ted Sod, a dramaturg for New York City's Roundabout Theater talks about the healing power that theater has on audiences. Sod, an actor, director and playwright, is developing a play about the wit and influence of the late Nora Ephron. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Peter Himler October 17, 2012 Tech savvy Public Relations influencer Peter Himler talks about Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn and Pinterest, and how social networks are changing the way we communicate. Twitter Peter Himler @peterhimler Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Dr. Deane Marchbein October 10, 2012 Dr. Deane Marchbein, President of Doctors Without Borders, talks about the struggle her organization endures to treat the sick and injured in war ravaged areas of South Sudan, Syria Libya and other hot spots around the globe. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to John Johnson October 3, 2012 John Johnson, a legendary New York television news anchor and reporter for 30 years, talks about growing up in Bedford Stuyvesant, negotiating the hostage situation in the 1971 Attica Prison uprising, and his days at WABC, WCBS and WNBC. Today he is an artist whose paintings are exhibited in galleries in New York and Europe. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Timothy Crouse June 27, 2012 Timothy Crouse is the author of the political campaign classic, The Boys On The Bus, and co-author of the Tony Award winning Broadway hit revival, Anything Goes, which his father, Russel Crouse, wrote years ago. Russell Crouse, a former journalist at the Kansas City Star,co-wrote the Sound of Music. Tim's sister, Lindsay Ann Crouse is a talented actress. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Layla and Robert Fanucci June 20, 2012 Layla Fanucci, and her husband Robert Fanucci, who makes the award winning Charter Oak wines out of their Napa Valley home, talk about their dual professional life. Her floor to ceiling paints, which once sold for $500, now sells for $100,000. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Ruth Mandel June 6, 2012 Ruth Mandel, Director of the Eagleton Institute of Politics talks with Allan about her family's ill-fated journey on the St. Louis, a german ocean liner, trying to escape the Nazi death camps. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Gretchen Morgenson April 25, 2012 Pulitzer Prize winning New York Times business columnist Gretchen Morgenson talks about how Wall Street and the bigger than ever banks stay a step ahead of the regulators. She says they are very good at obfuscating, selling, lobbying and misrepresenting their products to investors. Listen Now

ALLAN WOLPER TALKS TO PATRICK KENNEDY April 11, 2012 Former Rhode Island Congressman Patrick Kennedy talks about health care, his mission to eradicate diseases of the brain, his political future, and his extraordinary relationship with his father, the late Sen. Edward Kennedy. Patrick Kennedy and his wife now live in Brigantine, on the New Jersey shore. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Bill de Blasio and Chirlane McCray April 4, 2012 New York Mayor Bill de Blasio, and his wife Chirlane McCray, spoke of their hopes to end the disparity between rich and poor of New york a year before he won the Democratic nomination for Mayor and the general election. De Blasio, then the New York City Public Advocate, also explained why he changed his to de Blasio from Warren Wilhelm, Jr. They are the first interracial couple in the city's history to live in Gracie Mansion --the official residence of the of the mayor of the city of New York. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Eliot Spitzer February 29, 2012 Eliot Spitzer was the 54th Governor of New York. He was elected by a landslide vote in 2006 only to resign fourteen months later after being exposed as a client in a prostitution ring. The Governor's resignation angered many of his supporters, who felt he had been set up by the very wall street profiteers he pursued as attorney general. He later attempted a political combat, but lost the Democratic primary for New York City comptroller. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Nancy Schiliro February 22, 2012 Once a marine, always a marine. Lance Corporal Nancy Schiliro lost her eye as a result of a mortar explosion in Iraq. She returned home to New York battered and depressed. The Wounded Warrior Organization gave her the will to fight her way back. Now she is helping other injured veterans return to a normal life. Schiliro is an inspiration to all Americans. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Donna Lieberman February 1, 2012 Donna Lieberman is the former executive director of the New York American Civil Liberties Union, champions causes that are popular and unpopular. Her intense interest in protecting civil liberties was inspired by her father, who was persecuted for his ideals during the McCarthy era in the 1950's. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Dr. Vino, aka Tyler Colman December 29, 2011 Dr. Vino is the pseudonym for Dr. Tyler Colman, a world renowned blogger who monitors the wine industry. Colman gained widespread attention after he disclosed that some wine critics accepted payments from European vineyards they were covering. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Nancy Gruskin December 22, 2011 Nancy Gruskin became the most influential lobbyist for bicycle safety in New York City after her husband, Stuart, was killed crossing 43rd Street near Fifth Avenue by a food delivery man riding the wrong way on a bicycle. Gruskin, a former music teacher, is a single mother raising her teenage twins in Westfield, New Jersey. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Josh Rushing December 13, 2011 Former United States Marine Captain Josh Rushing is a host and correspondent for the highly acclaimed Al Jazeera English documentary series Fault Lines. Al Jazeera English is owned by the Middle Eastern nation of Qatar and provides an international view of American news. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Elsie McCabe Thompson October 19, 2011 Elsie McCabe Thompson is the former president of the Museum for African Art, a spectacular new building on New York's City's Museum Mile. McCabe-Thompson describes the 27 year campaign to find a home for the historic project. She was chief of staff for former New York Mayor David Dinkins and is the wife of Bill Thompson, who almost defeated Michael Bloomberg in New York's 2009 mayoral election. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to James Edward McGreevey October 10, 2011 Former New Jersey Governor James Edward McGreevey resigned 10 ago after admitting he was a gay American and acknowledging he appointed his lover as the head of homeland security in the administration -- a job for which had no qualifications. McGreevey is once again active in politics and hopes someday to become a priest in the Episcopal Church. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Eleanor Perfetto October 8, 2011 Dr. Eleanor Perfetto, professor of Pharmaceutical Health Services in the School of Pharmacy at The University of Maryland, spent years of her life tending to her husband, Ralph Wenzel, a former offensive lineman for The Pittsburgh Steelers, The San Diego Chargers, and The St. Louis Cardinals. He died four years ago suffering from a severe case of dementia -- a condition she said was the result of too many hits from his days in football. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talk to Tony Lo Bianco September 16, 2011 Tony Lo Bianco has starred in numerous movies and television shows, but his signature performance is his one man show recreating the late New York Mayor Fiorello LaGuardia. He became a Hollywood star after his role in the classic mob movie, The French Connection. One of his most memorable New York City oments: batting against Sandy Koufax in a high school baseball game. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Masha Hamilton June 15, 2011 Masha Hamilton, a former foreign correspondent for The Associated Press, Los Angeles Times and NBC Mutual Radio, has written four novels. Her novel,The Camel Bookmobile,described how camels delivered library books to children in the most remote areas of Kenya. She also started a writing project for women in Afghanistan. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Alan Newton May 18, 2011 Alan Newton, who spent 22 years in prison for a rape crime he did not commit, recently won a Federal Appeals Court decision that will reinstate a jury decision to award him $18.5 million. In 2006, he was freed after police found evidence that had been missing for almost two decades. A subsequent DNA test totally exonerated him. Newton then sued New York City. In October 2010, a jury awarded him $18.5 million.But in a shocking decision, the trial judge overturned the jury verdict. Newton, now 51, the co-founder of a City University of New York program that helps former inmates transition back to society. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Christine Dennison April 19, 2011 Christine Dennison, is an explorer who leads expeditions to the most remote corners of civilization. She swims with sharks and piranhas in the Amazon rain forest and underwater caves of the Caribbean. She has logged over a hundred dives under the polar ice caps in the extremely harsh conditions of the High Arctic. A true adventurer she has been honored by winning admission as a fellow into the exclusive Explorers club. Christine Dennison is a founder and president of Mad Dog Expeditions. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Jayne Anne Phillips March 11, 2011 Jayne Anne Phillips, director of The Masters of Fine Arts in Creative Writing at Rutgers University in Newark,is a writer who has won world wide recognition. Her 2009 novel, "Lark and Termite," was a finalist for The National Book Award. "Black Tickets", her collection of short stories, was lauded by literary giants like John Irving, Annie Dillard and Tim O'Brien. Raymond Carver said, "She is an original and this book of hers is a crooked beauty." (Photo credit: Elena Seibert) Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to David Carr February 8, 2011 The late David Carr of The New York Times overcame drug and alcohol problems to become one of the most powerful media and culture writers in the country. He retraces his journalism trek to The Times from the Twin City Reader in Minneapolis and analyzes the incredible burdens that technology has placed on today's journalists. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to David Paterson January 3, 2011 Former Governor David Paterson, the first African American to run New York State, says the media treated him as an "affirmative action" chief executive. In a one hour interview before he left office, Paterson said the print press was responsible for much of the distortion of his record. He said they underplayed and undervalued his accomplishments. (Photo by: Inga Korsgaard) Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Frank Lucas November 17, 2010 Frank Lucas was a Harlem drug king -- smuggling massive shipments of pure heroin to the United States from Southeast Asia on military transports. His life was given the full Hollywood treatment in the movie, American Gangster, with Denzel Washington playing the role of the one time drug king. Now 84 years old, Lucas counsels teenagers to remain in school and stay drug free. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Sean O'Brien October 13, 2010 Sean O'Brien is now a special assistant to Vice President Joseph Biden. He was the former chief of staff for Chicago Congressman Mike Quigley by day and a former night club comic who used to satirize Quigley boss and other Washington, D.C. elected officials. O'Brien's material was so devastating that the House Ethics Committee had thoughts of censoring him. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Teri Thompson August 5, 2010 Teri Thompson, sports editor of the New York Daily News, discuses the the growing number of stories on sex, steroids and crime that have become so common on America's sports pages. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Bruce McCall July 8, 2010 Bruce McCall once drew a cover for New Yorker magazine in which a group of gorillas stood around the Empire State Building waiting to audition for King Kong. McCall, an artist and satirist, shares his zany vision of American culture. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to David Dinkins about his legacy June 9, 2010 David Dinkins made political history in 1990 when he was sworn in as the first African American mayor of New York City. Dinkins, now a Columbia University professor, reflects on his historic journey and analyzes the mayors who preceded and followed him into office. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Dr. David Livingston April 27, 2010 Dr. David Livingston has operated on the most horrific trauma cases, including victims of gun shot wounds, car crashes and people under falling cranes in Louisville, New York City and Newark. He is the director of the New Jersey Trauma Center at the University Hospital at the University of Medicine and Dentistry in Newark. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Joseph Klempner February 11, 2010 Joseph Klempner Teller is a mystery writer who learned about the seedy side of life as a former undercover agent for the the Federal Bureau of Narcotics (now the Drug Enforcement Agency) and later as a defense attorney fighting injustice in New York City criminal courtrooms. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Rachel Noerdlinger January 4, 2010 Rachel Noerdlinger is the chief of staff for Chirlane McCray, wife of New York Mayor Bill de Blasio. In this interview in 2010, she spoke out about a variety of issues confronting New York City and her work as the brains behind the Rev. Al Sharpton. At the time she was very concerned about stop and frisk operations by the New York City police department. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Alicia C. Shepard November 20, 2009 Alicia C. Shepard, the former Ombudsman for National Public Radio, had an impossible job: She had to explain NPR to its audience and its audience to NPR. She also checked out the complaints fired at her network and sometimes joins the critical chorus on her NPR blog. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Fred Kaplan October 21, 2009 Fred Kaplan has spent a large part of his creative life in 1959, reliving a year he says changed everything in American life. Like the dawn of the birth control pill, the birth of the microchip, and the making of Motown. Kaplan is the war stories columnist for Slate and has lots to say about the new administration in the White House. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Bill Thompson August 27, 2009 Bill Thompson, the New York City Comptroller, is suddenly making a strong showing in the polls against Mayor Michael Bloomberg in the 2009 New York City mayoral election. Thompson talks of growing up in Bedford Stuyvesant in Brooklyn. He reacted with no emotion to then Newark Mayor Cory Booker's surprise endorsement of Bloomberg and President Obama's weak support of Thompson's campaign. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Andrew Rosenthal July 24, 2009 Andrew Rosenthal, the who stepped down in April, 2016 as editorial page editor of The New York Times, explained the process that produces the most read and debated section of the newspaper. He describes how he handles the furor that always follows a political endorsement and the diplomacy he uses to diffuse irate complaints from celebrities like Barbra Streisand. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Matthew Bogdanos June 17, 2009 Marine Reserve Colonel Matthew Bogdanos is on a mission to capture the thieves who looted thousands of priceless antiquities from the Iraq National Museum. Bogdanos says collectors pay millions of dollars for the stolen treasures, money often used by insurgents to buy weapons to fight American troops in Iraq. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Layla Fanucci May 20, 2009 For 25 years, Layla Fanucci, played a guitar, sang and taught music at the St. Helena Catholic School in California. But her life changed after she bought some paint at a Ben Franklin store. Now she gets up to $100,000 for her cityscapes of Paris and New York City. She made her New York debut at the Walter Wickiser gallery in Chelsea. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Steve Baruch April 23, 2009 Steve Baruch, a producer of Hairspray, Gypsy, Young Frankenstein, and The Producers, sent Allan Wolper a letter asking to invest in one of his plays on Broadway. Allan made a counter offer: an interview at WBGO. And here it is. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Annette Gordon-Reed March 7, 2009 Annette Gordon-Reed, a professor at Harvard, is an authority on the intimate relationship between Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings,a slave on Jefferson's plantation. Ms. Gordon-Reed said one of the reasons she wrote the book was to prove that African Americans could write about white politicians. She has won both a Pulitzer Prize and a National Book Award. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Hal Friedman January 30, 2009 Hal Friedman, a New York advertising executive, tells why he went inside his son's head to a write a painful, yet uplifting tale called Against Medical Advice. It's a story about his son's struggle to overcome Tourette Syndrome, a disorder that mystifies much of the medial profession. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Willie Kathryn Suggs December 19, 2008 Willie Kathryn Suggs, often called the Queen of Harlem Real Estate, gives listeners an insiders view of Harlem's housing history--starting with the days that African Americans and Jews were forbidden by convenant to buy there to the present boom of foreign investment, eminent domain disputes, and class and racial discord. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Joel Simon November 28, 2008 Joel Simon, executive director of The Committee To Protect Journalists, says Mexican editors and reporters are assassination targets because of their exposure of the massive drug dealings on American borders. Simon warns that violence against journalists is increasing around the world -- presenting a serious threat to democracies everywhere. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Janis Karpinski September 23, 2008 Janis Karpinski, the former army general in charge of the notorious Abu Grahib prison in Iraq, speaks about the controversial tactics American soldiers used on their prisoners. Miss Karpinski, who many claim was scapegoated in the torture scandal, gives her version of what she says is a dark chapter in U.S. military history. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Natalie Bauman August 29, 2008 Natalie Bauman and her husband buy and sell rare books worth from one thousand to one million dollars. Ms. Bauman says the rare volumes contain untold stories of American literary history and explains how her hobby became her passion and her profession. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Maurice "Mickey" Carroll July 9, 2008 Maurice "Mickey" Carroll, assistant director of the Quinnipiac University Polling Institute, is a former political writer for the New York Times, Newsday, The New York Post, The Star Ledger, and The Passaic Herald News. He explains how polls are conducted, who the pollsters are, how they're trained and the impact they have on various issues, including presidential races. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to David Fisher June 4, 2008 Author-Journalist David Fisher talks about the celebrities he has written about and worked with,an incredible list that includes William Shatner, Muhammad Ali, George Burns, Johnnie Cochran and Joan Rivers. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Ron Kuby May 16, 2008 Ron Kuby is a civil rights attorney who has spent his entire career representing the underdogs and underpriviledged in American society. Kuby explains how the media sometimes convicts criminal suspects in the court of public opinion. He is co host of a radio program with Curtis Sliwa. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Jeremy Schaap April 8, 2008 Jeremy Schaap is a host and reporter for ESPN's Outside The Lines and E:60 and the author of Triumph: The Untold Story of Jesse Owens and Hitler's Olympics. Schaap retells the heroics of Owens and other American track and field stars and debunks the myths of the 1936 games. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Steve Rubel March 7, 2008 Steve Rubel of Edelman Worldwide is an expert on cyber communications and marketing. He brings listeners up to speed on what's happening with blogs, the increasing number of so called "screen suckers," and how they're now a part of the political game. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Lauren Thierry Watkins December 20, 2007 Lauren Thierry Watkins produced the documentary, "Autism Every Day," which created a sensation at the 2007 Sundance Film Festival and was shown on the Sundance Channel in 2008. She discusses what it's been like to raise Liam, her son who has autistim. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Richie Roberts November 16, 2007 Richie Roberts is the former prosecutor and detective who prosecuted Harlem drug lord Frank Lucas, a story chronicled in the movie, American Gangster. Roberts, portrayed by Russell Crowe in the movie, explains how street level drug dealers used the movie's promotion to sell their drugs. Roberts later became the godfather of Frank Lucas' son. Listen Now

Allan Wolper talks to Marcellus Bishop Allen November 12, 2007 Marcellus "Bishop" Allen is the president of SOS and a leader of the Bloods. Allen played a key role in arranging a truce between the Bloods,the Crips, and the Latin Kings in Newark, New Jersey.He's a former clerk-typist for the Newark Board of Education and advises on gang activity in the New York/New Jersey metro area. Listen Now