Mitt Romney Talks Medicare in Exclusive Interview with Action 2
Republican Presidential Candidate Mitt Romney took a break from the campaign trail Wednesday and spoke exclusively to Matt Smith of Action 2 News.



The big issue--Medicare and how he's quickly trying to distance himself from parts of running mate Paul Ryan's budget plan.

The video of our full interview with Romney is posted above

Here's some of our conversation with candidate Romney on the topic:



Action 2 News: Your senior campaign advisor said Sunday if the Ryan Budget would have come to your desk you would have signed it. In a January debate you called it a proposal that was absolutely right on. So I guess why are you distancing yourself from at least the Medicare portion of the Ryan Budget?



Romney: Actually, Paul Ryan and my plan for Medicare, I think, is the same if not identical--it's probably close to identical. Our plan is for people 55 years of age and older. There's no change. The only change I'd mention for 55 or older is we'd restore the $817 billion President Obama took out of the Medicare trust fund.



The former Governor cites the wrong number here--talking about The Affordable Care Act. Actually, it's $716 billion in reductions--a number the campaign has been trying to hammer in the past few days. We clarify during the interview:



Action 2 News: And you're referring to that $716 billion estimate?



Romney: The $716 billion is what the President takes out of the Medicare trust fund to help pay for Obamacare. I think seniors will be outraged to learn money they put into medicare is going to be siphoned off.



Ryan's budget, which passed the Republican-controlled House, would have included many of the same reductions as the President's. Romney says they're not running on the Ryan Budget.



Action 2 News: Critics, though, will say while you say you're on the same page as Congressman Ryan you are providing no examples of the differences - one you mention is the more than $700 billion being cut.



Romney: Well, I'm not sure what critics you're referring to, but what I can tell you is Paul Ryan in joining my Presidential team is on board with my policy... The place there's a big difference is between myself and Paul Ryan and the President. The President has a very different plan. By the way, of course, individuals are going to have some differences even among those in the same party but nothing compares with the difference we have with President Obama.



Action 2 News also spoke with President Obama's Deputy Campaign Manager Stephanie Cutter. She's calling the Romney assertions over Medicare "attacks and lies."



Cutter: What we did - we strengthened the program - we gave them additional benefits, prescriptions drugs, we closed the prescription drug loophole. We gave them access to preventive care. So I want to be clear about this--the President strengthened Medicare. There's only one candidate in this race who happens to be Mitt Romney who has a proposal on the table that would weaken Medicare. The only way they find savings in Medicare is by increasing costs on seniors. The proposal that's on the table by independent analysts, not by me, would add costs to seniors by up to six-thousand dollars.



Action 2 News: That $6000, though Stephanie, you obviously know that was an old proposal of Ryan's and not in his current budget?



Cutter: And you understand in his current budget - they can't score - they can't give an estimate because they don't have enough details on the table. But just a year ago Paul Ryan had a budget on the table that turned Medicare into a voucher program.



Click here to view the full interview with Cutter.