Welcome to WCCF
Wisconsin has made significant headway in keeping children safe from firearms, but progress has stalled in recent years. Between 1999 and 2009, the number of children killed with guns dropped by more than a third, but since 2010 the number of children killed each year has stayed fairly level Continue reading →

Medicaid and the closely related Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) are a partnership between states and the federal government to provide access to health care services for low-income children, pregnant women, adults, seniors, and people with disabilities. Read more… … Continue reading →

Boosted by sound federal, state and local policy investments, Wisconsin’s children experienced marked progress in well-being placing the state 12th in the nation for overall child well-being, according to 2017 KIDS COUNT® Data Book. The annual Data Book uses 16 … Continue reading →

The Senate’s latest health bill will hurt many Wisconsinites whether they are on BadgerCare, receiving insurance through the marketplace, or have insurance through their employer. New analyses of the bill show that it will increase the number of people without … Continue reading →

Senate Health Plan Erases Wisconsin Gains in Insurance Coverage Over the past few years, the number of uninsured Wisconsinites has been significantly reduced. However, the positive downward trend is likely to be reversed under the Senate’s proposal to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act and make huge cuts … Continue reading →

The “Pay More for Less” Health Plan As long as the Senate is changing the name of the “American Health Care Act” (AHCA), they ought to come up with something that paints a more accurate picture of the bill. Rather than their dull and misleading title, the … Continue reading →

A Similar but Meaner Health Bill for WI Children and Families After the American Health Care Act (AHCA) passed the House in early May, there was a lot of talk from many in the Senate on how they would “start from scratch” to build a much better and more popular bill. … Continue reading →

Congressional Plans to Gut the ACA and Medicaid will Reverse Gains Made in Children’s Access to Care The Senate is considering even deeper cuts to Medicaid funding than those proposed by the House in the American Health Care Act. These cuts would negatively impact the gains made in health care access for children across the nation. A … Continue reading →

More Blog Posts