Fact Check: Has Nikki Haley 'Accidentally Confessed' to an Affair With Donald Trump?
Amid the flurry of rumors stemming from Michael Wolff’s book Fire and Fury, U.N. ambassador Nikki Haley has faced accusations that she had an affair with Donald Trump, accusations which she has denied.

It’s fitting that a rumor-mill would also produce pure fake news.

Real Time Politics (not to be confused with Real Clear Politics, a legitimate outlet) posted a story with the asinine headline, “Nikki Haley Just ACCIDENTALLY Confessed To Being ‘Romantically Involved’ With Trump!”

The fake headline gained popularity on Facebook.

The strange thing, however, is that the article never mentions that Haley confessed to anything but instead accurately quotes her interview with Politico and presents a rewording of The Hill’s report (which is a rehashing of Politico’s original report after the interview).

Here is the Hill’s opening paragraph:

U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley is ripping online rumors suggesting she's having an affair with President Trump as "disgusting" and "offensive" — and typical of the treatment of women in powerful positions.

Then comes the third-grader-cheating-off-a-friend’s-paper rewording from Real Time Politics:

U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Nikki Haley is tearing into the online rumors claiming that she is having an affair with President Trump as “disgusting” and “offensive” as well an unfair evaluation of women in powerful positions.

This sort of copying appears in tandem with most every paragraph of the article. The post also shows up on a site with the URL Full Reporter.com that appears to replicate Real Time Politics.

Conclusion: No, Haley did not confess to anything. She did the exact opposite.

If you have questions about this fact check, or would like to submit a request for another fact check, email Holmes Lybrand at hlybrand@weeklystandard.com or the Weekly Standard at factcheck@weeklystandard.com. For details on TWS Fact Check, see our explainer here.