:: WELSPUN ::
As a US$ 2.3 billion company, Welspun Group is one of India’s fastest growing conglomerates, registered at a CAGR of 30% over the last decade. Welspun is a fully integrated player within the Pipes, Plates & Coils and Home Textiles sector, while it also has a presence in the other business verticals such as Steel, Infrastructure and Energy. As a globally recognised leader in the fields of Line Pipes and Home Textiles, Welspun Group has captured a strong foothold in more than 50 Countries, it employs over 25,000 people and has as many as 100,000+ shareholders.



Through a vast global footprint, the company has leveraged many business association with a marquee of esteemed clients, especially within the Oil & Gas and Retail sectors where most companies are listed in the Fortune 100. Among the group’s subsidiaries are Welspun USA, Welspun Tubular LLC, Welspun Middle East and Welspun UK.



In the Line Pipe sector, Welspun has to its credit some of the most prestigious projects including the world’s deepest pipeline project in the Gulf of Mexico, U.S.A; heaviest pipeline project in the Persian Gulf; highest LNG pipeline project in Peru and longest pipeline project from Canada to the US.



While in the Home Textiles sector, Welspun is the largest integrated towel manufacturer in Asia, a leading supplier to 17 of the top 30 Global retailers, and a global supplier offering the entire range of products within the segment.



Welspun’s manufacturing base sits in its core facilities at Anjar, Gujarat, while other units are diversified in different parts of India with one plant each in USA and Saudi Arabia.



Behind this rapid rise to prominence is a story of vision, foresight, planning and excellence. It is this willingness to face challenges that has made Welspun a recognized name as the one who pushes boundaries only to emerge victorious as a innovative solution provider that dares to commit.



Welspun is proactively involved in a highly developed CSR programme which focus on the three ‘E's - Education, Empowerment & Health and Environment. With an aim to give back to the society, the company has driven an entire campaign to empower the underprivileged and establishing a sustainable business model that takes care of the environment. The social activities aren’t just limited to high profile projects, in fact every Welspunite is encouraged to contribute to the community in any small way they can.