Revealed: Navy Officer Did Something Heroic During Chattanooga Shooting, But May Be PUNISHED For It
A Navy officer and Marine reportedly returned fire at the shooter who killed five service members in Chattanooga, Tenn., even though current policy does not permit military members to carry firearms on facilities such as those where the attack occurred.

Mohammod Abdulazeez was slain last Thursday after allegedly firing dozens of shots at two separate military facilities, including the Navy Operational Support Center in Chattanooga. The cold-blooded assault killed four Marines and one active-duty Navy reservist.

The center’s commanding officer, Lt. Cmdr. Timothy White, used his personal firearm to engage the shooter during the attack, according to sources quoted in the Navy Times. A report from The Washington Post said that one of the Marines killed in the shooting might have been carrying a 9 mm Glock and possibly returned fire on Abdulazeez. The Navy officer could face disciplinary action for violating policy about possessing a weapon on the facility that was supposed a gun-free zone.

The investigation into the attack is ongoing, and authorities will not know if White or the Marine hit Abdulazeez until an autopsy and a ballistics report have been completed. The recruiting center, the other building at which the gunman fired, was reopened Monday.

The chairmen of both the House and Senate Armed Services committees, Rep. Mac Thornberry, R-Texas, and Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., have proposed a measure in this year’s renewal of the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) allowing members of the military to carry firearms on base, they said in a joint statement.

Long before the Chattanooga attack, we had been working to clarify a post commander’s authority to allow carrying of personal firearms. This year’s National Defense Authorization Act will reflect that work. Together, we will direct the Pentagon to end the disconnect between the threats our warfighters and their families face and the tools they have to defend themselves.

h/t: WZTV

TRENDING: LiAngelo Ball Tells Truth About The Day He Said ‘Thank You’ To President

Are you in favor of arming the military on base? Share your thoughts in the comments section below.