West Kentucky Star
McConnell's Paducah Speech Spurs Protests

By Adam Morton

PADUCAH, KY - Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell was in Paducah Wednesday to talk about healthcare reform, the economy and other issues.The senator spoke at the Carson Center at the Paducah Rotary Club luncheon. The biggest discussion of the day was on healthcare reform.McConnell said that replacement of the current healthcare system should be a main point in this Republican government. McConnell said he knows there are some that think the current system works well.McConnell said, "The status quo is not sustainable." McConnell did not give any specifics on the current republican plan to repeal and replace. He addressed how deeply divided the country is over healthcare. "Unfortunately, this healthcare issue has been a very divisive and partisan issue." McConnell said.McConnell also addressed the private health insurance market. McConnell said, The private insurance market is collapsing all across the country." McConnell said that the legislation would have to be repealed and replaced at the same time.Not everyone agreed with McConnell's point of view. A group of about 20 concerned citizens protested McConnell's views on health care.Jennifer Smith is a concerned citizen who protested at the event. "Honestly, I lived in Canada for 12 years. I do believe the single payer system is best." Smith said. Smith said if the Affordable Care Act has problems, the government should fix those, not start from scratch.Leslie McColgin, who works as speech therapist, says the plan to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act would destroy Medicaid. McColgin said, "This bill is going to be devastating in terms of services that will be cut."She added that there are already problems in Medicaid, which funding cuts would only exacerbate.McConnell said he respected the protesters' opinions, but he doesn't think a single payer system is best for the country. As for Medicaid, McConnell said, "Nothing we've advocated so far would cause anyone currently on Medicaid to come off of it."