9 Investigates: State senator weighs in on controversial...
Some parents are demanding answers because they believe a history textbook in Seminole County schools is teaching religion and not just history.

On Tuesday, 9 Investigates' Daralene Jones asked one state senator about the controversial book.

Sen. David Simmons thanked 9 Investigates for bringing the controversy to his attention, saying he had some serious concerns.

Raw: Dad discusses thoughts on Islamic lessons

Raw: School district spokesman storms out of interview

Raw: Full interview with school district

Some parents are demanding answers because they believe a history textbook in Seminole County schools is teaching religion and not just history.

On Tuesday, 9 Investigates' Daralene Jones asked one state senator about the controversial book.

Sen. David Simmons thanked 9 Investigates for bringing the controversy to his attention, saying he had some serious concerns.

Simmons believes the district needs to reconsider using the book and said his office is working to set up a meeting with administrators.

Hundreds on Channel 9's Facebook page are still debating whether teachings about Islam inside a Seminole County high school went too far.

"I'm concerned about the emphasis that exists with respect to that, and I believe that these are things that need to be reviewed," said Simmons.

One chapter in the book is dedicated to the rise of Islam, including details about the Five Pillars and quotes from the Quran.

Hassan Shibly executive director of CAIR Florida, a Muslim civil rights groups, said, "Ignorance is our worst enemy, because when we don't know each other that's when we start to fear each other."

Ron Wagner, the father who brought the story to 9 Investigates' attention is pushing to have the book removed from Seminole County schools. He said these types of religious teachings go too far.

Wagner's frustration was further fueled by a required prayer rug assignment in his son's class.

Simmons helped pass a bill last year that gives school districts more flexibility to change out its textbooks. It requires a hearing process and has to be pushed by parents.

"If they're not satisfied with what the school board has done to follow through with the petition procedure that exists," said Simmons.

Shibly argues there is no way to teach history without including his faith.

"Religions heavily influenced the worlds we live in today," he said.

Shibly and his group have fought throughout the state, including Volusia County, to keep the book in classrooms.