Transcript: FBI Director James Comey’s press briefing remarks on the San Bernardino terror investigation – Part 1
Part 1 of 3. Partial transcript of FBI Director James Comey’s press briefing remarks on the San Bernardino terror investigation. The joint press conference with NYPD Police Chief William Bratton was held on Dec. 16, 2015:

…They are communicating online, showing signs in that communication of their joint commitment to jihad and to martyrdom. Those communications are direct private messages.

So far in this investigation, we have found no evidence of posting on social media by either of them at that period of time and thereafter reflecting their commitment to jihad or to martyrdom. I’ve seem some reporting on that and that’s a garble. Right? The investigation continues but we have not found that kind of thing. These communications are private direct messages, not social media messages.

…

We still see in San Bernardino no indication of direct contact with foreign terrorist organizations. Obviously, that would include any direction from foreign terrorist organization. We still have not seen evidence, although we constantly look for it or are still working on it that they are part of an organized cell of some sort or that there were other parts to this plan.

But one of the things we’re trying to understand is so where were they for four hours after the attack and what else, if anything, they were planning to do and was there anybody who helped them or assisted them or supported them in some way.

Now, with respect to family members, I’m not yet in a position to comment on that. I am highly confident that in this case as in nearly all of our cases involving radicalization that somebody saw something that was concerning and obviously didn’t tell law enforcement but I’m not ready to talk about that yet.

…

I don’t know what devices. They were using an Internet service provider communication. I don’t want to name their particular provider but one of the very common Internet service providers that provides email service and direct message.

…

There are a couple of reasons we say constantly the two of us if you say something say something. One is it helps us. As we look back through our cases, the people had seen things if they had told them about it we might have been able to make a difference.

We also think it contributes to a more healthy response by folks to the threat. Right? There’s a great deal of anxiety in the land right now and our belief is that people should not be afraid. People should instead channel that sense of fear into something healthy, which is an awareness of surroundings.

People should not be freaked out, right? They’ve invested in a lot of money in us and the people we represent to be effective at investigating and responding to this threat. We’re not perfect but we are a whole lot better than we were at September 11th. So we urge people to channel it into an awareness of your surroundings.

And if you see something tell us and we’ll look into it and live your life. But please do not let these savages accomplish what they want to accomplish. They actually believe that they can freak out America into a way that damages us. Of course, they can’t. Right? But we encourage people to channel it into something healthy and then go on with your lives while we do the work that you pay us to do.

…

Learn More:

Transcript: FBI Director James Comey’s press briefing remarks on the San Bernardino terror investigation – Part 1

Transcript: FBI Director James Comey’s press briefing remarks on the San Bernardino terror investigation – Part 2

Transcript: FBI Director James Comey’s press briefing remarks on the San Bernardino terror investigation – Part 3