Election 2014 Montana Senate debate transcript: Question on Obamacare
Partial transcript of the Montana Senate debate between Republican Steve Daines and Democrat Amanda Curtis on Oct. 20, 2014:

(Incumbent Democratic Sen. John Walsh exited the race due to plagiarism accusations.)

Question:

…You said you want to repeal the Affordable Care Act, and you said you’re interested in replacing it with things like tort reform, health savings accounts, portability of health plans across state lines. But for people who can’t afford health insurance now and haven’t been able to, do you think those things will really help them get health insurance? And do you think we even should have a policy in this country as a goal to get toward some kind of universal health coverage for people can’t afford it and can’t?

Republican Steve Daines:

I believe the answer to the health care problems is to have a Montana-based solution.

And by the way, I did not vote against Obamacare 40 times. Should check my record. I voted against it once to repeal Obamacare. That’s my voting record.

But here’s what we need to do. Tort reform is probably a 10% to 20% savings in defensive medicine costs.

We also need to expand HSAs. Obamacare cut HSAs. We need to expand HSAs.

And number three, we need to allow American people to have a tax deduction who aren’t working for a company to receive that same tax deduction that individuals receive when they work for companies and have employer-sponsored health care plans.

At the end of the day, I don’t want to have a one-sized fits all solution that might work for California or New York. We need a solution that works for Montana, that works for rural Montana.

Those Montanans are living month-to-month on fixed incomes. Those hardworking middle class Montanans that don’t want to see an Obama-centered solution in D.C. They want to see a solution made right here in Montana.

Democrat Amanda Curtis:

We have unfortunately seen one size fits all solutions from Congressman Daines. He has voted along Tea Party lines almost 90% of the time, and that vote to repeal the ACA was one of those.

The fact of the matter is that the ACA provided for our state to expand Medicaid, which would have provided health insurance to the most vulnerable of our citizens. Our legislature dropped the ball on that and I would like to see us continue to improve the ACA and in Montana’s next legislature expand Medicaid for all of our citizens.

Republican Steve Daines:

The Congressional Budget Office just released an update. The problem that the ACA was trying to solve was ensuring that the poor, the disabled, those who can’t afford health care are getting coverage.

The Congressional Budget Office’s own forecast for 2020 said 31 million Americans will still not have health care coverage after the ACA is implemented.

Nancy Pelosi sold the health care system – the ACA – as a $950 billion project. The latest estimate suggests it will be now $1.8 trillion spent and we’ll still have 31 million Americans uninsured – this is after the ACA is implemented.

Democrat Amanda Curtis:

As a math teacher, I really have to just step in here and say that when you look at the cost savings of preventing citizens from having their initial point of contact with the health care system be the emergency room, the amount of money that is saved by this country in the long run is astronomical. That’s a much more realistic way to look at the numbers.

Republican Steve Daines:

And the updated CBO score that came out of the Senate committee just updated last week says the ACA now add $130 billion to our debt. So $1.8 trillion expense, raised taxes, 31 million Americans uninsured, is going to raise the deficit $130 billion. Take a look at that Senate committee report that just reviewed the latest Congressional Budget Office forecast.

Question:

…If they can’t afford health insurance, can they afford health savings accounts or are they going to benefit from tax deductions at all?

Republican Steve Daines:

So here’s what we need to do. We need to solve this problem at the state level. We have states like Indiana, states like Utah – other states are moving forward right now with programs and plans here that will be unique to that state – unique to that state’s needs.

If you think about Montana, what a resident in Winnett might need or Ekalaka might need could be very different than someone living in Bozeman, Billings or Missoula.

So we need to come up with a state focused solution. A great big bureaucracy in Washington, D.C. is not the answer.

Look what the VA has done when it took over that health care system – how veterans are now not getting their care.

Look at Indian Health Services. When the federal government takes over a system, it becomes very expensive and the biggest problem is the poor, the disabled, the elderly are not going to get the care that they need.

Democrat Amanda Curtis:

You know, I would just ask anyone who has voted to repeal the ACA to try to explain that to my mom who has not had health insurance for 31 years but now has access to preventive care and help paying for her prescriptions. Or try to explain that to my new friend that I met the other day who as a health care professional for the first time is considered insurable.

###

Learn More: