Donald Trump accused stage rusher due in court | Dayton News
Thomas DiMassimo was released from jail a few hours after his arrest at the Donald Trump rally at the Dayton International Airport Saturday March 12, 2016. (Contributed)

By Breaking News Staff

UPDATE @ 11:28 a.m. (March 14):

Thomas DiMassimo, 22, has not yet been formally charged after he was accused of jumping over a railing in an attempt to get onto the stage at the Donald Trump rally Saturday near the Dayton International Airport.

Court officials said DiMassimo has been ordered into Dayton Municipal Court tomorrow at 1:30 p.m., but the exact nature of that appearance will be determined depending on formal charges.

DiMassimo was released from the Montgomery County Jail on Saturday afternoon after he posted bond. The 22-year-old had been booked on pending charges of disorderly conduct and inducing panic.

INITIAL REPORT:

The protester who rushed the stage at Donald Trump’s campaign rally in Vandalia told police he preplanned it, according to a police report obtained from the Dayton Police Department.

Protester arrested after rushing stage at Donald Trump rally

After he was booked into the Montgomery County Jail, Thomas DiMassimo, 22, told police all he planned to do was run up on stage, take the microphone and yell, “Donald Trump is a racist,” the report states.

DiMassimo told police he “had no intention of hurting anyone” and said he “preplanned” the incident because “he gave his keys to his girlfriend to take his car home before the rally,” according to the report.

The report, written by one of two Dayton Police officers posted near the stage, said two Secret Service agents and the officer writing the report placed DiMassimo in an airport police cruiser.

DiMassimo told the officer he “was going to urinate in the cruiser if we did not let him out,” the report states.

According to the report, the officer took DiMassimo behind a cruiser and “assisted him to urinate by opening his clothing” while several special agents “shielded” the suspect.

One of the Secret Service agents reported that he saw DiMassimo “grab an unknown citizen by the shoulder and pulled him out of his way,” before jumping the metal fence and run toward the stage, the report states.

DiMassimo was taken down about four feet from the stage and a Secret Service agent “busted his own nose as he fell on top of DiMassimo” while attempting to handcuff him, according to the report.

DiMassimo was charged with “inducing panic because he created a situation of panic among approximately 5,000 citizens,” the report said.

He was also charged with disorderly conduct “because he engaged in a conduct that caused inconvenience, annoyance, and alarm to citizens and Donald Trump that had an effect which interrupted the speech,” according to the report.