News Release From Carole Keeton Strayhorn
For Immediate Release:

Wednesday, March 10, 2004 Contact: Sheila Clancy

512-463-4070

Strayhorn Kicks Off "Project: Pay Up"

Comptroller Urges Delinquent Taxpayers to Pay Up Now or Pay More Later

(Austin)--Texas Comptroller Carole Keeton Strayhorn today announced Project: Pay Up, a three-week amnesty period aimed at collecting unpaid taxes owed by Texas businesses. From March 11 through March 31, 2004, taxpayers can come forward, pay their past due taxes in full, and the Comptroller will waive penalty and interest charges normally assessed against delinquent taxpayers.

Strayhorn estimates Project: Pay Up will bring in $50 million in delinquent state tax revenue and an additional $9 million owed to local governments.

The 78th Legislature authorized the tax amnesty, recommended by Strayhorn in her 2003 report Limited Government, Unlimited Opportunity.

"I'm looking out for Texas and looking out for the honest, hardworking Texans who pay their taxes and bear the burden when others don't pay their fair share," Strayhorn said. "This one-time waiver of penalty and interest will bring in tax dollars we might not collect otherwise. These are dollars we need to educate our children, to help our children who need medical care and to provide other services vital to Texans.

"The last time the State of Texas offered a tax amnesty was in 1991," Strayhorn said. "This is indeed a rare opportunity for businesses with unpaid, unreported or under-reported taxes to wipe the slate clean. They can pay their taxes and avoid penalty and interest. They can pay up now or pay more later, when we seize their business and padlock their doors."

The Project: Pay Up amnesty period applies to sales tax, franchise tax and all other state and local taxes and fees administered by the state Comptroller except Unclaimed Property and PUC Gross Receipts Assessments. It applies to taxes that were due anytime before February 1, 2004.

Strayhorn urges taxpayers to visit her Web site at www.window.state.tx.us/taxinfo/amnesty, call 1-800-252-7942 or go to their nearest Comptroller field office to learn all of the details about Project: Pay Up. Tax reporting forms are available on the Comptroller's Web site. To ensure that delinquent tax reports and payments are processed as amnesty filings, taxpayers must write "Tax Amnesty" at the top of tax reports, and on checks, cashier's checks and money orders. Tax reports and payments should be mailed to:

Tax Amnesty

Comptroller of Public Accounts

P.O. Box 13232

Austin, TX 78711



--30--