Winchester Star
WINCHESTER -- Thirty-three Valley Health employees were laid off today.

Valley Health President and CEO Mark Merrill - who is also the Winchester Medical Center president - said the layoffs were necessary to cut costs in the face of declining patient volumes, payment cuts stemming from the Affordable Care Act and Virginia lawmakers' decision thus far not to expand Medicaid coverage to hundreds of thousands more Virginians.

Merrill said nine management-level positions were included in the job losses.

"They were across the organization," he said. "Some of those are in director roles. Some are in manager roles."

Some of those eliminated positions were at Valley Medical Transport, which is a non-emergency management service.

The majority of the laid-off staffers - about 60 percent - worked at Winchester Medical Center, according to a news release from Valley Health. Warren Memorial Hospital, Shenandoah Memorial Hospital, Page Memorial Hospital, Hampshire Memorial Hospital and War Memorial Hospital all lost one employee each. Additionally, four employees had their hours cut.

The cuts came on top of the elimination of 25 vacant positions today. In 2013, the health system eliminated about 100 vacant positions, laid off 17 workers, and reduced the hours for another eight.

"There's minimal impact on the nursing side in particular," Merrill said regarding the terminations.

Winchester Medical Center opened up its North Tower about two years ago, and the expected patient increase hasn't coincided, Merrill said.

"We anticipated greater volume growth that hasn't materialized," he said.

Additionally, as part of the Affordable Care Act, hospitals agreed to some Medicare payment reductions in 2010. Medicare was further impacted by the sequestration, Merrill said. He said the hospital industry agreed to the reductions with the understanding that Medicaid rolls would be expanded, decreasing the level of uncompensated care at hospitals.

With Virginia not signing on to Medicaid expansion, "we sort of got the double whammy," Merrill said.

Merrill said he plans to speak to state legislators about the issue. The General Assembly convened Wednesday afternoon.

"I will urge Medicaid expansion and reform," he said.



See Thursday's Winchester Star for more details.