Congresswoman Frederica Wilson : Press Releases : CONGRESSWOMAN FREDERICA WILSON KEEPS PRESSURE ON FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO STOP CLOSURE OF NORTH PERRY AIRPORT TOWER
Miami, FL — Congresswoman Frederica Wilson (FL-24) will hold a news conference and tour the air traffic control tower at North Perry Airport today, in an effort to save the tower from closure due to the Congressionally-mandated “sequester.” The tour of the North Perry Airport control tower is scheduled for 10:00 a.m. The news conference will be held at the tower base at 11:00 a.m. Congresswoman Wilson will be joined by Pembroke Pines Mayor Frank Ortis, Miramar Mayor Lori C. Moseley, Broward County Commissioner Sue Gunzburger, air traffic controllers and officials from the Broward County Aviation Department. The tower at North Perry Airport is one of 149 contract towers, nationally, designated for closure.

Congresswoman Wilson submitted an official letter, also signed by Congresswoman Debbie Wasserman-Schultz (FL-23), and Congressman Alcee Hastings (FL-20), calling on FAA Administrator Michael Huerta to grant a special exemption for the airport, given its importance to the regional economy and air traffic safety. Congresswoman Wilson, who fought successfully to keep the control tower at Opa-Locka Airport open, issued the following statement on behalf of North Perry Airport:

“North Perry Airport is the 9th busiest contract tower in the nation. It offers crucial backup and aviation relief to Hollywood Fort Lauderdale International Airport. With five flight schools and numerous commercial operations, the airport is essential for aviation training, helicopter operators, and banner planes. An operational control tower is critical to aviation regulation and to the safety of pilots and passengers in the event of an aircraft accident or emergency.

While it’s good news that the Broward County Board of Commissioners has agreed to temporarily finance control tower operations at North Perry Airport, out of the county’s budget through September 30th, it’s clear that this funding will not be sustainable. Without reinstatement of FAA funding, the tower will again face the threat of closure, which would have dangerous consequence for our community and the broader aviation network.

As a strong opponent of the “sequester,” I understand that the FAA now faces unique challenges. But I strongly urge Administrator Michael Huerta to consider the dramatic impact that closing the tower at North Perry Airport will have both locally and nationally,” said Congresswoman Wilson.

WHO: Congresswoman Frederica Wilson, Pembroke Pines Mayor Frank Ortis,

Miramar Mayor Lori C. Moseley, Broward County Commissioner Sue Gunzburger,

a representative from Congressman Alcee Hastings office, Broward County

Aviation Department Director of Administration & Strategic Planning Doug

Webster and North Perry Airport Air Traffic Manager Ron Brinson.

WHAT: News Conference and Tour of North Perry Airport Air Traffic Control Tower

WHEN: Thursday, April 4, 2013, Tower Tour 10:00 a.m., News conference 11:00 a.m., at the

base of the control tower

WHERE: North Perry Airport, 7801 South Airport Road, Pembroke Pines, Florida 33023

###

U.S. Rep. Frederica S. Wilson is a second-term Congresswoman from Florida representing parts of Northern Miami-Dade and Southeast Broward counties. A former state legislator and school principal, she is the founder of the 5000 Role Models for Excellence Project, a mentoring program for young males at risk of dropping out of school.