Two charged in home invasion
A burglary investigation has produced multiple charges against two Sauk County men. One is accused of repeated sexual assault of a child.

Charges filed by the Sauk County District Attorney’s Office allege 19-year-old Axel R. Conrad of Wisconsin Dells and 20-year-old Brandon R. Marsala of Reedsburg forced their way into a Baraboo home Thursday evening and tackled a man inside.

Throughout the course of the investigation, investigators spoke with a 15-year-old girl who said she began having sexual relations with Conrad when she was 14.

Investigators also claim Marsala pointed a gun at a young girl and threatened to kill her. He has been charged with criminal trespassing, bail jumping and second-degree reckless endangerment.

According to the criminal complaint, officers were called to a Baraboo home Thursday evening after the occupant reported two men had forced their way inside.

The man told police one of the two men tackled him while the other began looking around the home. The man was able to get the license plate of the getaway vehicle, which he provided to police.

The woman who owned the car told police that Marsala and Conrad had driven her to work that day and taken her vehicle after they dropped her off. She said Marsala later picked her up from work with blood on his face and clothes.

The woman told police Marsala informed her that someone had ripped off Conrad’s friend, so the two men broke into the Baraboo home to beat him up. The two men took a marijuana plant from the home, the woman told police.

Another witness told police that earlier that day she had been “brake checked” by the same vehicle, which was being driven by Conrad at the time.

She told officers Marsala got out of the vehicle and climbed into hers. Marsala was asking her about the whereabouts of a man, the young woman told police, and he threatened to kill her if she didn’t tell him. She said Marsala pointed a pistol at her.

Conrad allegedly sideswiped the woman’s vehicle before Marsala hopped back in with him and they drove off.

One witness told officers she thought Marsala was high on heroin when the incident occurred, because he was slurring his words and nodding his head. She said Conrad was yelling and screaming and seemed “really messed up.”

Authorities also interviewed a 15-year-old girl who said she began having sexual relations with Conrad when she was 14 years old. Conrad allegedly admitted to the allegations.

Conrad faces charges of burglary, criminal trespassing, disorderly conduct, and the repeated sexual assault of a child. He has been jailed on a $500 cash bond and is due to appear in court Feb. 24.

Marsala also has been jailed on a $500 cash bond as well and is due in court Feb. 27.