Campaign Finance Database

Updated: February 14, 2018

Welcome to Wisconsin’s premier searchable digital database of campaign contributors to candidates for state office in Wisconsin. Regularly updated, this database includes records of contributions of $100 or more from individuals to candidates for the Wisconsin Legislature as well as governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, state school superintendent and state Supreme Court justices.

The contributor records in this database generally date back to 1993, although in limited cases contributions dating as far back as 1989 are included. As of 2016, a new state law requires the disclosure of only the occupation of donors who give more than $200 in a calendar year. Previous state law required disclosure of both the occupation and employer of donors who gave more than $100 in a calendar year. Please note that, in general, contributions returned by the candidates are excluded from search results. (Click here to see a description of recent updates to the database.)

You have two options when searching for individual contributors. Use the simple search below to search by contributor, employer, city or candidate or use the advanced search to search by more varied criteria.

Contributions from political action committees (PACs) can be found elsewhere on our website.

Simple Search

Search individual contributions to ALL state candidates: by an Individual Contributor

(Search by last name with a comma. Example: Smith,) or by a Specific Employer or from a Specific City View the contributions to a SPECIFIC candidate: Scott Walker - Governor (R)

All Candidates



Leadership Committees Or mix and match your own search criteria:

Advanced Search



Recent Updates

Updated through February 5, 2018 for candidates in the spring supreme court election

Updated through December 31, 2017 for the governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, secretary of state, treasurer, supreme court justices, superintendent of public instruction, legislative campaign committees and all current legislators.

Updated through June 30, 2017 for the governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general, secretary of state, state treasurer, all current legislators, Supreme Court justices, leadership committees, and 2017 candidates for superintendent of public instruction.

Returned contributions have been removed.