Unemployment in Wisconsin: A Clear Contrast Between Forward vs. Backward
by

The unemployment rate continues to decrease in Wisconsin, as employer confidence and job creation continues to rise under Governor Scott Walker’s leadership. Now, the state’s unemployment rate sits at 5.8% – lower than the national average and the lowest in 5 years. In contrast, when Mary Burke was Commerce Secretary, the state’s unemployment rate was at or above the national average for 20 months – the only time in the last 25 years that it has done so. We can’t afford to return to those policies.

Forward vs. Backward:

Through Scott Walker’s leadership, Wisconsin’s unemployment now stands at 5.8%, the lowest in five years and the 9 th consecutive month it has dropped

consecutive month it has dropped During Mary Burke’s time as Commerce Secretary, the unemployment rate in the state topped the national average for the only time in the last 25 years, having been at or above the national rate for 20 months

When Scott Walker took office, the unemployment rate was 7.8% and over 133,000 jobs had been lost in the Doyle-Burke Administration. Now, the unemployment rate is two points lower, and we have over 100,000 new jobs under Walker – and counting

Under Walker, employer confidence now stands at 95%; At the end of the Doyle-Burke Administration employer confidence was only 10%

Business rankings under Scott Walker: Since taking office, Wisconsin is up 27 spots to now rank 14 th ; Under Mary Burke: Wisconsin went down 8 spots to 33 rd

; Under Mary Burke: Wisconsin went down 8 spots to 33 Our economic rankings have improved and unemployment has dropped each year, which is a stark contrast to Mary Burke’s policies of higher taxes and large deficits that caused Wisconsin’s rankings to plummet and unemployment to rise above the national average

During the Doyle-Burke Administration unemployment peaked at 9.2%; under Governor Walker our unemployment rate is at its lowest in 5 years and is now 5.8%

We can’t afford to go back to policies that bring higher taxes, higher unemployment and job loss. Let’s continue moving forward under Governor Walker’s record of lower unemployment and job creation.





*Comment, Share and retweet on social media to further spread The Republican Party of Wisconsin’s message!