FCSO arrest 8 in connection to alleged dog fighting ring - WMBFNews.com, Myrtle Beach/Florence SC, Weather
FLORENCE COUNTY, SC (WMBF) – The Florence County Sheriff's Office conducted an investigation that led to the discovery and arrests of eight people in connection to a dog fighting ring, FCSO Sheriff Kenny Boone said.

Sheriff Boone said the lengthy investigation led agents in narcotics and patrol to a vacant lot behind 5104 Heyward Rd. in Effingham early Saturday morning.

Most of the subjects attempted to flee on foot and scattered to the woods and a nearby field, but were apprehended. Deputies found a temporary dog fighting ring had been constructed. In addition, they found and seized four vehicles, three firearms, powder cocaine and marijuana.

A pit bull was turned over to environmental services, while the other canine escaped after attacking one of the fleeing suspects.

"It's difficult for one agency to actually crack one of these rings, that's why you don't see it more prominently in prosecutions and apprehensions, but we do the best we can," said Captain Michael Nunn with the FCSO.

Search warrants in connection to the offense will be sought and are expected, and additional charges and arrests are possible, stated FCSO Captain Mike Nunn.

"The individuals engaged in these activities do so secretively and underground," Nunn continued. "They are highly secretive about where and when the dog fights are going to take place. It's a tight circle on individuals, it's very difficult to break into those circles."

According to a news release, the following suspects were arrested on October 12 by FCSO investigators:

Benjamin Harrison; age 38, charged with violation of the Animal Fighting and Baiting Act and drugs/possession of cocaine, first offense.

Daniel Parks; age 34, charged with violation of the Animal Fighting and Baiting Act.

George McCall; age 36, charged with violation of the Animal Fighting and Baiting Act.

Harold Small; age 35, and charged with violation of the Animal Fighting and Baiting Act and drugs/possession of 28 grams or less of marijuana, first offense.

Brandon Williams; age 32, charged with violation of the Animal Fighting and Baiting Act.

Rodney Cooper; age 33, charged with violation of the Animal Fighting and Baiting Act.

Walter Taylor; age 59, charged with violation of the Animal Fighting and Baiting.

Edward Windham; age 32, charged with violation of the Animal Fighting and Baiting Act and four bench warrants.

Copyright 2013 WMBF News. All rights reserved.