Hassan criticized for out-of-state travel during Senate race
As she mounts a campaign for U.S. Senate, Gov. Maggie Hassan is being criticized by some Republicans, who said she is putting her campaign ahead of her day job.

Click to watch News 9's coverage.

The critics cited last week's shooting of two Manchester police officers as the latest example.

"Well, I would have thought wherever she was, she would have come into town to see how those officers were," said Mayor Ted Gatsas, who is running for the Republican nomination for governor.

At the time of the shooting, Hassan was in Chicago for a political fundraiser, but her office said she was in constant contact with state officials and spoke with both officers by phone.

But some are rankled because from February through April, Hassan has been out of state for similar events on 30 days. Her office confirmed the travel.

"I think there's been far too many this session," Senate President Chuck Morse said. "Obviously, there's problems, and they're not getting solved."

Under the state constitution, Morse is acting governor when Hassan is gone, and he said that he is given little or no notice when she leaves. He said he also believes that funding for issues such as mental health are among those taking a back seat to Hassan's Senate run.

"We're putting a plan forward, and we said we wouldn't punt on this, and the governor hasn't been there," Morse said.

The same charge was leveled by Republican state Sen. Jeanie Forrester, who is also running for governor.

"Whether it's the heroin epidemic or mental health, we're having issues getting money out to these programs, and so we've appropriated all this money, and things are not getting done," she said.

The Hassan campaign waved off the critique as a hypocritical attack by allies of U.S. Sen. Kelly Ayotte.

"That's because they're desperate," Hassan campaign treasurer Kathy Sullivan said. "They're afraid. They know that Maggie Hassan is a formidable candidate for Senate, and they're very afraid."