Major crimes down in Manchester; new computer tool credited
Manchester police have announced a dramatic decrease in major crimes, a decline that surprised veteran law enforcement officials.

Click to watch News 9's coverage.

Robberies, homicides, burglaries and aggravated assaults are down by 17 percent this year.

Chief Nick Willard said that a computer program developed with IBM specifically for Manchester is the secret weapon to the department's success. The tool is called predictive analytics, and while it's not new to law enforcement, the way the department is using it is being called cutting-edge by national programs.

The program shows police not only which areas of the city are most likely to see crime, but when. Willard said that based on that information, he shifted the concentration of his officers to target certain neighborhoods at certain times of the day or night.

The chief said he also partnered with New Hampshire State Police to double up on coverage during peak times.

"A lot of people right now think that Manchester is nothing more than where people are addicted to heroin," Willard said. "The messaging is kind of negative. People think of heroin abuse in the city of Manchester before they think what a vibrant city it is."

Willard also credited the commitment of his officers, who were willing to work overtime and vary their shifts to achieve the results.

The department recently hired 15 new officers. They are in training and will be ready to hit the streets in nine months, Willard said.

Willard released another statement Tuesday evening elaborating on the crime numbers.

"Over the past 7 years, Manchester’s crime rate has increased by +19%, with only two of the 7 years seeing a decrease in crime; -8% in 2011 and -6% in 2013. Although 2015 is not yet validated by the state, it appears the crime rate will have increased by +3%," the statement reads.



"The good news, and something I am hopeful for, is that our change in methodology, through predictive analytics will see a sustained decrease in crime. In 2013-2014 MPD was a reactive police department, in 2014-2015 MPD changed to a Hotspot policing model, which resulted in an -11% decrease in crime after implementation. In July of 2015 MPD switched completely to a predictive policing model and saw a -4% decrease in crime during that last six months of 2015. The first quarter of 2016, we continue to see a decline of -17%.



"Coupled with the predictive policing model, I put more officers on the street through overtime by utilizing the money that was budgeted for officers but were vacant due to 21 retirements and resignation in the fist half of 2015.



"Using the predictive analytics, we deployed additional officers on the street during times in which crime was predicted to most likely occur. To maximize the number of officers on the street, I invited the New Hampshire State Police to partner with us during this predictive hotspot patrols, upwards to five 2-officer (MPD/NHSP) units strategically deployed on city streets in those identified areas. During the times the units were deployed, there was a -36% decrease in crime. Operation Cyan, which began on September 6, 2015, netted the following results: arrest of 124 people, 2,018 motor vehicle stops and 664 motor vehicle summons issued. Additional specific operations were conducted throughout the year as well utilizing officer/detectives from all divisions, focusing on robberies, property crimes and theft from motor vehicle.



"Officers of the Manchester Police Department handled an unprecedented number of calls for service that exceeded 145,000, yet in spite of that, they continued to focus on the new way of doing business, and it is my hope moving forward that using predictive analytics we will sustain these initial results (-4% decrease, July –December 2015 and -17% January to March, 2016)."