As Congress Approves Syrian Rebel Aid, Tillis Doesn’t Comment
Joe Bruno More>>

Tiger World Asks For Christmas Trees Tiger World Asks For Christmas Trees Christmas is over but for Tiger World in Rowan County, Christmas is just beginning. If you look around the nonprofit zoo in Rockwell, it's easy to tell Tiger World loves Christmas. But their Christmas trees aren't for decorating. Christmas is over but for Tiger World in Rowan County, Christmas is just beginning. If you look around the nonprofit zoo in Rockwell, it's easy to tell Tiger World loves Christmas. But their Christmas trees aren't for decorating.

Losing Weight in the New Year Losing Weight in the New Year After eating all of that pork, sauerkraut and black eyed peas, working out may be the last thing on your mind. But for some people, the new year is an excuse to get back in the gym. After eating all of that pork, sauerkraut and black eyed peas, working out may be the last thing on your mind. But for some people, the new year is an excuse to get back in the gym.

Lancaster South Carolina Theatre Shows The Interview Lancaster South Carolina Theatre Shows The Interview Get the popcorn ready. Sony's controversial comedy, The Interview, is screening at Crown Cinema in Lancaster, South Carolina. Crown Cinema is the closest theatre to Charlotte showing the film. Get the popcorn ready. Sony's controversial comedy, The Interview, is screening at Crown Cinema in Lancaster, South Carolina. Crown Cinema is the closest theatre to Charlotte showing the film.



“Best Christmas Ever.” Seriously Ill Children Get Shopping Spree “Best Christmas Ever.” Seriously Ill Children Get Shopping Spree Twenty-eight seriously ill children received a special Christmas gift from Hometown Heroes and the Mecklenburg County Sheriff's Office. Hometown Heroes and MCSO teamed up with local law enforcement agencies to escort 28 children who are seriously ill for a Christmas Eve shopping spree at the Walmart on W Roosevelt Boulevard in Monroe. Twenty-eight seriously ill children received a special Christmas gift from Hometown Heroes and the Mecklenburg County Sheriff's Office. Hometown Heroes and MCSO teamed up with local law enforcement agencies to escort 28 children who are seriously ill for a Christmas Eve shopping spree at the Walmart on W Roosevelt Boulevard in Monroe.

Traveling in the Ebola Age Traveling in the Ebola Age Travelers at Charlotte-Douglas International Airport are on high alert after learning a third U.S. patient diagnosed with Ebola was on a flight from Cleveland to Dallas just a day before she found out she had the rare and often times deadly virus. Travelers at Charlotte-Douglas International Airport are on high alert after learning a third U.S. patient diagnosed with Ebola was on a flight from Cleveland to Dallas just a day before she found out she had the rare and often times deadly virus.