Planned Parenthood official says lack of funding has hurt services to thousands of patients
When the five-member Executive Council meets on Wednesday to consider restoring $549,304 in state funding for Planned Parenthood of Northern New England, all eyes will be on councilor Chris Sununu, a Republican candidate for governor.

Executive Council faces vote next week to restore state... New Hampshire’s five-member executive council will vote next Wednesday on whether to restore $549,000 in state funding for Planned Parenthood of Northern New England, after rejecting the contract and defunding the organization last summer on a 3-2 vote. More

Sununu is clearly the swing vote on the council, on which Republicans hold a 3-2 majority. Since Friday, when it was first announced that the contract will be on the Wednesday council meeting agenda, Sununu has not said how he will vote.

Sununu supported Planned Parenthood funding in 2011, but was on the losing side when what was then an all-Republican council voted 3-2 to defund the agency. Sununu again voted in favor of Planned Parenthood when funding was restored on a 4-0 council vote in 2014.

And in August 2015, he cast the deciding vote to defund the program.

Since that time, PPNNE vice president Jennifer Frizzell said, patient services have been cut back but the doors have remained open at the agency’s facilities in Manchester, Keene, Exeter, Derry and Claremont.

Frizzell said in an interview Tuesday that the funding, which comes entirely from the state general fund, represents one-third of the public money that the organization receives to subsidize services for individuals who are underinsured or uninsured.

“When you lose that, inevitably our capacity to meet the needs of those in every community is diminished,” she said.

“Our doors have remained open, and in the past 10 months, we have made every effort to absorb the loss in a way that has the least impact on patients,” Frizzell said. “But there have been some areas where we’ve reduced the number of providers, and several of our health centers have been open only three or four days a week, instead of five or six.”

“Wait times have gone up to three to five weeks, and that wait can make a difference for lifesaving and time-sensitive health care services.”

The current contract would last through June 30, 2017, Frizzell said. Next summer, with a new governor and a new council, it will likely be taken up again.

“A lot of sources contribute to our finances,” Frizzell said. “We have made every effort to not impact the patients, but when this come up in a pendulum-swinging way, you do not have a sufficient and sustainable model to meet the community’s needs.”

According to details provided by Frizzell, Planned Parenthood of Northern New England served 14,191 patients at the end of 2014, but that number dropped by 21 percent, to 11,119, by the end of 2015 as a result of the “lost funding.”

If the contract is again rejected on Wednesday, “you can only nip and tuck to absorb these kinds of cuts for so long,” she said.

According to the information provided by Frizzell, the agency serves about 12,000 patients each year “and provides almost 20,000 sexually transmitted infection tests, over 10,000 well-women exams and cancer screenings, and almost 1,500 clinical breast exams annually.”

“No public funding is used to provide abortions,” PPNNE says.

Political tug-of-war

Democratic councilors Colin Van Ostern, who is also running for governor, and Chris Pappas have urged Sununu to vote in favor of restoring the funding and have set up an online petition. Both are pro-choice and strong advocates of Planned Parenthood.

Republican executive councilors David Wheeler and Joe Kenney are staunch pro-life conservatives and are expected to vote against the funding, as they did in August.

Sununu has been blasted by his three competitors for the GOP gubernatorial nomination for not saying how he will vote. He said only, in a statement Monday, that he is “in the process of reviewing the proposed contract and continuing to talk and listen to people on the matter.”

State Sen. Jeanie Forrester, who calls herself “a proud pro-life candidate,” asked, “How can Chris Sununu be so confused about whether the taxpayers of New Hampshire should be giving money away to the nation’s largest abortion provider?” A leader doesn’t leave people questioning his convictions on matters of principle.”

Manchester Mayor Ted Gatsas, who is pro-choice but opposes public funding of abortions, said, “New Hampshire doesn’t need timid politicians who hide from tough questions and refuse to give their positions on important issues. Councilor Sununu has had plenty of time to review this contract and he needs to pledge that he will vote against taxpayer funding for Planned Parenthood."

State Rep. Frank Edelblut, who is also pro-life, said, “The problem with Chris is that he has to poll-test what he wants for breakfast. We need a governor with a backbone, not someone trying to fulfill a legacy."