Obama's insidious racism
“I know the events of the last few days have prompted strong passions, but … I urge everyone in Ferguson, Missouri, and across the country to remember this young man through reflection and understanding.”

– President Barack Hussein Obama

When was the last time We the American People heard President Barack Hussein Obama comment on the death of a white man at the hands of a black man? Indeed, in my native city of Philadelphia, alone, at least six white police officers have been slain by black men over the last few years. Not a peep from our Racist in Chief or his equally bigoted attorney general, Eric Holder, both of whom are not coincidentally black.

Earlier during his administration, Obama sided with a black professor in Massachusetts, Henry Louis Gates, and the family of Trayvon Martin during earlier racially charged incidents (stating that Trayvon could have been his son and that the president could have been Trayvon 35 years ago). In the latest incident, a Saint Louis County police officer identified as Darren Wilson allegedly shot an 18-year-old black man, Michael Brown, touching off rioting and violence the Washington Post and other media have observed looked more like the streets of Gaza than a “civilized” American city.

The reality is that we do not presently know who if anyone was at fault in provoking or causing the death of Michael Brown, who last Saturday was accused by the local police of having engaged in a convenience store robbery, just before his fatal shooting. But what makes my blood boil is that our so-called president and his attorney general jump to judgment, on a consistent and regular basis, against “whitey” and in favor of their black brothers.

A president and his attorney general were elected and appointed and confirmed to represent all of the American people, not just their people. But the opposite has been true in this administration and whites have been afraid to speak out because of fear of being branded racists, or having black vigilantes attack them verbally or physically. The racist Obama and his henchmen like Eric Holder have succeeded in creating what in effect is a huge racial divide and race war in the nation, pitting black against white and vice versa. This race war has manifested itself not just through gratuitous comments that favor blacks over whites, but in his deeds. Here are just a few examples:

First, it has become clear that Obama’s economic policies and eventual legislation, such as the disastrous Obamacare, have been designed to favor blacks over whites, and to in effect have whitey pay reparations to blacks for the insidious years of racial discrimination. Obama’s intention is to melt down the gold in America and redistribute it to his people.

Second, Obama ignores racially motivated crimes against whites, some of which is manifest in the rising anti-Semitism and anti-Christian bigotry here and worldwide. It is an undisputed fact that hate crimes against Jews far exceed those against blacks. But Obama couldn’t care less, particularly since his Muslim roots and sympathies skew his objectivity and interest in doing anything for either Jews or Christians. This also explains why Obama has not spoken out about the persecution of Christians in the Muslim world with any force. He is a Muslim through and through in the mold of his Chicago friend Rev. Louis Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam. Ironically, Obama is less honest than Farrakhan, who says it as he feels it. Obama’s hatred of Christians, Jews and whites in general is more nuanced and subtle, but it has become obvious that in his heart the feelings are not dissimilar from those of Farrakhan and his ilk, like Rev. Jeremiah Wright and Rev. Al Sharpton, to name just a few other black anti-white bigots. At this rate, it is remarkable that Obama has not renamed the White House “the Black House.” Clearly, in his way of thinking, the Founding Fathers must have had conspiratorial racist motives in naming the people’s house accordingly.

I am not a racist and neither is the majority of Americans. But Obama’s actions are creating a huge unjustified backlash against blacks in general; this is tragic and regrettable. The nation owes much to our black brothers who have enriched our society and fought side by side with whites and others in the name of freedom. But the nation owes nothing to the likes of Obama and Holder, who are low-class, racist hacks who should be removed from office and banished to hell by whatever legal means are appropriate.

The bottom line is this: It is time to speak up and act. Racism is indefensible, whether whites or blacks perpetrate it. But we are a nation of laws, and – as enshrined in the Declaration of Independence, our Constitution and other sacred writings and documents that gave birth to a new nation – all men are created equal.

Yes, Mr. President and Mr. Attorney General, whites, Christians and Jews have rights, too, and you either must treat them as equal to blacks or pay the legal price.

Help Larry Klayman with his class-action suit against Obama’s use of the NSA to violate Americans’ rights

Media wishing to interview Larry Klayman, please contact [email protected].