Woman ‘groped by Bill Clinton’ unloads on Hillary run
WASHINGTON – Kathleen Willey, one of the women caught in the cross-fire of alleged sexual harassment by former President Bill Clinton and what she characterizes as acts of intimidation to silence her, told Aaron Klein’s Investigative Radio Sunday she expects a “scandal a day” with Hillary Clinton’s bid for the presidency and proclaimed she has no accomplishments worthy of being considered for her run for the office.

As to Mrs. Clinton’s announcement emphasizing herself as a champion of women and the downtrodden, Willey called it “a joke.”

Hillary’s role in Benghazi revealed – $4.95 today only!

“What has she done, what has she accomplished to run for president, to become the president of the United States?” Willey asked. “I can’t find, for the life of me, one thing. And if I could find one thing, I would acknowledge that fact. But I haven’t seen one single accomplishment that would give her the credentials to be president of the United States.”

As to Mrs. Clinton’s focus on her womanhood, Willey said: “Well, that’s a joke, if that’s her one credential for running for president, then why don’t I run. I’m a woman. It makes absolutely no sense. … There are a lot more women out there way more qualified than she. The only thing Hillary has been successful on is riding in on the coattails of other men – like Obama and her husband. That’s it.”

Listen to Aaron Klein’s interview with Kathleen Willey:

Willey also called Mrs. Clinton a “serial liar.”

“She took it upon herself to erase all of her emails so that none of us can see what happened in Benghazi,” the former Democrat activist said.

“Women should pay attention to what she’s done to other women, and not just the women who were unfortunate to cross paths with her husband,” Willey said.

What do YOU think? Will Hillary Clinton be elected president in 2016? Sound off in the WND Poll

Does she expect all of the Clinton scandals of the past to be relived through this campaign?

“Who wants to hear that anymore?” Willey asked. “I don’t want to hear it anymore. Their mere presence on the stage is going to guarantee the fact that we’re going to hear one of those scandals every single day that she’s running for the nomination. And then if she wins we’re going to hear about Travelgate and Vince Foster and Monica Lewinsky and me and all of the trouble they got themselves into in Arkansas. The thing that boggles my mind is that doesn’t seem to bother her. If she would really look at that, is that really good for the country? Nothing embarrasses these people. It’s like a scandal a week with these people.”

Aaron Klein Investigative Radio” is broadcast on New York’s AM 970 The Answer and Philadelphia’s NewsTalk 990 AM.

Willey is author of the 2007 book “Target: Caught in the Crosshairs of Bill and Hillary Clinton.”

Get the book exposing the Clintons’ incredible, political payback machine that none but WND dared to print!

As WND reported, Willey and her husband, Ed, were Democratic activists who founded Virginians for Clinton and helped send Bill and Hillary to the White House in 1992.

While serving as a volunteer in the White House and facing financial hard times, Willey says she met with Bill Clinton in the Oval Office to request a paying position. But instead of getting help, she says, she was subjected to “nothing short of serious sexual harassment.”

Distraught, Willey fled Clinton’s presence, only to discover that her husband Ed had committed suicide that same tragic afternoon.

Later, she was drawn “unwillingly” into the Paula Jones lawsuit, the Ken Starr investigation and impeachment proceedings.

Willey also claims the Clinton tag team was behind a string of events that can only be described as a mob-style intimidation campaign to keep her silent that even included breaking into her home to steal her memoirs of the events.

Willey wrote “Target” when Hillary Clinton was running for president the first time in 2007, and her comments are all the more relevant now that Clinton is running for the presidency in 2016.