Why I doubt Kenyan birth document
I bet that got your attention.

For 24 hours, I have been deluged with e-mail – about 6,000 more than usual – that essentially fall into three categories:

Thank you for getting the goods on Barack Obama – I knew he was born in Kenya.





You really stepped in it this time, Farah. That document is bogus and it's going to take the whole "birther" movement down once it is revealed as such.





Don't you investigate the facts before you publish something? That document cannot be real because of X, Y and Z.

Because so many Americans have been educated in government schools, it is probably necessary for me to explain that reporting a news story is different than making an assertion.

No one at WND – not me, not Jerome Corsi, not any columnists, not any reporters – have defended the authenticity of the Kenyan birth certificate. No one here has made a judgment that it is real. What we did was report a fact – that California attorney Orly Taitz has filed a motion in federal court to determine its authenticity.

Heck, Barack Obama's purported "certification of live birth" has been on the Internet for nearly a year and there are still people fighting over whether it is real or not. (And, by the way, the people who claim it is won't get any help from the state of Hawaii, which has steadfastly refused to confirm it is official Hawaiian issuance.)

The first I saw of this document was Sunday when Orly Taitz put it on her website. Naturally, we reported this new twist in a story we have covered from the beginning.

Where's the proof Barack Obama was born in the U.S. or that he fulfills the "natural-born citizen" clause in the Constitution? If you still want to see it, join over 400,000 others and sign up now!

But, somehow, people assumed we were asserting that this was a genuine Kenyan birth document belonging to Barack Obama. That was never the case. In fact, if I had to bet on its authenticity, I would wager it is not. That doesn't mean it wasn't worth reporting. As I said, even the certification of live birth issued by Obama has never been proven to be real.

The Kenyan document could be real. I haven't seen a single disqualifying error pointed out in the last 24 hours. But I still strongly suspect it is not.

It did occur to me that the fastest and most efficient way to determine authenticity was to show it publicly – and let the scrutiny begin.

That is, of course, the exact opposite approach Barack Obama has taken to his birth certificate and virtually every other meaningful document in his life. He has hidden them from the public. Even though he has a constitutional obligation to prove he is a "natural born citizen," he arrogantly refuses to release something as harmless as his birth certificate.

Instead, he releases a document, not verified by the state of Hawaii, that could never prove he was actually born in Hawaii, because of the great potential for fraud it engendered. Anyone could march into a Hawaii public health department office and say he or she had a baby, fill out a form with the pertinent details, sign it and there would be no questions asked. That unverified procedure, by one "parent," would result in the generation of a certification of live birth – and, by the way, newspaper announcements in the local papers.

That certification of live birth, because of the inherent flaws in it, would be of little use to you in securing a U.S. passport. Why? Because the State Department understands they often misrepresent reality.

(Column continues below)

That's why we need to see Obama's birth certificate – his real one, the one with the doctor's signature, the name of the hospital, etc. There is no substitute for beginning the determination as to "natural born citizenship." Hearsay doesn't cut it. Autobiographies don't cut it. Unverified documents produced with no independent eyewitnesses don't cut it.

For the life of me, I don't know why every single American can't agree on that. I don't know why every single American can't agree to pressure Obama to release that one crucial document. I don't know why even Obama can't agree on that – unless he's hiding something.

And I strongly suspect he is.

I don't know what he's hiding.

I don't know if it's a foreign birth.

I don't know if it has anything to do with Kenya.

I don't know if it's something about his parentage.

I don't know if it relates to establishing his constitutional eligibility.

But, whatever it is, he has a sworn duty to come clean.

Clearly, the questions are never going to stop unless he does.