“Indiana’s Not Buying It” raises awareness on sex trade during Indy 500
Press release from the Indiana Attorney General

On Thursday, Indiana Attorney General Greg Zoeller announced the ongoing efforts of a statewide awareness campaign aimed at combatting child sex trafficking. These efforts coincide with the upcoming Indianapolis 500, which could exceed attendance of 300,000 people, with many visiting from out of town.

The “Indiana’s Not Buying It” campaign focuses on reducing the demand for commercial sex that fuels human trafficking. Human trafficking occurs when people are recruited into the sex or labor trade through force, fraud or coercion or when a child is used for commercial sex. It happens in all corners of the state, and primarily to young, vulnerable populations, said Zoeller. The average age at which children in the U.S. first become victims of sex trafficking is 13.

“The violent, exploitive sex trade that victimizes far too many children will not end unless we stand up as a society and refuse to tolerate commercial sex,” said Zoeller, who co-chairs the Indiana Protection for Abused and Trafficked Humans (IPATH) Task Force. “With a major sporting event approaching, I hope this message reaches men who purchase sex that we are no longer buying any excuses.”

Last month “Indiana’s Not Buying It” campaign launched in conjunction with the 2015 NCAA Final Four championship, which was held in Indianapolis.

Last year in an analysis of Backpage.com ads in the Louisville area, researchers found the largest spike in adult services classified ads occurred during March Madness with more than 100 ads per day. When the Super Bowl was held in Indianapolis in 2012, the number of Indiana-specific “escort” ads on Backpage jumped from eight in December prior to the event to 129 the day before the Super Bowl.

According to law enforcement, there were 18 commercial sex related arrests during the 2015 NCAA Final Four.

Following the launch of the campaign, IPATH launched a training and awareness blitz in Central Indiana. Flyers and other victim recovery materials aimed at reaching and providing resources to victims were distributed at truck stops, rest areas and taxi cab services, in addition to local restaurants, bars and other tourism hot spots. The Indiana Motor Truck Association and Indiana Department of Transportation facilitated the distribution of these materials. IPATH also worked to train area hotel staffs on spotting the red flags associated with trafficked victims. 40 hotels/motels in the Indianapolis and surrounding area received awareness materials.

Similarly, to reach those that are in town for the Indianapolis 500, IPATH specifically targeted businesses in the Speedway area and hotels around the city by distributing resources and victim recovery materials.

To learn more about the campaign, click here.