The 3 scariest things about Obama
Note: Meet Victoria Jackson on WND's Tea Party at Sea cruise to Alaska this summer.

private army (like Hitler) socialist (like Hitler) media control (like Hitler)

A clause hidden in the Obamacare bill, which is now law, gives Obama the right to form a private army.

Why isn't anyone freaking out?

Hitler did this.

Hitler, like Obama, was a "socialist" who came from a dysfunctional family, had a communist father who abused alcohol, womanized and sired several children from different mothers, had a white mother, suffered child abuse and neglect, moved often, lied about his birth and heritage, changed his name, was a narcissist, rose to power with the help of disreputable men, had the Rothschilds as financial backers, stirred up racial conflict and class warfare, wrote a biography about race at age 35, followed up with another book used to launch a political career, supported infanticide (partial-birth abortion), gave big speeches in stadiums, promised change and a new social order, had youth groups singing his praises, used propaganda, used voter fraud and intimidation, controlled the media, created "crises," used a poor economy, hated Jews (Israel), pretended to be "Christian," advocated population control and euthanasia, socialized medicine, formed a private army and then … killed his political opposition with his private army.

Well, I am Obama's political opposition. That's why I am concerned.

Listen to Mark Levin here:

I think my friend Scott Spages explains socialism well. Jannique Stewart interviews him:

The Obama administration is set to begin formal contact with the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, a group dedicated, in its own words, to "eliminating and destroying Western civilization from within, and sabotaging its miserable house."

What is H.R. 973? This is a bill designed to protect Americans from being forced to comply with foreign laws we did not enact. The motivation for this bill is to keep judges from using Shariah law, but it would apply to any foreign law judges might use to subvert the Constitution. Let's call Congress about it: 202-224-3121. I can't believe I'm even typing this! What's going on?

Interesting that in researching Obama's church of 20 years, Trinity United, the Marxist Black Liberation Theology church with racism in its mission statement, journalist Kyle-Ann Shiver found Muslim books for sale in the church's "Christian" bookstore! See her column at American Thinker. Obama praises Islam in this montage:

(Column continues below)

Islam is Naziism? Watch this video. Why aren't the media all over this? Oh yeah, because Obama controls the media.

We have one TV channel with glimpses of truth on it, Fox News. The government controls all the rest. NBC left "under God" out of the pledge. Harry Reid left "under God" out of the pledge. Last week, I was a citizen journalist and caught Park Rangers in D.C. on video lying about our national monuments. Now, the government wants to take over radio with fees and fines, and the Internet with a new creepy thing, "The National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace," that will track our every move.

Remember, Cuba voted in Castro, and Germany voted in Hitler. If America votes in Obama for the second time,we deserve a dictator.