European Ambivalence Threatens NATO Afghanistan Mission
AMSTERDAM -- Is it possible that NATO, probably the mightiest, certainly the wealthiest, military alliance the world has even seen, could leave Afghanistan defeated by the Taliban, a band of religious fanatics with an ideology harking back to the 7th century? During two days of talks just completed in the Dutch resort of Noordwijk along the North Sea coast, defense ministers from NATO countries discussed the future of the mission in Afghanistan in tones that betrayed a sense of urgency bordering on despair.



In the Netherlands, whose troops are fighting in the most dangerous region of Afghanistan, the mission is gradually losing public support. Every time a Dutch soldier dies in Afghanistan the push here to end this country's participation grows stronger. The war is seen as a distant battle with hazy goals, far removed from the daily lives of Europeans. The sentiment is shared in varying degrees by the people of the 38 countries with troops in ISAF, the International Security and Assistance Force in Afghanistan.



NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer, who happens to be Dutch, has been pleading with the public to understand the importance of the mission. The consequences of defeat in Afghanistan will reach people on the continent, he recently argued, addressing Europeans. "The security of Afghanistan is directly linked to your and my security."



In addition to helping the people of Afghanistan, defeating the Taliban is seen as a crucial element in the war against Islamic extremism. The Taliban are closely linked to radical Islamists in Pakistan, an unstable country that possesses nuclear weapons. Defeat in Afghanistan would embolden and strengthen extremists in Pakistan and beyond, fueling terrorism around the world.



Some six years have passed since NATO forces led by the United States overthrew the al-Qaida-harboring Taliban regime in Afghanistan following the Sept. 11 attacks. Still, the Taliban have refused to go away. Diverted to Iraq, U.S. forces shifted much of their focus, relying on NATO to finish the job Washington had failed to wrap up. Now, the Taliban look even stronger, and the countries carrying the heaviest part of the load are asking for help from their allies. In response, they are getting words of encouragement and, at best, a portion of what they say they need.



Hosting the Noordwijk meeting, Dutch Defense Minister Eimert van Middelkoop made a case to his European colleagues that sounded very much like the "Freedom isn't free" bumper stickers seen on some cars on American roads. The way van Middelkoop put it, "There is no free ride to peace and security." The Netherlands urged NATO members to contribute troops to the Dutch-led mission in southern Afghanistan's Uruzgan province. Chastising member nations whose troops are working in safe zones, van Middelkoop said "Fair risk and burden sharing has to be a leading principle for NATO." Without more help in Uruzgan, the Netherlands has warned that its commitment to Afghanistan could come to an end in August 2008.



The government here sounds determined to stay, but public opposition could force their hand, particularly if the Dutch feel they have been left carrying an unfair share of the burden in terms of treasury and life. The United States, with the largest contingent in Afghanistan -- 15,000 troops -- also pressured NATO members to up their participation. "What we need now," said U.S. Defense Secretary Robert Gates, "are actions, deeds and a sense of urgency and commitment."



Faced with the threat of a Dutch and later a Canadian withdrawal, the French passionately urged the countries on the front lines of the battle -- Canada, the U.K., the U.S. and the Netherlands -- not to pull back from their objectives. French Defense Minister Hervé Morin said they must maintain their troop levels, but then he said France would not send more combat forces to help. Instead, he offered some 50 French training personnel to help prepare Afghan forces. French troops, numbering about 1000, are based in the comparatively peaceful capital of Kabul.



Denmark also offered to help, but its new contribution also seemed unlikely to turn the tide. Grasping at the secretary general's compelling argument for publicizing the case for fighting in Afghanistan, the Danes offered 1 million euros to buy video equipment to produce YouTube videos and other materials describing the Taliban's excesses. De Hoop Scheffer wants the public in NATO countries to understand that the Taliban are committing "the most horrendous human rights violations." Abundant videos of Taliban tactics in the war and atrocities against civilians are already in NATO hands. One interesting length of footage described by the secretary general shows a Taliban fighter drawing out from his backpack a Burqa, the head-to-toe robe worn by some Afghan women. The fighter puts on the Burqa in order to move unsuspected as a woman. Then he pulls out an AK-47 and begins firing on NATO troops.



By the time the meeting in the Netherlands ended Thursday, NATO countries had made small but measurable additions to their troop commitments. Several countries, including Spain, Italy and Turkey, remain adamant that they will not add more troops to their existing commitments, particularly not for fighting in the tense south and east. But other nations offered small numbers of troops. In total, some nine countries -- including the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Hungary, along with non-NATO members Croatia and Georgia -- pledged to send an extra 1000 combat troops.



The modest increase is welcome, but it may not be enough to defeat either one of the two enemies faced by NATO's Afghanistan mission: the Taliban, and public opinion at home.



Frida Ghitis is an independent commentator on world affairs and a World Politics Review contributing editor.



Photo: NATO Secretary General Jaap de Hoop Scheffer at a press conference in Amsterdam Oct. 25.