Emails Show Clinton Was Warned Over Security in Benghazi Ahead of Attack
Then-Secretary of State Hillary Clinton received emails from her top aides warning about dangerous security conditions in Benghazi, Libya, in the run-up to the terrorist attack that killed a U.S. ambassador and three other Americans there in 2012, documents disclosed on Friday show.

The messages were part of a batch of about 300 emails involving Benghazi that were made public by the State Department. State officials already gave the emails in February to a special House committee that is looking into the Benghazi attacks and is expected to take testimony from Mrs. Clinton.

The emails, in addition to what they reveal about the Benghazi attack, offer glimpses into Mrs. Clinton’s thinking and executive style. In an exchange with aides about to testify on Capitol Hill, she wrote: “Well, what doesn’t kill you makes you stronger (as I have rationalized for years), so just survive and you’ll have triumphed!”

The emails shed little light on the political controversy that erupted over the Obama administration’s early assessment that the attack was touched off by an anti-Islamic video. Mrs. Clinton’s aides show no alarm in the emails over then-United Nations Ambassador Susan Rice’s appearances on talk shows in which she described the attacks as a “spontaneous” response to an anti-Islamic video. A top Clinton aide wrote that Ms. Rice “did make clear our view that this started spontaneously and then evolved.”

Critics said Ms. Rice had discounted the role of terrorism in the incidents for political purposes. As Ms. Rice’s assertion of spontaneous protests became more controversial, Mrs. Clinton’s deputy chief of staff, Jake Sullivan, assured her that she hadn’t made the same error in her own initial statement.

The State Department is going through 30,000 of Hillary Clinton’s emails from her time as Secretary and will release them on a rolling basis. What is the vetting process, and why will it take until January 2016 to get through them all? Photo: Getty

“You never said spontaneous or characterized the motives. In fact you were careful in your first statement to say we were just assessing motive and method,’’ Mr. Sullivan wrote in one of the emails to Mrs. Clinton.

The newly released emails show at least some of the details about the worsening security environment in Benghazi that were presented directly to her.

One cautionary email sent to her long before the Sept. 11, 2012, terror attack came from longtime aide Huma Abedin. The April 24, 2011, note cited reports that hotels in Benghazi were being targeted for attack.

The note said U.S. diplomat Christopher Stevens—who would later become ambassador and die the following year in the Benghazi attack—would be meeting with Libya’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs to make “a written request for better security at the hotel and for better security-related coordination.”

About two months later, in a June 10, 2011, email from Mr. Sullivan, Mrs. Clinton was told of a “credible threat…against the hotel that our team is using.” The note said security officials would be moving personnel out to alternative locations.

Mrs. Clinton has taken broad responsibility for the deadly assault on the diplomatic compound where Mr. Stevens and other Americans were killed, an episode that threatens to complicate her 2016 presidential bid. At the same time, she has said that officials lower in the State Department chain of command were the ones who made decisions about protecting diplomatic posts overseas.

In her memoir published last year, “Hard Choices,” she said that as secretary of state she wouldn’t necessarily learn about requests for beefed-up security in dangerous places where the State Department operates. “It’s just plain impossible for any secretary of any cabinet agency to take that on,” she wrote.

The emails to Mrs. Clinton were far from the only evidence of deteriorating security in Benghazi. In April, 2012, five months before the attack, a small improvised explosive device was thrown over the wall of the diplomatic compound, and two months later, a bomb “exploded near the main gate,’’ a Senate report said. Attacks were also carried out that year on a U.N. convoy, on Red Cross offices and a convoy carrying Britain’s ambassador.

Victoria Toensing, attorney for Greg Hicks, the deputy chief of the Libya mission, said on Friday that Mr. Stevens’ pleas for additional security staff went unheeded.

“The State Department repeatedly rejected the pleas of two U.S. ambassadors asking for more security in Libya,” Ms. Toensing said. “Instead, Department of State hierarchy reduced security in the summer of 2012, from 38 to nine personnel. Responsibility for the deaths of four Americans lies with the department.”

Hillary Clinton is starting to map out her positions on foreign policy. WSJ politics reporter Peter Nicholas explains where she might have trouble clarifying her record as secretary of state. Photo: AP

The Benghazi emails are part of a larger cache of about 55,000 pages of email messages which Mrs. Clinton turned over to the State Department last year and which were sent or received through a private email account linked to a server kept at her home in Chappaqua, N.Y. Mrs. Clinton’s representatives read through the emails and turned over to the department those they deemed a matter of public record, while deleting about 30,000 they judged to be personal in nature.

Republican lawmakers have sharply criticized the practice and have questioned a disclosure process in which Mrs. Clinton and her lawyers had the final say on what to release.

Rep. Trey Gowdy (R., S.C.), chairman of the House Select Committee on Benghazi, said in a statement: “To assume a self-selected public record is complete, when no one with a duty or responsibility to the public had the ability to take part in the selection, requires a leap in logic no impartial reviewer should be required to make and strains credibility.”

Campaigning in New Hampshire on Friday, Mrs. Clinton said that she welcomed the release of the documents and that she wanted the rest to come out soon. A federal judge this week ordered the State Department to release the full 55,000 pages of records on a rolling basis.

“I want people to be able to see all of them,” she said, speaking to reporters after a roundtable event with local business owners.

The attacks in Benghazi, occurring on Mrs. Clinton’s watch, are a point of potential vulnerability in her White House bid. A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll last month showed that 51% see Mrs. Clinton as “knowledgeable and experienced enough” to be president. Republicans see the Benghazi episode as one that could darken such impressions of Mrs. Clinton, raising questions about her managerial competence.

At least eight different congressional committees have already looked into the Benghazi attack, which was also the focus of a separate review by a board appointed by Mrs. Clinton. Last year, House Speaker John Boehner (R., Ohio) moved to create the select committee now looking into the attacks, citing frustration over what he said was the Obama administration’s lack of cooperation with congressional inquiries into the episode.

GOP lawmakershave spent months pressing for State Department emails and documents that would illuminate Mrs. Clinton’s role in safeguarding the Benghazi outpost and handling the crisis after the attacks began.

Mr. Gowdy’s committee plans to take testimony from Mrs. Clinton on Benghazi, an appearance that will focus attention on one of the most painful episodes in her four-year tenure as secretary of state and potentially distract from her core campaign message about helping struggling middle-class families.

Other emails in the year leading up to the attacks related concerns about a rising threat from Islamic militants and the dangers of rivalries among militias.

The risks of the situation were described in a Feb. 24, 2012, email from Gene Cretz, the ambassador to Libya at the time, that warned of the difficulties of disarming the militias. “There is concern here that continuing rivalries among the militias remains dangerous from the perspective of the havoc they can wreak with their firepower and their continued control of select turf,” the email said.

—Janet Hook, James Grimaldi and Rebecca Ballhaus contributed to this article.

Write to Byron Tau at byron.tau@wsj.com