Hillary Clinton’s Custom Email Based on Server Near Her Home
When Hillary Clinton received an email as secretary of state, the message landed at a server registered to her home in New York’s Westchester County and physically located in the area, according to Internet registration records.

That set up underscores the lengths Mrs. Clinton and her inner circle went to create a communications system that they could more closely control.

For personal email, most individuals either use consumer services such as Google ’s Gmail or rent space on a technology company’s data center.

A custom email system, along with Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email address as secretary of state, raises the question of what security measures she took to protect her communications while in office from 2009 until 2013. Those steps remain unclear.

The private system also meant that government officials would have had to go through the former cabinet member—and likely 2016 Democratic presidential candidate—herself to access her email, whether to check for hackers or in the case of a subpoena or records request.

The unusual arrangement for such a high-ranking official was first reported by the Associated Press. The Wall Street Journal confirmed those findings by consulting with computer security experts, including Christopher Davis, founder of Hyas Technology, which researches who controls servers and Internet addresses used in computer intrusions.

Mr. Davis, along with many other technology professionals, has access to old records linked to domain names across the Internet. Those records show that “clintonemail.com,” the domain name used by Mrs. Clinton, was run out of a server in or near Chappaqua, N.Y., where the Clintons own a home.

Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email account for official business as secretary of state, disclosed this week, has become a point of controversy as she prepares a likely presidential campaign.

Mrs. Clinton was under no legal requirement during her time in office to use a government email account, under regulations put in place in 2009. The department, though, was obligated to preserve her email records.

Hillary Clinton used a private email account to conduct official business as secretary of state. What are the possible implications for the next presidential race? WSJ’s Jason Bellini has #TheShortAnswer

The State Department didn’t obtain such records until it asked for them in late 2013, after which Mrs. Clinton turned over 55,000 pages of emails, the department has said.

Mrs. Clinton’s email practices raise questions about transparency, the adequacy of her record preservation and about how much of her correspondence as secretary of state could be accessed by open records requests.

They also raise security questions at a time when computer intrusions are in the news. The inbox of the U.S.’s top diplomat would be a treasure trove for foreign spies and mischievous hackers. Federal agencies deploy teams to try to keep these people out of government email accounts.

Mrs. Clinton’s office didn’t respond to an inquiry Wednesday about her use of a private email server. The State Department has said it has no indication that Mrs. Clinton sent classified information through email.

Late Wednesday night, Mrs. Clinton tweeted: “I want the public to see my email. I asked State to release them. They said they will review them for release as soon as possible.”

Controversy surrounding Hillary Clinton's personal emails and past fundraising has some Democrats feeling uneasy. WSJ's Byron Tau joins the News Hub to discuss. Photo: Getty

Cybersecurity experts were mixed in their assessment of the security risks raised by a private email system.

Some said fears of such risks had been overblown, given the security lapses in some government systems. Those include a recent breach of the State Department system by hackers last year and internal leaks from government officials, such as former Army private Bradley Manning and former National Security Agency employee Edward Snowden.

“No system is 100% secure,” said Peter Singer, a strategist at the New America Foundation. While Mrs. Clinton, in setting up her own email server, may not have had access to the level of resources afforded a government agency or a major technology company, he said, “on the other hand, by the way, both those have been hacked.”

Alan Paller, director of research for SANS Institute, a cybersecurity research group, said using a government email account would have carried the disadvantage of being an obvious target for hackers. “People know that’s where to look,” he said. The State Department is under “more constant attack,” he said.

Paul Vixie, who founded a Bay Area cybersecurity firm, Farsight Security, said that if Mrs. Clinton hired someone with the appropriate level of skill to set up her server, it would have been more secure than using a government email account.

“Nothing is completely wizard-proof, but if you do a good job you can raise the costs of any attacker to a point where it’s probably not worth their while to break in,” he said.

Some experts were more skeptical of Mrs. Clinton’s choice.

With a private email server, “she’s on her own,” said Christopher Soghoian, a technologist at the American Civil Liberties Union. “We don’t know if she herself was running her email server or if she had someone she was paying to do it. But we would imagine they don’t have the skill and resources the State Department and [National Security Agency] do.”

The government has faced its own challenges in securing email accounts. Last month, The Wall Street Journal reported that after three months of trying, the State Department had yet to expunge hackers linked to Russia from its unclassified email system.

The Internet connection that Mrs. Clinton’s computer server used was registered to a man named Eric Hoteham, whom the Journal and the AP couldn’t locate. The name is similar, however, to that of Eric Hothem, a longtime Clinton aide who currently works at J.P. Morgan Chase & Co. in Washington, D.C. Mr. Hothem couldn’t be reached for comment Wednesday.

Other domains linked to the clintonemail.com network include mail.president.clinton.com, printer.presidentclinton.com and wjcoffice.com. Former President Bill Clinton’s full initials are WJC.

Write to Danny Yadron at danny.yadron@wsj.com and Rebecca Ballhaus at rebecca.ballhaus@wsj.com