Hillary Clinton Talks Tough on Executive Action
Hillary Clinton is proposing a raft of policy ideas for Congress to consider if she is elected president, and already promising to go around lawmakers if they won’t work with her.

On Wednesday, the Democratic front-runner pitched ideas to crack down on corporate inversions, maneuvers that shift companies’ legal addresses outside of the U.S. to lower tax bills. If Congress won’t help shut them down, she said, she would use regulations to stop companies from gaming the system.

“This is not only about fairness. This is about patriotism,” she said at a campaign event in Waterloo, Iowa. “If Congress won’t act, then I will ask the Treasury Department, when I’m there, to use its regulatory authority, if that’s what it takes.”

It was the third major policy area where she vowed executive action, all but anticipating that Congress, which is likely to remain at least partly controlled by Republicans, wouldn’t back her proposals. In each case, she would go beyond what the Obama administration has done.

She has promised to expand President Barack Obama’s executive action on immigration, shielding more people in the U.S. from deportation, even as the existing policy is being challenged in the courts.

Mrs. Clinton also has said she would try to rewrite firearms regulations so more sellers are required to conduct background checks on potential gun buyers. There is scant support for new gun restrictions among Republicans.

Mr. Obama has used executive authority to advance his agenda, with his moves on immigration and energy policy infuriating Republicans. The prospect of more of the same under a Clinton presidency is troubling to them. “It has really made it hard for compromise and for coordinated work to happen together,” Sen. Mike Crapo (R., Idaho) said in an interview Wednesday. “Because if the president says, ‘Look, it’s either my way if you’ll pass a law to do it or it’s my way through an executive order,’ that doesn’t result in negotiations.”

The proposals come at the same time Mrs. Clinton pitches herself as someone who can find common ground with political opponents. Asked Tuesday at a New Hampshire town hall meeting how she would work with a GOP Congress that “takes pride in not compromising,” Mrs. Clinton talked about her ability to work with them.

“When I was first lady, when I was senator, when I was secretary of state, I worked with a lot of Republicans,” she said. “I will go anywhere to meet with anyone at any time to find common ground.”

Clinton spokesman Brian Fallon said that doesn’t mean she wouldn’t use powers that come with the Oval Office. “Her first preference will always be to seek to work with Congress,” he said. “But where progress has stalled and there is clear legal authority for the president to act, she will not hesitate to do so.”

Former Obama aide Dan Pfeiffer, who helped craft Mr. Obama’s strategy on executive action, said Mrs. Clinton is taking the right approach. “At a time of massive congressional gridlock, it’s incumbent on candidates to make it clear how they would achieve their agenda, and a legislative-only approach would not be seen as credible to the voters or the press covering the campaign,” he said.

Her latest proposals deal with so-called inversions, where a U.S. company, looking to lower its tax bill, typically merges with a smaller overseas competitor so it can move its legal address to a foreign country. That gives the company greater freedom to push taxable profits out of the U.S. and into countries where corporate taxes are lower.

She is proposing legislation to prohibit U.S. companies from escaping the country’s tax system by purchasing smaller competitors. And she is suggesting an exit tax on companies that try to get around that ban by making them pay the U.S. levy on their tax-deferred foreign earnings.

Lastly, she wants to prevent companies that operate overseas from taking maximum advantage of both countries’ tax systems. Without a change in law, for instance, a company’s Irish parent could lend money to its U.S. subsidiary, with the interest payments deductible against the 35% U.S. corporate tax rate, but taxable only at the 12.5% Irish tax rate.

This is known as “earnings stripping,” and she says she may be able to eliminate the practice through executive action if Congress won’t do it legislatively.

The Treasury Department has been studying potential rules against earnings stripping for more than a year but hasn’t taken action.

The former secretary of state cited the recent announcement by pharmaceutical giant Pfizer Inc., which is planning to merge with the smaller Allergan PLC and put the combined company’s legal address in Ireland. Mrs. Clinton and other Democrats, as well as some Republicans, have been critical of the Pfizer deal, and the policy represents her effort to combat such arrangements.

The Clinton campaign estimated that its new proposal would generate $60 billion over a decade for the government, which she would use to provide incentives for creating jobs in the U.S.

Republican National Committee spokesman Michael Short said the proposal wouldn’t fix “our outdated and uncompetitive tax code.”

Write to Richard Rubin at richard.rubin@wsj.com and Laura Meckler at laura.meckler@wsj.com