High tides cause persistent flooding in South Florida - WSVN-TV - 7NEWS Miami Ft. Lauderdale News, Weather, Deco
MIAMI BEACH, Fla. (WSVN) -- It seems fish are now taking to the streets in one area, as high tides continue to bring a flood of frustration to South Florida.

Drivers and residents are calling it a nightmare, as the water rises and recedes, and it's far from over as more tidal trouble continues on Wednesday.

South Florida has been under a coastal flood advisory since Monday because of "high astronomical tides due to the lunar cycle," according to the National Weather Service, and neighborhoods have been dealing with rising and falling waters ever since.

Though Indian Creek Drive was dry early in the morning Tuesday, the tide in Miami Beach rose again that night forcing crews to close the road from 41st to 26th streets. Crews have been able to pump water out of neighborhoods into the bay but remain on scene to relieve flooding from the persistent high tides.

#UPDATE: Indian Creek Dr under water. Road closed from 41st to 26th st. Details at noon @wsvn pic.twitter.com/r8SlXBjbfj — Lorena Estrada (@EstradaLorena) September 29, 2015

However, Fort Lauderdale gets the award for the something you don't see everyday: fish swimming on Cordova Road between Seventh and 15th. "Look at that," said a bystander. "A mullet in the street."

Beach communities have felt effects from the flooding the most. After high tides during the last few days, water became more than ankle deep along Indian Creek Drive. Crews in the area had to perform road closures to ease traffic congestion.

Residents who live along Indian Creek Drive were frustrated to see the problem continue. "We woke up, and it's flooded again, so it has been a nightmare," said one resident in a car.

Some areas in Miami beach, which have been raised, remained dry, but that was not the case for Indian Creek Drive. "There's good news, there's bad news. Good news is, where we put in our pumps and raised our roads, Alton Road is dry, West Avenue is dry and Sunset Harbour is dry, but Indian Creek Drive, which is a state road, unfortunately gets flooded," said Miami Beach Mayor Philip Levine. "We need to put pressure on our state to raise this road, put in pumps and of course we're going to raise the sea wall as well."

Miami Beach has a five-year water pump install program in the works in areas around the city. On Monday, former Vice President Al Gore toured trouble spots with Levine. He came to Miami to talk about climate change.

Gore and Senator Bill Nelson believe the rising sea level just exasperated this high tide event. "If they hadn't spent tens of millions of dollars on those pumps to try to get the water back in Biscayne Bay," Nelson said. "So do we want to get serious about this?"

Drivers are asked to be cautious when driving through the area, but along Northeast 10th Avenue and 79th Street, cars easily made a wake in high water. "I'm just worried about my car," said tourist Mason Shu.

He then walked over to his car, hoping it didn't have any water damage. Unfortunately for Brown, he said, "I have to tow my car see what kind of damage it has and try to have it replaced."

In Eastern Fort Lauderdale, officials tried to clean up the mess by pumping water from the streets into the bay. "I think the city needs to raise some sea walls. This is a high end neighborhood and we pay a lot of taxes in this area. It's going to drive down the property values and keep people from supporting the area if they don't do something," said one resident.

7News spoke with Public Utilities Director Steve Joseph in Hollywood who said they have spent over $400,000 on flood flaps and hope that some of that will ease some of these conditions for residents. "They're not the end-all to the issues we have. Obviously, there are some walls that we have to address, there's some gaps that we have to take care of, but it should make a significant difference in terms of curbing some of the effects we're seeing," he said.

The City of Fort Lauderdale has placed a water advisory in the area of northern boundary of Northeast First Street, the western boundary of South Victoria Park Road and the southern boundary of New River Road. This area is being affected by the King Tide and a broken sewer line. Crews are working to fix the sewer line.

Another high tide is expected Wednesday morning, at around 11 a.m.