Gov. Scott sits down with ABC 27 News

TALLAHASSEE, Fla. - Governor Rick Scott on Thursday sat down for his first interview with ABC 27. The governor tackled issues from immigration and drug testing, to government cuts and the future of Tallahassee. To view the entire interview, click on the video on the right hand side.

On vetoing funding for public broadcasting and other items in the budget:

"I don't think the state ought to be paying for (public broadcasting),” Scott said, “but the easy ones are things like studying how to collect rain water, stuff like that and new barn and things like that. But they’re a lot of tough ones, but the way I thought about it was, ‘what should state government be doing?’ I mean there's a lot of good things in there, but they were local issues, or charity should be doing it, or there's a better way of doing it, or we're already doing it a different way. And on top of that, I don't want to increase the debt in the state. We already have 23 billion dollars worth of debt, so those are things I thought about, but really, it’s how do we get jobs going?”

On not vetoing federal stimulus money in the budget:

“Gosh, the stimulus is in all parts of these nooks and crannies (in the budget), they put it in all different places,” Scott said, “it's so difficult to even, you know define where it is and things like that."

On comments House Speaker Dean Cannon made in a press release, stating Scott should have focused more on education during session and not after it ended:

“If you go back and look at my campaign, part of my 7 steps to 700,000 jobs was the best educated workforce, and so I put a lot of time into education,” said Scott. “And we have a good education bill that we passed, the Student Success Act, which allows our principals to get rid of the bad teachers, and keep the most effective teachers, merit pay. We're also separately going to expand successful charter schools, public schools that are run by outside groups, and then expand virtual education. But if we have extra money to do things that I vetoed, we ought to put that back into education."

On the elimination of 4,500 government positions:

I'm going to do everything I can to make sure we treat state workers fairly,” Scott told us, “I'm going to make sure that I grow private sector jobs. But taxpayers expect us to run an efficient government and that's also what I’m going to do.”

On the governor’s thoughts and visions for the Capital City:

“My wife and I love living here,” Scott said, “we love the people, we love traveling around the city, we've gone to a variety of churches. But think about it, you know, a lot of us know Austin, Texas. Austin, Texas is a state capital, has a big university there, it's a big university town. We're in the same position, we should be a big business center, we should be able to attract companies here. If you look at all the talent that's coming out of FAMU and FSU, we should be a draw for a lot of companies. And so when I talk to companies around the world I say, ‘look this is a city you ought to look at,’ and that's what we have to do here. We have to make this a city that people will want to build their businesses, grow their businesses, move their businesses to.”

On drug testing welfare applicants and state employees:

“It's the right thing for Florida,” Scott said. “Our taxpayers, they're often drug tested in their jobs, it's only fair that if you're going to get free money from the government under the cash assistance program, we ought to know you're drug free. It's good for families, it gives people an increasing incentive that they’re not going to use drugs, so it's the right thing to do. And on top of that, as a taxpayer, you expect your workforce to be drug free, to be more effective, to be more productive, so it's the right thing to do."

On anything the governor wanted passed this session, but didn’t make it to his desk:

“One, we should have repealed the septic tank law that was passed last year,” said Scott, “and then two, we should of have had an immigration bill passed. Our federal government needs to do their job and secure our boarders, they need to have a national immigration bill that makes sense, they need to have a good work visa program, we're at a 40 year low at our crime rate, we don't want people in our state that are violating our laws and are here illegally.”