Lobbying firm owned by the Morrisey family paid to lobby against Trump’s SCOTUS Nominee
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

July 10, 2018

Contact: Brittni@wvdemocrats.com, 304-342-6606

Lobbying firm owned by the Morrisey family paid to lobby against Trump’s SCOTUS Nominee

Morrisey plays politics during the day and pockets big money at home

CHARLESTON, WV — Attorney General Pat Morrisey wants to have his cake and eat it too.

Morrisey wants to publicly support President Trump’s nominations for the Supreme Court, but he is financially benefiting from Planned Parenthood’s lobbying effort to sink Trump’s judicial nominees.

Pat Morrisey doesn’t want West Virginians to know that he has a major financial stake in the push to oppose Trump’s pick.

FOLLOW THE MONEY TO PAT MORRISEY’S POCKET:

The Morrisey family owns the Washington, D.C. lobbying firm Capitol Counsel.

Denise Henry Morrisey holds the second-largest ownership stake in Capitol Counsel… Denise Henry Morrisey receives compensation based on the firm’s profits, including those derived from fees paid by clients, according to testimony her husband gave in 2015 amid a lawyer disciplinary board investigation of Patrick Morrisey’s ties to another Capitol Counsel client, drug wholesaler Cardinal Health. (Gazette-Mail, 5.7.2017)

Capitol Counsel was paid $460,000 to lobby for Planned Parenthood, and was “enlisted” last year to “shoot down the [Gorsuch] nomination.” (Washington Examiner, 5.8.2017)

Public records show that the Morrisey-owned lobbying firm is still working for Planned Parenthood on “Legislative issues related to judicial nominations.” (U.S. Senate Clerk)

At least six partners at Capitol Counsel have given tens of thousands of dollars to Patrick Morrisey’s campaigns over the years. The firm also donated $5,000 to Morrisey’s inauguration party in 2013. (Gazette-Mail, 5.7.2017)

“Pat Morrisey has no credibility when it comes to discussing Supreme Court nominees because the Morrisey family business was paid a fortune to lobby AGAINST Trump’s judicial nominees,” said Belinda Biafore, chair of the West Virginia Democratic Party. “Actions speak louder than words, and Morrisey’s actions show he is profiting from the effort to block Trump’s pick to the Supreme Court.”

Today, West Virginia Democrats delivered cake to Morrisey at the West Virginia State Capitol.