* - WWL - AM870
Saints restricted free agent RB Mike Bell reached an agreement with the Eagles for one year, $1.7 million with $500,000 guaranteed. Should the Saints match the offer? no yes View Results ADVERTISEMENT

Click here for an interactive NCAA Men's Basketball bracket E-Mail Story Print Story Follow Story Follow Story Email Story





Jindal: Saints to go 19 - 0









"I'm a lifelong Saints fan," Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal said. "I remember the bad times and the good times; when they were one and 15 as well as this year's incredible, incredible run."



The governor expects the Saints to go all the way.



"I'm predicting we'll go, not only undefeated, but all the way through the Super Bowl - something that's never been done before. I think the Saints are going to set a national record right here."



Listen to Jindal:

Listen:



Jindal (pictured above with Saints owner Tom Benson) adds that the Saints' success if great for the state on several levels.



"It is great to hear Americans all over this country cheering on the Saints," the governor told the WWL State Capitol Bureau. "Certainly it's great for us economically."



He says hotels, restaurants and other tourist driven businesses get a boost from the great publicity and attention.



"They send a positive image, a positive message about our state. It shows the country that here in Louisiana were are capable of world class food, world class hospitality, world class football and certainly world class economic performance."



Jindal adds that the charity and community work the players and coaches do off the field makes him proud.











The state's governor is beaming with praise for the New Orleans Saints, and he's making lofty predictions."I'm a lifelong Saints fan," Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal said. "I remember the bad times and the good times; when they were one and 15 as well as this year's incredible, incredible run."The governor expects the Saints to go all the way."I'm predicting we'll go, not only undefeated, but all the way through the Super Bowl - something that's never been done before. I think the Saints are going to set a national record right here."Listen to Jindal:Jindal (pictured above with Saints owner Tom Benson) adds that the Saints' success if great for the state on several levels."It is great to hear Americans all over this country cheering on the Saints," the governor told the WWL State Capitol Bureau. "Certainly it's great for us economically."He says hotels, restaurants and other tourist driven businesses get a boost from the great publicity and attention."They send a positive image, a positive message about our state. It shows the country that here in Louisiana were are capable of world class food, world class hospitality, world class football and certainly world class economic performance."Jindal adds that the charity and community work the players and coaches do off the field makes him proud.