NOPD chief says public can help fight murder rate 'crisis'
WWLTV (Photo: WWLTV)

NEW ORLEANS -- Murders have jumped more than 30 percent so far this year in the city of New Orleans. It comes after the 150 murders in the city in 2014, a record low that wasn't see in decades.

This latest surge in murders prompted us to have a frank conversation with the chief of the New Orleans Police Department. We sat down today with Superintendent Michael Harrison to get his take on why murders are increasing, and what his force can do about it.

If you think more officers is the answer, you may be surprised.

Our conversation comes just a few days after the funerals of 18-year-old Jawara Givens and 20-year-old Milan Arriola, who was a daughter of an NOPD officer and NOFD captain. Givens and Arriola are among the 103 people who've been murdered in New Orleans this year.

"It's really unexplained why we're seeing this increase, because shootings are actually down right now," said Harrison.

I followed up by asking Harrison if the number of shooting incidents and deadly shootings is in fact down, and given the number of homicides so far this year, whether the city is safer.

"I wouldn't say it like that, I think today's criminals are far more brazen than they used to be. They have far less regard for human life and they're committing brazen acts, even in the day time. So we're seeing an increase in homicides that are taking place, indoors inside of private residences or apartments, inside of vehicles. That's something we can't predict, or be in every home or every car," Harrison said.

The NOPD has been struggling with a severe shortage of officers, but Harrison said the number of homicides is not directly connected to manpower.

"I don't think murder is tied to that. There may be other crimes of opportunity that could be tied to manpower, but not homicide, because there is research to show us that no matter how many police officers we put out there, when people make up their minds to commit this violent act, which is a social issue, it's not about the amount of police," Harrison said.

The chief said because has a smaller force than in years past, the NOPD has to be smarter with where it deploys and positions the officers it does have.

He, and the office of Mayor Mitch Landrieu, say that strategy, combined with the NOLA FOR LIFE murder reduction program and a focused effort to go after the most violent criminals, has led to an 8 percent drop in overall crime since this time last year.

A spokesman for the mayor also emphasized that in the three years since the NOLA FOR LIFE strategy was implemented, the "broader murder trends," including the 2015 increase in murder victims, are improving.

Bradley Howard said in the three years prior to the launch of NOLA FOR LIFE, the murder rate was volatile and increasing. Since the launch of the program in May 2015, Howard claims the monthly murder rate has trended down with less month-to-month volatility.

The fact remains, though, that more people have been murdered in New Orleans in the first six months of 2015 than the first six months of 2014. The 100th murder this year took place on July 8th. Back in 2014, that deadly benchmark wasn't reached until Aug. 31.

I asked Harrison if the city is in a crisis when it comes the homicide rate, and if it isn't, why there wasn't a sense of urgency given the relatively small population of the city.

"The police department, and everybody in city government views homicide as a crisis. It is extremely important to us. It is the most important thing for us, saving human lives. We strive every day to make that our number one priority, to prevent the loss of life. So it's a crisis to us. Now, why you don't see public outrage because of it? I can't answer that, but we've had a culture of violence in the city for a very long time," Harrison said.

New Orleans has a history of violence. Crime data going back decades backs that up. But has that history set a strange standard for the city, one in which murders in the triple digits is almost expected?

"I don't think it's expected, and we can do better, and so we're doing everything we can to make sure every program is fully functional, fully staffed," said Harrison.

That includes in NOPD's Seventh District. The 30 murders there so far this year have almost equaled the 32 murders in that district in all of 2014.

Harrison said New Orleans East, which most of the Seventh District encompasses, can be a challenge to police. With major roads like Interstate 10 and Chef Menteur Highway cutting through New Orleans East, police must cover a lot of ground where crime can enter and exit.

"So that's why eastern New Orleans is sort of staffed heavier than some of the other districts. For example, there are 95 police officers assigned to the east. The next largest district has 77, so we're giving resources there because we know it's bigger, we know it's larger. The distance to travel to from call to call takes a lot longer because of its size. We realize that. There are other agencies helping us. State police helps us on the interstate in the Seventh District, and we have other agencies that are working with us, some that we can talk about, some that we can't," Harrison said.

What many are reluctant to talk about is the impact of gentrification on crime.

Dr. Ansel Augustine believes there is a connection. He said it's likely pushing crime into areas like New Orleans East.

"I do believe it plays a part, and I believe we have a responsibility to protect people's neighborhoods. If you know someone grew up in the neighborhood, well that's their home. Why can't they live there anymore?" Augustine said.

Augustine is working to reduce violence through the Office of Black Catholic Ministries. To him, getting that accomplished is less about policing, and more about job opportunities for the city's black community.

"For us as New Orleanians, we have to create opportunity so that everybody can have a decent life, so their life can be valued, and once that happens and I can value my own life and someone values theirs. Once that happens, I believe the violence will go down," Augustine said.

From the police chief's view, the NOPD needs help, and it has to come from the people of New Orleans.

"We need people to, number one, give us information. You can give it to us, you can give it Crimestoppers about crime you know about, more particularly homicides. We need citizens to become engaged with police officers, we need our officers to become engaged with citizens," Harrison said.

Bridging that divide can help the NOPD's rate of solving homicides, which right now sits at 50 percent.

Harrison said he's spoken with fellow police leaders in major cities, and they too are experiencing a higher homicide rate.

According to our partners at USA Today, Milwaukee has seen its murders more than double, with 84 this year, compared to 41 last year. In Baltimore, murders there have jumped by at least 33 percent, and in Chicago, homicides are up 19 percent.

Many of the police chiefs in those cities, including Harrison, say weak gun laws play a big role in what's happening on their streets.

Read or Share this story: http://on.wwltv.com/1MsQiNb