Several GOP candidates discuss poverty in SC
Six of the candidates seeking the Republican presidential nomination were in South Carolina Saturday for a discussion on fighting poverty.

Hundreds of voters attended a forum at the Columbia Metropolitan Convention Center organized by The Jack Kemp Foundation.

Several protesters were also in the crowd and interrupted event attendee Marco Rubio several times.

The protesters accused Rubio of turning his back on the Hispanic community.

The forum was moderated by House Speaker Paul Ryan and U.S. Sen. Tim Scott.

GOP hopefuls who attended included former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, Ohio Gov. John Kasich and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio.

Carly Fiorina was scheduled to appear, but missed her flight.

Gov. Nikki Haley and U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham gave remarks during the event.

Bush, Carson and Christie were part of the first panel discussion.

Bush said, "It's great to give people a chance to get a job but if they don't have the skills to get a job then that's the first step and all of our workforce programs I think need to be revamped and certainly our education systems as well."

Gov. Christie said revamping the criminal system as well will help the poor.

"There are always going to be jail cells if I’m president for folks who are dealing drugs and committing violent acts. Always going to be jail cells for them, but we need to get some people who are just addicts out of those jail cells, give them treatment because you can't get to work if you can't get out of bed in the morning. You can't get to work if you're high on heroin or cocaine, no one's going to hire you,” said Christie.

Dr. Ben Carson said the country needs an economic stimulus to help bring more jobs.

"I believe that the real answer to poverty is not government, but the private sector,” said Carson. “We have the highest corporate tax rates in the developed world, that is absolutely crazy and what I would suggest is a six-month hiatus to allow that money to be repatriated with no taxes what so ever and in the process just requiring that 10 percent of it be used in enterprise zones and to create jobs for people who are unemployed and on welfare,” said Carson.

Former Gov. Mike Huckabee took the stage alone in the Fiorina’s absence.

Ryan asked, "Do you think focusing on inequality is the best way to fight poverty?

Huckabee said, “No, focusing on inequality is focusing on the problem. Focusing on the solution is how to make it work and the solution is to create an environment of which jobs are brought back to the United States."

Kasich and Rubio shard their ideas during the last panel of candidates.

Kasich said, "The working poor, the drug addicted, and the mentally ill are issues. These are people who live in the shadows and I absolutely think, as Jack Kemp did, that when we rise everybody's got to have a shot and you know what, that opens every body's hearts."

Rubio was interrupted several times when it was his turn to speak.

One protester yelled, "Rubio doesn't represent our community, he wants to deport our families."

Rubio eventually got his point across on how to handle poverty.

"I strongly believe that K-12 systems belong squarely and solely in the hands of state and local communities, that we don't need a national school board,” said Rubio. "Poor people are often condemned to sending their kids to schools that are failing and so I believe at the state level and many states across this country have aggressively pursued, empowering parents to put their children in the best setting possible,” said Rubio.

Republican and Democratic candidates will continue to spend a lot more time in South Carolina ahead of the primaries in February.