VIRGINIA ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PARTNERSHIP
Rachel Thomas www.governor.virginia.gov



Stella Li Lindenburg Industry, LLC 323-283-2348 Suzanne Clark VEDP (804) 545-5806

Governor McAuliffe Announces 349 New Jobs in Appomattox County

-Lindenburg Industry, LLC to invest $113 million in first U.S. manufacturing operation-

Richmond - Governor Terry McAuliffe announced today that Lindenburg Industry, LLC, a subsidiary of a Chinese-owned corporation, will invest $113 million to establish an industrial honeycomb manufacturing operation in the Town of Appomattox in Appomattox County. This project, which represents the first new company announcement in Appomattox in 15 years and the largest since Thomasville Furniture began construction in 1972, is a direct result of the Governor’s meeting with company officials in Beijing, China during his Asia Marketing Mission last month. Virginia successfully competed against North Carolina for the project, which will create 349 new jobs.



Speaking about today’s announcement, Governor McAuliffe said, “An investment and project of this significance is transformational for Appomattox, and the Commonwealth is honored to add another international company to its roster. I had the great privilege of meeting with company officials in Beijing, China and close this significant win during my Asia marketing mission and I am thrilled that Lindenburg Industry is establishing their first U.S. manufacturing operation in Virginia. This project will revitalize a vacant facility, allowing quick start-up to production, and put approximately 350 people back to work in highly skilled manufacturing positions. These jobs are the stepping stones to building a new Virginia economy that will enable us to compete on a global scale, and the economic benefits that this project will bring to Appomattox and to the Commonwealth are tremendous.”



“We welcome Lindenburg Industry to Appomattox and to Virginia, and thank the company for this transformative investment and the creation of hundreds of new jobs,” said Maurice Jones, Virginia Secretary of Commerce and Trade. “This project is a great example of Virginia’s international connectivity as we continue to enhance our strong business relationship with China, and we look forward to Lindenburg Industry benefitting from the Commonwealth’s outstanding business climate, world class workforce and access to global markets through our port system.”



Lindenburg’s parent company is one of the world-leading investment holdings companies in China that is focused on energy, energy conservation and environmental protection related technologies. Being a publicly-traded company in Hong Kong (Listing code: HK. 901), EagleRide Investment Holdings Ltd. adheres to the corporate philosophy of being “positive, sagacious, enterprising and innovative.” Faced with a myriad of investment opportunities available around the world, EagleRide’s investment in the United States was in part encouraged by benchmark indexes reaching all-time highs in 2013 and the fact that America is home to some of the most exceptional infrastructures in the world. For these reasons, EagleRide Investment Holdings Ltd. has appointed various technical advisors in the U.S. to help in identifying investment prospects in energy, and environmental protection sectors.



“The U.S is characterized by low political risk, as well as an advanced level of legal protections for doing business and making investments,” says Stella Li, CEO of Lindenburg Industry, LLC and Chief Technology Officer of EagleRide Investment Holdings Ltd. “After an extensive search by our site location consultants at Development Advisors, LLC, we found the right location for our initial U.S. manufacturing operations in Appomattox, Virginia. This location provides us with an excellent business environment and the workforce talent we require to be successful. We are greatly appreciative of the support that the Town of Appomattox, Appomattox County, the State of Virginia, and Dominion Virginia Power have provided in making this project come to fruition. We also want to thank the North America Chinese Chamber of Commerce for their part in assisting with our integration into the North American economy on this particular project.”



Lindenburg will be manufacturing industrial environmental control components used in clean air emissions. The introduction of progressive environmental legislation around the world is a key driver of Lindenburg’s business activities. The environmental management system is the cornerstone of the company’s effort to make responsible use of natural resources and systematically reduce its wastewater, solid waste streams, and atmospheric emissions.



The Virginia Economic Development Partnership worked with the Town of Appomattox and Appomattox County to secure the project for Virginia. Dominion Virginia Power also provided support. Governor McAuliffe approved a $1.4 million grant from the Governor’s Opportunity Fund to assist Appomattox with the project. The Virginia Tobacco Indemnification and Community Revitalization Commission approved $1.17 million in Tobacco Region Opportunity Funds. The company will receive benefits from the Port of Virginia Economic and Infrastructure Development Grant Program. Additional funding and services to support the company’s employee training activities will be provided through the Virginia Jobs Investment Program.



“Words cannot express the excitement and anticipation I have regarding the announcement that Lindenburg Industry is locating in the Town of Appomattox," said Appomattox Mayor Paul Harvey. "This has truly been a team effort by all of the parties involved, from the Governor's office to the local level. The location of Lindenburg Industry in the Town of Appomattox will produce a huge economic boost, not only in the number of quality jobs being made available, but also to the local businesses and their ability to provide various support services. As Mayor of the Town of Appomattox, it is a privilege to welcome a company of the caliber of Lindenburg Industry to the Appomattox community."



“On behalf of Appomattox County and its citizens, I’d like to welcome Lindenburg Industry to our community,” said Ronnie Spiggle, Chairman of the Appomattox County Board of Supervisors. “This is a great day for Appomattox County. This will help our local economy, local businesses and will be a boost for our citizens by creating jobs for our people and to help them achieve the American dream. Appomattox is known for its history. I am delighted that Lindenburg Industry has chosen Appomattox to make some new history.”



“The Tobacco Commission is excited to welcome Lindenburg Industry to Appomattox County,” said Senator Frank Ruff, Vice Chairman of the Virginia Tobacco Indemnification and Community Revitalization Commission. “Having an available building was a major asset in attracting Lindenburg Industry. The Commission awarded a significant TROF incentive for the company’s commitment to create 349 new jobs in Virginia’s tobacco region.”



“The Port of Virginia is happy to welcome another new company that is going to bring jobs and revenue to our state,” said John F. Reinhart, CEO and executive director of the Virginia Port Authority. “We look forward to establishing a strong relationship with Lindenburg Industry, LLC, as the company exports its finished product to China using the port. We are pleased that the competitive services to Asia, via The Port of Virginia, and the incentives offered by the port were factors in this company’s decision to locate its first US facility in Virginia.”



“Virginia continues to innovate and provide a fertile environment for attracting jobs and investment,” said Robert M. Blue, President of Dominion Virginia Power. “Reliable, low-cost energy is critical to the manufacturing renaissance in the United States and Dominion Virginia Power is pleased to be a partner in the equation.”