MACS-1 Marine drives Afghan vehicle training



Photo by Air Force Master Sgt. Christopher DeWitt

Sgt. Nathan Brewer, lead instructor for an Afghan National Army drivers training course, leads a team of four other Marines who train Afghan National Army soldiers how to drive. Brewer, who licensed military vehicle drivers for Marine Air Control Squadron 1, is developing future driver training for ANA 209th Corps, which conducts missions in Afghanistan's northern provinces.



The army didn't have training manuals, and even if they did most of the soldiers couldn't read them due to high illiteracy rates.



Fuel for the vehicles was also scarce.



The challenges facing Sgt. Nathan Brewer and his team of four other Marines kept stacking up as he undertook the task of developing a vehicle training course for the Afghan soldiers in just three short months.



Now, Brewer, who licensed military vehicle drivers for Marine Air Control Squadron 1, is approaching the end of his tour after ensuring the future of driver training for ANA 209th Corps, which conducts missions in Afghanistan's northern provinces.



"Our mission is to set up a foundation for the ANA to complete driver's training and then to develop instructors from those students that can teach it to themselves," said Brewer. "Basically, we are here to train ourselves out of a job - and to an extent I feel we've done that."



In order to complete their mission, Brewer and his team have instituted some unique curriculum changes to better prepare a select few Afghan soldiers to become teachers.



Besides driving, the Marines incorporated literacy training into the daily schedule. Out of the more than 6,500 soldiers in the 209th Corps since April 2009, only 14 percent could read prior to any formal training.



Now, due to the literacy training, Marines have been the first group in Regional Command-North to have Afghan trainers conducting driver's training with ANA soldiers.



Mentoring in Afghanistan isn't without its problems, and Brewer and his team often find themselves facing issues other than the obvious language barrier.



"Lack of fuel and other resources was sometimes a problem when we needed to conduct actual driving," Brewer said. "We do what we have to; adapt and overcome. I'm very happy about the progress that we've made - it's over my expectations, especially considering our limited resources."



Working so closely with ANA soldiers has been a challenge for Brewer, who admits that he had to make some mental changes in order to be an effective mentor.



"We can't come here and impose our will, as mentors, we have to help them along," said Brewer. "I think sometimes we have to come down off our pedestal, put our cultural differences aside, and work with them - be a friend instead of an instructor."



As Brewer nears the completion of his team's three-month mission in northern Afghanistan, he is in awe of what they were able to get done during their short time with the 209th Corps.



"Seeing the training unfold, improvements since adding literacy training, and seeing progress shows me they are becoming self-sufficient and lets me know we won't be here forever," said Brewer, a 23-year-old native of Kansas City, Kan. "When I sit back and look at the impact of what we do, it's really humbling." Story by Air Force Master Sgt. Christopher DeWittMAZAR-E-SHARIF, Afghanistan - When one Yuma Marine began training Afghan National Army soldiers here how to drive, few of them had ever been behind the wheel of a vehicle.The army didn't have training manuals, and even if they did most of the soldiers couldn't read them due to high illiteracy rates.Fuel for the vehicles was also scarce.The challenges facing Sgt. Nathan Brewer and his team of four other Marines kept stacking up as he undertook the task of developing a vehicle training course for the Afghan soldiers in just three short months.Now, Brewer, who licensed military vehicle drivers for Marine Air Control Squadron 1, is approaching the end of his tour after ensuring the future of driver training for ANA 209th Corps, which conducts missions in Afghanistan's northern provinces."Our mission is to set up a foundation for the ANA to complete driver's training and then to develop instructors from those students that can teach it to themselves," said Brewer. "Basically, we are here to train ourselves out of a job - and to an extent I feel we've done that."In order to complete their mission, Brewer and his team have instituted some unique curriculum changes to better prepare a select few Afghan soldiers to become teachers.Besides driving, the Marines incorporated literacy training into the daily schedule. Out of the more than 6,500 soldiers in the 209th Corps since April 2009, only 14 percent could read prior to any formal training.Now, due to the literacy training, Marines have been the first group in Regional Command-North to have Afghan trainers conducting driver's training with ANA soldiers.Mentoring in Afghanistan isn't without its problems, and Brewer and his team often find themselves facing issues other than the obvious language barrier."Lack of fuel and other resources was sometimes a problem when we needed to conduct actual driving," Brewer said. "We do what we have to; adapt and overcome. I'm very happy about the progress that we've made - it's over my expectations, especially considering our limited resources."Working so closely with ANA soldiers has been a challenge for Brewer, who admits that he had to make some mental changes in order to be an effective mentor."We can't come here and impose our will, as mentors, we have to help them along," said Brewer. "I think sometimes we have to come down off our pedestal, put our cultural differences aside, and work with them - be a friend instead of an instructor."As Brewer nears the completion of his team's three-month mission in northern Afghanistan, he is in awe of what they were able to get done during their short time with the 209th Corps."Seeing the training unfold, improvements since adding literacy training, and seeing progress shows me they are becoming self-sufficient and lets me know we won't be here forever," said Brewer, a 23-year-old native of Kansas City, Kan. "When I sit back and look at the impact of what we do, it's really humbling."