Stopping the President's Executive Amnesty
The President plans to issue an Executive Order on immigration today. One needs to ask, what are the President’s motives for moving quickly on this before the new group of legislators—that America elected—take office? The President should honor the will of the people, wait until the new Congress and work with us just as the Constitution intended.

I have the honor of serving on the House Committee on Foreign Affairs. In this role, I have had the opportunity to witness just how excruciatingly porous our borders truly are. Every day that our border is not secure, is a day our country is vulnerable to attack. The priority for the Federal Government is national security. However, the priority for this President seems to be circumventing Congress and consolidating as much power as possible. The President should agree to faithfully enforce the laws on the books, not create a larger magnet to incentivize illegal behavior. The question that really should be asked is: does the President care more for the people illegally in our country or does he care for the hard-working American worker who is struggling to make ends meet in his abysmal economy?

Rather than working with Congress on legislation that would create jobs and invigorate our economy, the President has chosen to once again ignore the Constitution and play partisan politics.

It is time for Congress to push back. The President may have a pen and a phone, but Congress has the checkbook. Not only should Congress deny funding for any of President Obama’s plans of amnesty but we should pass legislation to deny his authority to unilaterally execute such broad measures in the future. Therefore, I have introduced the Executive Amnesty Prevention Act. This legislation simply states that the President does not have the legal authority to provide amnesty and legalize millions with the stroke of his pen.

The Constitution provides Congress with the power to establish immigration law, not the President. It is time for Congress to take back this power, and place it where the Founders intended. My legislation denies this and future Presidents the ability to unilaterally rewrite the law, and forces a rebalancing of the powers of the branches of the Federal government.

After Congress has stopped the President from his reckless action, we should focus on securing our borders and crafting a workable immigration policy that rewards those that enter our country lawfully. The United States of America is the greatest nation in the world. I understand why millions come to our shores in the hopes of a brighter future. However, we are also a nation of laws and we should promote those who have stood in line and worked to get here the correct way in addition to the millions of hard-working citizens who are here already. We cannot, nor should not, be a nation that rewards those who break the law over those who follow it.