Melania Trump: ‘If ISIS Lay A Finger On Barron, I’ll Scratch Obama’s Eyes Out’
First Lady Melania Trump has warned former president Barack Obama that if ISIS terrorists “lay a finger” on Barron Trump, she will “scratch his eyes out.”

Melania Trump’s warning comes days after ISIS terrorists used social media to call for the assassination of Barron Trump.

The terror group is sharing personal details about the 11-year-old boy on social media channels, including the private address of his school, and Melania Trump is pulling no punches, laying the blame for the rise of ISIS firmly at the feet of Barack Obama.

The Middle East Media Research Institute (MEMRI) translated the mass calls for the murder of President Trump’s youngest son on the popular “Telegram” app.

“Using the hashtag ‘handle the son of the mule of America,’ the supporter, who uses the name ‘Dak Al-Munafiqeen,’ Arabic for ‘striking the hypocrites,’ wrote: ‘Barron Trump goes to this school in Washington,'” according to MEMRI. “The post was followed by a photo of Barron Trump. To widely disseminate the call for assassination, several pro-ISIS Telegram channels have shared and forwarded the post.”

The rise of ISIS, funded and supported by Barack Obama, is viewed as another Obama-era failed project in in D.C., and Melania Trump has warned Obama that “if his chickens come home to roost in my house, if anything happens to my son, I will scratch his eyes out.“

“Supporting terrorists anywhere in the world can have serious and long term consequences,” Melania Trump said, “and if any of these psychopaths so much as lay a finger on Barron there will be hell to pay.”

Explaining that death threats from Islamic State terrorists have “already had an impact” on her son, the First Lady said “This is all on the head of Barack Obama.“

“I have always found it hard being polite to that man, considering all of the things he has done, but it will be even harder now.“

The influence Barack Obama had over the world was profound and deeply disturbing. Once you start looking at trouble around the United States and the world, you realize that Obama’s hand is in everything.

But as Melania Trump says, while Obama may be traveling the world as though he is still president, attempting to operate a shadow government to undermine President Trump’s presidency, Obama’s influence is steadily waning, and the terrorists he helped rise in the Middle East are in retreat.

We are on the verge of taking our country back.