Biden Preparing 2020 Presidential Bid – With Obama As Vice President
Former Vice President Joe Biden has suggested a possible 2020 bid for the presidency — with former President Obama as his running mate and potential VP — saying “we may very well do it.”

Joe Biden is moving closer to a 2020 run for president, with close aides telling Politico that they are preparing for the campaign announcement ahead of the 2018 midterm elections.

Biden’s tilt at the presidency comes as no surprise given his relative popularity among Democrat voters, however it is the former Vice President’s choice of running mate — Barack Obama, the former President — that is raising eyebrows. While legal under constitutional law, the scenario would be unprecedented in U.S. political history, as two-term presidents have traditionally taken an unspoken vow to retire from public life.

According to The Hill, “Biden has reportedly said that he sees himself as the only Democrat who could defeat Trump in 2020.”

The former vice president is “thinking through a million unconventional options, because there is an acknowledgment that this could be an unconventional campaign,” one person close to the discussions said.

The Democrat Party has been struggling to form a coherent opposition to President Trump, with potential 2020 candidates falling by the wayside in recent months. As things stand, there are no up-and-coming presidential candidates on the left side of the divide that stand a chance of defeating President Trump.

However according to Biden’s aides, the Biden/Obama team will be “unstoppable” and “march straight back into the Oval Office like nothing had happened.“

“The Trump presidency will be a blip, erased from history by the second Obama/Biden presidency.”

Most telling perhaps is the media response to Biden’s suggestions that he “may very well” run for president in 2020. A campaign has been launched to popularize the former Vice President in recent months in the liberal media.

A “candid photo” (actually a staged photoshoot) featuring Biden leaning down to speak to a homeless man in Washington recently “went viral” and “broke hearts“, according to breathless liberal hacks, suggesting that the mainstream media — also known as the Democratic Party’s PR branch — are set to mobilize on behalf of Biden’s campaign just like they did for Hillary Clinton in 2016.