Ginette Petitpas Taylor: The Canada Child Benefit “has lifted hundreds of thousands of children out of poverty." - FactsCanada
OECD

By: Kelly Firth on July 23, 2017

The number of children lifted out of poverty by the Canada Child Benefit won’t be known until late 2017 or early 2018.

Ginette Petitpas Taylor , Parliamentary Secretary to the Finance Minister and MP for Moncton — Riverview — Dieppe, in Question Period on June 19, 2017

The Liberal government introduced the Canada Child Benefit (CCB) in the 2016 budget. It replaced the former Canada Child Tax Benefit and the Universal Child Care Benefit. Tied to income, the new benefit was targeted at increasing child care benefits for low- to middle-income families.

Speaking about Liberal tax initiatives in Parliament in June, Ginette Petitpas Taylor, parliamentary secretary to Finance Minister Bill Morneau, said, “we also put in place the Canada Child Benefit program, which has lifted hundreds of thousands of children out of poverty.” The Liberals entered summer promoting the CCB program.

Monthly CCB payments began in July of last year. At the time of implementation, the CCB was projected to lift approximately 300,000 children above the low income cut-off, the income level at which a family is estimated to spend 20 per cent more than the average family on food, clothing, and shelter.

But is it too early to see the effects of the CCB?

In short, yes. The program is too new to know how many children have been affected by the benefit.

Mathieu Filion, director of communications for the Ministry of Families, Children and Social Development which manages the CCB, explained by email, “to know if people are lifted out of poverty, we need to know their revenue for a full year. We will know at the end of 2017 how many families and children will be [affected].”

This data will be collected using the Canada Income Survey (CIS). The voluntary survey collects information on the income and income sources of Canadians, along with other household characteristics. As the CCB was introduced in 2016, the 2016 CIS will be the first relevant survey collected.

In fact, while this information is being collected in 2017, the data won’t actually be published until 2018, according to Statistics Canada.

Petitpas Taylor’s claim is misleading because it confuses projected effects for actual effects. As Kevin Milligan, an economist at the University of British Columbia, put it, “all we have now is projections from the government. These may be very good projections, but we will not have actual data on 2016 until late 2017.”

Until data from the 2016 CIS is published, we can’t know if the projections are realized.

See how we score.