About the Foundation for Moral Law

The Foundation for Moral Law is a non-profit, tax-exempt, 501(c)(3) organization located in Montgomery, Alabama.

The Foundation for Moral Law exists to restore the knowledge of God in law and government and to acknowledge and defend the truth that man is endowed with rights, not by our fellow man, but by God! Please partner with us to achieve this important mission.

The Foundation maintains a two-fold focus:

Litigation—The Foundation for Moral Law represents individuals involved in religious liberties cases and files amicus curiae (friend-of-the-court) briefs in state and federal courts. To read our legal briefs go here Education—The Foundation conducts seminars to teach the necessity and importance of acknowledging God in law and government. To find out more about our seminars, go here. Read our Statement of Faith here.

Historic Location. Located near the Court Square Fountain in downtown Montgomery, Alabama, the Foundation’s offices occupy the old Central Bank Building (http://www NULL.hmdb NULL.org/marker NULL.asp?marker=35301) at One Dexter Avenue (above). Completed in 1856, this historic building was the first “ironfront” in Alabama. The Bank generously supported the Confederacy but was bankrupt at the end of the Civil War. Other banks occupied the building until jewelers Klein & Son acquired and occupied it from 1923-1983. The building was restored for the Arts Council of Alabama in 1985. The Foundation restored the building again in 2005.

History of the Foundation. The Foundation for Moral Law was established December 2002, with Pastor Phillip Ellen as President, Mr. Randy Stafford as Vice-President and Dr. Mel C. Glenn Sr., as Executive Director. Dr. Rich Hobson was chosen by the board to be president of the Foundation in November 2003, with Pastor Phillip Ellen assuming the office of vice-president of the Foundation. Later, Judge Roy Moore served as President and Dr. Rich Hobson was the Executive Director. In January 2013, due to Judge Moore taking office as Chief Justice of the Alabama Supreme Court, it was announced that his wife, Kayla Moore, was named President of the Foundation . It was announced that Judge Moore would take the title of President Emeritus of the Foundation for Moral Law.

How Can You Help? Tax-deductible contributions, which can be made through this website by clicking here, allow Foundation attorneys to continue the fight. You may also purchase various Foundation products here.