Regulations Designating Physical Activities
Marginal note:Definitions

1 The following definitions apply in these Regulations.

abandonment

abandonment [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

aerodrome

aerodrome has the same meaning as in subsection 3(1) of the Aeronautics Act . (aérodrome)

airport

airport [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

area of mine operations

area of mine operations means the area at ground level occupied by any open pit or underground workings, mill complex or storage area for overburden, waste rock, tailings or ore. (aire d’exploitation minière)

canal

canal means an artificial waterway constructed for navigation. (canal)

Class IA nuclear facility

Class IA nuclear facility [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

Class IB nuclear facility

Class IB nuclear facility [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

decommissioning

decommissioning [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

drilling program

drilling program has the same meaning as in subsection 1(1) of the Canada Oil and Gas Drilling and Production Regulations , SOR/2009-315. (programme de forage)

exploratory well

exploratory well has the same meaning as in subsection 101(1) of the Canada Petroleum Resources Act , but does not include a delineation well or development well as those terms are defined in that subsection. (puits d’exploration)

flowline

flowline has the same meaning as in subsection 2(1) of the Canada Oil and Gas Installations Regulations . (conduite d’écoulement)

hazardous waste

hazardous waste means hazardous waste as defined in section 1 of the Export and Import of Hazardous Waste and Hazardous Recyclable Material Regulations and hazardous recyclable material as defined in section 2 of those Regulations but does not include nuclear substances. (déchets dangereux)

marine terminal

marine terminal means (a) an area normally used for berthing ships and includes wharves, bulkheads, quays, piers, docks, submerged lands, and areas, structures and equipment that are (i) connected with the movement of goods between ships and shore and their associated storage areas, including areas, structures and equipment used for the receiving, handling, holding, consolidating, loading or unloading of waterborne shipments, or (ii) used for the receiving, holding, regrouping, embarkation or landing of waterborne passengers; and

(b) any area adjacent to the areas, structures and equipment referred to in paragraph (a) that is used for their maintenance. (terminal maritime)

migratory bird sanctuary

migratory bird sanctuary means an area set out in the schedule to the Migratory Bird Sanctuary Regulations . (refuge d’oiseaux migrateurs)

new right of way

new right of way means land that is subject to a right of way that is proposed to be developed for an electrical transmission line, an oil and gas pipeline, a railway line, or an all-season public highway and that is not alongside and contiguous to an existing right of way. (nouvelle emprise)

nuclear facility

nuclear facility has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Nuclear Safety and Control Act . (installation nucléaire)

nuclear substance

nuclear substance has the same meaning as in section 2 of the Nuclear Safety and Control Act . (substance nucléaire)

offshore

oil and gas pipeline

oil and gas pipeline means a pipeline that is used, or is to be used, for the transmission of hydrocarbons alone or with any other commodity. (pipeline d’hydrocarbures)

paper product

paper product [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

pulp

pulp [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

pulp and paper mill

pulp and paper mill [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

right of way

right of way [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

uranium mill

uranium mill means a mill as defined in section 1 of the Uranium Mines and Mills Regulations . (usine de concentration d’uranium)

uranium mine

uranium mine means a mine as defined in section 1 of the Uranium Mines and Mills Regulations . (mine d’uranium)

waste management system

waste management system [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

water body

water body means any water body, including a canal, a reservoir, an ocean and a wetland as that term is defined in The Federal Policy on Wetland Conservation published in 1991 by the Department of the Environment, up to the high-water mark, but does not include a sewage or waste treatment lagoon or a mine tailings pond. (plan d’eau)

wetland

wetland [Repealed, SOR/2013-186, s. 1]

wildlife area