Authorizations to Transport Restricted Firearms and Prohibited Firearms Regulations
RENEWAL

1.6 For the purposes of subsection 67(1) of the Act, the manner in which an authorization to transport is renewed is any of the manners in which it can be issued.

SOR/2004-269, s. 3.

NUMBER OF FIREARMS

2. An authorization to transport may authorize the transportation of one or more restricted firearms or prohibited firearms.

CONTENTS OF AUTHORIZATIONS TO TRANSPORT THAT TAKE THE FORM OF LICENCE CONDITIONS

3. An authorization to transport that takes the form of a condition attached to a licence must

(a) identify all of the firearms to which the authorization to transport applies; and

(b) specify (i) the period for which the authorization to transport is issued, (ii) the places between which the firearms to which it applies may be transported, and (iii) the reasons for which the firearms may be transported between the specified places.



CONDITION

4. A chief firearms officer who issues an authorization to transport shall attach to it the condition that the firearm be transported by a route that, in all the circumstances, is reasonably direct.

REVOCATION

5. A chief firearms officer who issues an individual's authorization to transport shall revoke it if

(a) the individual's licence to possess any of the firearms referred to in the authorization is revoked or reaches its expiry date; or

(b) the chief firearms officer becomes aware that the individual's physical or mental state has deteriorated to an extent that may affect the safety of the individual or of any other person.

NOTICE OF REFUSAL OR REVOCATION

6. (1) A notice of a decision to refuse to issue an authorization to transport or to revoke an authorization to transport is sufficiently given if the notice is addressed to the applicant for or holder of the authorization at their address that is set out in the application for the authorization or, if the individual has advised the chief firearms officer of a change of that address, at the new address, and the notice is (a) delivered personally, at any time that is reasonable in the circumstances; (b) sent by registered mail or by courier; or (c) transmitted by electronic means that can produce a paper record.

(2) The notice is deemed to be received (a) on the day of delivery, if delivered personally; (b) on the fifth working day, excluding Saturdays and holidays, after (i) the postmark date, if it is sent by mail, and (ii) the date of shipment on the waybill, if it is sent by courier; and (c) on the day of transmission, if sent by electronic means.



SOR/2004-269, s. 4.

COMING INTO FORCE

7. These Regulations come into force on December 1, 1998.