Canada.ca
Use filters to search for the most recent news articles.

News type Any backgrounders media advisories news releases speeches statements

Institution Any Aboriginal Business Canada Administrative Tribunals Support Service of Canada Advisory Panel on Responsible Conduct of Research Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency Bedford Institute of Oceanography Canada Agricultural Review Tribunal Canada-Alberta Oil Sands Environmental Monitoring Canada Border Services Agency Canada Centre for Inland Waters Canada Economic Development for Quebec Regions Canada Employment Insurance Commission Canada Excellence Research Chairs Canada Firearms Centre Canada Industrial Relations Board Canada Infrastructure Bank Canada Research Chairs Canada Revenue Agency Canada School of Public Service Canadian Army Canadian Centre for Housing Technology Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety Canadian Coast Guard Canadian Commercial Corporation Canadian Conservation Institute Canadian Cultural Property Export Review Board Canadian Dairy Information Centre (CDIC) Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency Canadian Food Inspection Agency Canadian Grain Commission Canadian Heritage Canadian Heritage Information Network Canadian Human Rights Commission Canadian Institutes of Health Research Canadian Intellectual Property Office Canadian Intergovernmental Conference Secretariat Canadian International Trade Tribunal Canadian Northern Economic Development Agency Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission Canadian Pari-Mutuel Agency Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission Canadian Security Intelligence Service Canadian Space Agency Canadian Special Operations Forces Command Canadian Transportation Agency Civilian Review and Complaints Commission for the RCMP Committee on the status of Endangered Wildlife Communications Research Centre Canada Communications Security Establishment Canada Competition Bureau Canada Competition Tribunal Copyright Board Canada Correctional Service Canada Criminal Intelligence Service Canada Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada Defence Research and Development Canada Democratic Institutions Department of Finance Canada Department of Justice Canada Education in Canada Employment and Social Development Canada Environmental Protection Review Canada Environment and Climate Change Canada Farm Products Council of Canada Federal Economic Development Agency for Southern Ontario FedNor Financial Consumer Agency of Canada Financial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of Canada Fisheries and Oceans Canada Geographical Names Board of Canada Geological Survey of Canada Geomatics Canada Global Affairs Canada Health Canada Historic Sites and Monuments Board of Canada Human Rights Tribunal of Canada Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada Independent Review Panel for Defence Acquisition Indian Oil and Gas Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada Indigenous Services Canada Industrial Technologies Office Infrastructure Canada Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada Innovation Hub Integrated Terrorism Assessment Centre Interagency Advisory Panel on Research Ethics Intergovernmental Affairs Judicial Compensation and Benefits Commission Labour Program Leader of the Government in the House of Commons Library and Archives Canada Marine Security Operations Centres Project Measurement Canada Military Grievances External Review Committee Military Police Complaints Commission of Canada National Defence National Energy Board National Film Board National Research Council Canada National Seniors Council Natural Resources Canada Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council Networks of Centres of Excellence of Canada Northern Pipeline Agency Canada Occupational Health and Safety Tribunal Canada Office of the Chief Military Judge Office of the Commissioner for Federal Judicial Affairs Canada Office of the Communications Security Establishment Commissioner Office of the Extractive Sector Corporate Social Responsibility Counsellor Office of the Federal Ombudsman for Victims of Crime Office of the Ombudsperson for the Department of National Defence and the Canadian Forces Office of the Procurement Ombudsman Office of the Superintendent of Bankruptcy Canada Office of the Superintendent of Financial Institutions Canada Office of the Taxpayers' Ombudsman Office of the Veterans' Ombudsman Parks Canada Parole Board of Canada Patented Medicine Prices Review Board Canada Physical Resources Bureau Polar Knowledge Canada PPP Canada Privy Council Office Public Health Agency of Canada Public Prosecution Service of Canada Public Safety Canada Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal Canada Public Service Commission of Canada Public Service Labour Relations and Employment Board Public Services and Procurement Canada RCMP External Review Committee Registry of the Specific Claims Tribunal of Canada Royal Canadian Air Force Royal Canadian Mounted Police Royal Canadian Navy Saguenay - Lac-Saint-Jean Secretariat of the National Security and Intelligence Committee of Parliamentarians Security Intelligence Review Committee Service Canada Shared Services Canada Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada Social Security Tribunal of Canada Statistics Canada Status of Women Canada The Canadian Shellfish Sanitation Program The Correctional Investigator Canada The National Battlefields Commission The Ontario-Quebec Continental Gateway Translation Bureau Transportation Appeal Tribunal of Canada Transportation Safety Board of Canada Transport Canada Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat Veterans Affairs Canada Veterans Review and Appeal Board Western Economic Diversification Canada Wild Species Youth

Subject Any AA Arts, Music, Literature AG Agriculture EC Economics and Industry ET Education and Training FM Form descriptors GV Government and Politics HE Health and Safety HI History and Archaeology IN Information and Communications LB Labour LN Language and Linguistics LW Law MI Military NE Nature and Environment PE Persons PR Processes SO Society and Culture ST Science and Technology TR Transport

Minister Any Hon. Ahmed D. Hussen Hon. Amarjeet Sohi Hon. Bardish Chagger Hon. Bernadette Jordan Hon. Bill Blair Hon. Carla Qualtrough Hon. Carolyn Bennett Hon. Catherine McKenna Hon. Chrystia Freeland Hon. David Lametti Hon. Diane Lebouthillier Hon. Dominic LeBlanc Hon. Filomena Tassi Hon. François-Philippe Champagne Hon. Ginette Petitpas Taylor Hon. Harjit Singh Sajjan Hon. James Gordon Carr Hon. Jean-Yves Duclos Hon. Jonathan Wilkinson Hon. Joyce Murray Hon. Karina Gould Hon. Kirsty Duncan Hon. Lawrence MacAulay Hon. Marc Garneau Hon. Marie-Claude Bibeau Hon. Maryam Monsef Hon. Mary Ng Hon. Mélanie Joly Hon. Navdeep Singh Bains Hon. Pablo Rodriguez Hon. Patricia A. Hajdu Hon. Ralph Goodale Hon. Seamus O’Regan Hon. William Francis Morneau Right Hon. Justin P. J. Trudeau

Audience Any Aboriginal peoples business children educators employers funding applicants general public government immigrants job seekers media non-Canadians non-governmental organizations parents persons with disabilities rural community scientists seniors students travellers veterans visitors to Canada women youth

Region Any Atlantic British Columbia Ontario Prairies Quebec Territories