Jason Kenney on banning niqabs, burkas during citizenship oath
The following are remarks made by Immigration Minister Jason Kenney on Monday, as he announced a ban on face coverings for new Canadians taking their citizenship oath

Jason Kenney

“I’m here today to talk about the incredible importance of Canadian citizenship. Every year, Canada welcomes over 150,000 new members of our Canadian family, people who came from over 180 different countries of origin with a hope of living in this free and prosperous land, to respect its laws, its customs: to become good citizens.

“I’ve been so honoured to act as our minister of citizenship for the past four years, three years during which time we have tried to reinforce the value and a deeper understanding of Canadian citizenship rooted in our history. So many who went before us made sacrifices to build this country. We owe it to them to ensure that we always respect the incredible value of Canadian citizenship.

“There are four legal requirements to become a Canadian citizen: firstly, to have a basic knowledge of Canada; secondly, a capacity to speak one of our two official languages; thirdly, to have been a resident in Canada for three out of five years, to have actually lived here and demonstrated a commitment to the country and finally, to take the oath of citizenship.

[np-related]

“All we ask of people is to fulfill the requirements of citizenship and to swear an oath before one’s fellow citizens that one will be loyal to our traditions that go back centuries. This common pledge is the bedrock on which Canadian society rests. That is why starting today, my department will require that all those taking the oath do so openly. From today, all persons will be required to show their face when swearing the oath.

“I have received complaints from members of Parliament, from citizens, from judges of the citizenship court that it is hard to ensure that individuals whose faces are covered are actually reciting the oath. Requiring that all candidates show their faces while reciting the oath allows judges and everyone present to share in the ceremony, to ensure that all citizenship candidates are in fact, reciting the oath as required by our law. This is not simply a practical measure. It is a matter of deep principle that goes to the heart of our identity and our values of openness and equality. The citizenship oath is a quintessentially public act. It is a public declaration that you are joining the Canadian family and it must be taken freely and openly.

“To segregate one group of Canadians or allow them to hide their faces, to hide their identity from us precisely when they are joining our community is contrary to Canada’s proud commitment to openness and to social cohesion. It’s important to note that this is an expectation. If Canada is to be true to our history and to our highest ideals, we cannot tolerate two classes of citizens. We cannot have two classes of citizenship ceremonies.

“Canadian citizenship is not simply about the right to carry a passport or to vote. It is also about responsibilities and obligations. It defines who we are as Canadians including our mutual responsibilities to one another and a shared commitment to values that are rooted in our history. At its best a citizenship ceremony captures the profound nature of this shared commitment.

“We believe that this new rule is the best way to be faithful to that ideal. What I am announcing today makes part of our broader action plan for Canadian citizenship to ensure that we truly value this great gift that we share. We’ve done this first of all, by improving the knowledge requirement with a new test and the new study guide Discover Canada which goes much more deeply into our history, shared values, institutions and symbols. We’ve done it by announcing that there will finally be third party consistent testing of language ability in French or English. We’ve done it by addressing the problem of fraud in demonstrating permanent residency in our citizenship program.

“Last week, we announced that our investigation has identified some 6,500 individuals who have been engaged in such residency fraud using crooked immigration consultants against whom we are taking enforcement action. Finally we are ensuring that the citizenship oath itself is properly respected by all of those who take it so that they in taking a solemn commitment, being a witness publicly to the rest of their fellow citizens, demonstrate who they are and their commitment to Canada.”