Stephen Harper: Roots of a rebel (1959–1978)
OTTAWA — On the morning of Tuesday, May 21, 2013, Prime Minister Stephen Harper walked into Room 237-C at the heart of Parliament Hill’s Centre Block to speak to members of the Conservative caucus.

He was met with a standing ovation from the MPs and senators jammed inside, many anxiously hoping their leader would work his magic – and make a political hurricane disappear.

Forty-eight hours earlier, Harper had reluctantly announced the resignation of his chief of staff, Nigel Wright, who had given $90,172 of his own money to Sen. Mike Duffy. The money was meant to repay Duffy’s ineligible Senate housing expenses, and those present at the caucus meeting expected some explanations.

For years, Harper – long an advocate of Senate reform – had promised never to appoint anyone to the Senate. Yet, by 2013, he had appointed dozens. On one day alone, he made 18 appointments — including Duffy, former broadcaster Pamela Wallin, and aboriginal leader Patrick Brazeau.

Now all three were enmeshed in controversy over their expense claims — and thanks to Wright’s cheque, the prime minister’s office had been drawn in.

Harper walked to the podium that looked out over his caucus. Against a backdrop of four Canadian flags, he spoke.

“I don’t think any of you are going to be surprised to hear that I am not happy,” he began.

From their leather-backed seats in the room, its towering walls bedecked with historic murals from the 1920s, MPs and senators listened intently. Crowded at the back of the room, after receiving a rare invitation to attend a caucus speech, stood reporters, photographers and television-camera operators.

“I’m very upset with some conduct we have witnessed — conduct of some parliamentarians and the conduct of my own office,” Harper continued.

Then, abruptly, he changed the subject — reiterating old pledges about ethical government and Senate reform and telling Conservatives they must not let “distractions” push them off their political agenda. And he took his seat at a table at the front of the room.

The vagueness of Harper’s remarks, at such a critical moment, left journalists incredulous.

“What about the cheque?” some shouted.

“What about Nigel Wright?”

“What did you know?”

Harper, his frozen smile followed by an almost blank expression, ignored them. Caucus members tried to drown out the questions with cheers, and one former Harper aide — ironically, a senator he had appointed — moved in to shield him from TV cameras as party officials shooed the media out.

The speech, for many, was a turning point. It was proof of something they had feared for a long time: that Harper, once a principled conservative, was now just like other politicians — dodging scandal, declining to explain, refusing to accept responsibility.

He came to office determined to follow a conservative roadmap of transparency, accountability, smaller government and balanced budgets.

Yet, within a month of Wright’s resignation, the RCMP would launch a criminal investigation into the Senate affair, and Harper’s fellow Alberta Conservative MP, Brent Rathgeber, would quit caucus, saying he could no longer stomach how the government was avoiding questions and compromising its principles on policies “in the name of political expediency.”

What had happened to Stephen Harper — the prime minister of such conservative promise, who helped found the Reform party, re-unite the right, and vanquish the once-mighty Liberals?

Harper had steered the country through a global recession, worked relentlessly on free-trade agreements, confronted the economic imperatives of an aging population, and had even been willing to tackle the often-intractable problems faced by aboriginals.

His principles in some areas of governing — such as foreign policy, justice and social policy — remained unshaken.

But although he had once railed against deficits, political patronage, the appointment of senators, corporate bailouts, and granting unique status to Quebec, he had gone on to commit all of these supposed sins.

Now, at the midterm of his majority government, Harper was swept up in accusations that he had somehow lost his path.

Are such perceptions fair? It’s clear Harper is a man of contradictions. Surprising compromises live alongside unflinching convictions. Incremental change appears to take priority over revolutionary gestures.

To some, he seems cold, aloof and cruelly partisan. To others, he is decent, loyal, compassionate, even funny.

As Stephen Harper marks the 10th year since he helped re-create the Conservative party, and the 20th anniversary of his arrival in Parliament as a Reform MP, two questions loom: How has Harper changed Canadian politics, and how has politics changed Harper?

Harper declined an interview for this Postmedia News project. But dozens of others were interviewed — his friends, political associates and critics — to help shed light on this complex, cautious conservative.

**

A curious — and tragic — event in family history before Stephen Harper’s birth may have laid the foundation for his basic values.

On the afternoon of Jan. 21, 1950, his grandfather, Harris Harper, a schoolteacher and principal in Moncton, N.B., mysteriously disappeared.

As later recounted by Stephen Harper’s uncle, Harris had paid a quick visit to his doctor’s office for an injection of vitamin B, and a witness said he looked disoriented as he left the building. He did not return home, where his wife and two sons lived, and where a paycheque lay on his dresser.

Police launched a search with the help of 1,000 volunteers, and issued cross-Canada alerts and missing-person flyers. Someone bearing his description was seen later that weekend at the Saint John Salvation Army Hostel.

But Harris Harper was never found, and was eventually declared dead. The disappearance led to gossip. Had he committed suicide? Was it a horrible case of amnesia? Harris’s sons could only have been deeply scarred by that event.

One son was Joseph Harper — Joe to his friends. He became a chartered accountant, moved to Toronto, met and married Margaret Johnson, and started a family with three sons of his own: Stephen, Grant and Robert.

Joseph Harper never forgot the lesson of his father’s disappearance.

“It made (my father) appreciate that all the good things in life, all of the best things in life, in work and play, in friendships and family, are still just passing things,” Stephen Harper said in 2003, in the eulogy at Joseph Harper’s funeral at Westminster Presbyterian Church in Calgary.

“And it made him deeply cherish these things all the more and, especially, to be thankful for the eternal God that provides them.”

Young Stephen grew up with a deep appreciation for his own family. In later years, as a conservative politician, he would emphasize the importance of family as a “building block of our society.”

For the young Harper, family meant comfort, loyalty and responsibility. He was particularly close to his father: in the eulogy he said, “There is no adequate way of saying goodbye to the most important man in your life.”

A year later, nearing the end of his first election campaign as Conservative leader, Harper spoke to a Toronto Star interviewer about the bond with his father – of how, for instance, they would sit by the railway tracks and watch the trains. He spoke of going through the campaign “without the advice and counsel” of his father.

“He was a person of scrupulous integrity,” Harper told the interviewer. “He was a stickler for following the letter and spirit of all rules.”

Gordon Shaw, who worked with Joseph at Imperial Oil and later helped found the Reform party with Stephen Harper, said, “In a way, Stephen was similar to his father. He did not have a lot of friends.

“I appreciated (Joe’s) intelligence and he was a very interesting guy to talk to.”

Joseph Harper was a big fan of jazz, particularly Duke Ellington, and son Stephen took piano lessons — a skill he kept from even his political advisers until he took the stage at the National Arts Centre in 2009 to sing a Beatles tune.

Joseph Harper loved military history. When his son later worked in Ottawa, Joseph would sometimes troop to nearby museums and archives for research on military insignia.

Much later, as prime minister, Stephen Harper would place priority on rebuilding the military and creating a better sense of history among Canadians about their past wars.

For his first 12 years, Harper was raised in a red-brick, two-storey home in Leaside, a middle-class Toronto neighbourhood of tree-lined streets and crescents. He attended Northlea Public School, two blocks from his home.

“When I was a boy here, you felt safe, you knew people were looking out for you,” he told a gathering of residents in April 2013 who were marking the 100th anniversary of Leaside.

“You felt you could knock, and did in fact knock on any door at any time if you were in trouble or you needed something.”

“People were personally responsible and civically minded.”

Harper’s first “real vivid political memory” was the great flag debate in 1964 prompted by the Pearson government’s proposal for a new ensign.

Leasiders were deeply divided — a fact confirmed by a five-year-old Harper, who conducted a survey of neighbours on his street, Bessborough Drive. He found half the street wanted the old flag; the other half, including his parents, wanted a new flag (although the Harpers were more partial to a proposed ensign with three maple leaves and blue borders).

“Emotions ran very high,” Stephen Harper recalled at the anniversary gathering. “Many neighbours stopped speaking to one another, so intense were the differences.”

A couple of years after the family moved across town in 1971 to a large ranch-style bungalow in Etobicoke, Harper enrolled in nearby Richview Collegiate Institute.

The teenager known as “Steve” excelled in every subject; in 1978, he was one of four students chosen to represent the school on CBC TV’s quiz show, Reach for the Top.

“Both Stephen and I were a little bit more in the geek camp and a little bit in the athletic camp.”

Bob Scott, who taught him medieval history in Grade 11 and American history in Grade 13, said Harper was the school’s top student. But Scott didn’t recall Harper showing much interest in politics. “I didn’t see any conservative streak in him.”

“He was very smart, very well respected by his peers. He was reserved, but he was not geeky. He was not pushy. Despite his obviously superior intelligence and ability, he never flaunted. He was just quietly competent in everything.”

In fact, he was a kid who “got along with everybody,” said Scott.

Years later, Joseph Harper had a long conversation during a late-night flight with Ray Speaker, a one-time Reform MP. “We got talking about Stephen and his dad said to me, ‘My son was a good student in school and he knew he could make 90 per cent. He studied all night to make 100 per cent the next day,’” said Speaker.

Larry Moate, a friend and classmate throughout high school, said the two were both “keeners” who studied Latin together.

Students had their cliques: athletic “jocks”; party animals (alcohol, not drugs, was more popular); and academic kids perceived as “geeks.”

“Both Stephen and I were a little bit more in the geek camp and a little bit in the athletic camp.”

Both joined the school’s cross-country team. Tall and skinny, Harper practised and ran with steady determination, despite occasional bouts of asthma that persisted in later years.

“Running is a sport where you have to be disciplined,” said Moate. “You have to be committed. That reflected his mindset then and I think you can see characteristics of that now.”

Moreover, the sport taught Harper a thing or two about competition.

“Running cross-country, believe me, can be a contact sport,” said Moate. “There is a narrow pathway that you have to run through and elbows are flying.”

Moate and Harper listened to music — the Beatles were a Harper favourite even then — and sometimes had deep discussions “of a spiritual nature.” Harper was raised in the United Church and would later become a follower of the evangelical Christian and Missionary Alliance.

“He had a deep empathy with humans, with his fellow man,” said Moate. “He wasn’t a shallow teenager only interested in self-gratification. I think he actually cared for other people around him and for the state of humanity.”

**

In June of 1978, Harper finished high school. Despite his reserved nature, his yearbook entry, typical of the times, was flippant: “Steve was active in the apathy movement … Pet Peeve: Reality. Favourite Saying: Comes only in essay form. U. of T. for Commerce, Law.”

Harper graduated with a 94.7-per-cent average, taking the gold medal for the highest grade in the graduating class. That September, armed with a scholarship, he entered the University of Toronto’s Trinity College.

His future appeared clear – but then the unexpected happened. Within two months, Harper dropped out, apparently telling his anxious parents he wanted something different: to get a job, figure out his life, and return to academia in a couple of years.

Moate was “shocked,” but adds, “It was clear he didn’t like it. And one day he just said, ‘Larry, I’m quitting.’”

Harper’s reasons for dropping out have never been publicly explained, though his mother was worried he would never return to school.

Moate doesn’t recall Harper telling him why he left, but thinks he knows.

“I always felt that all his life in high school he had really been pushed academically. I think as part of his upbringing, academics was emphasized and hard work was emphasized.

“I think he was pushed and he finally realized once he got to university, maybe it’s not what he had wanted.”

It was the first move in a pattern of withdrawals that would surprise those around Harper during his political career. He wasn’t afraid to step back and consider his options. He’d choose his direction carefully before charging forward.

Harper left the security of his family and moved to Edmonton to work in the computer room at Imperial Oil, which employed his father back in Ontario.

But his mind was racing with ideas, and within two years he was studying economics at the University of Calgary.

It was there that he would meet a young woman who discovered politics with him and who would become his fiancée for a year.

It was there, in Alberta, that his political awakening would occur.

Stephen Harper timeline: A public life

Next: A political awakening (1978–1993).

mkennedy@postmedia.com

Twitter.com/Mark_Kennedy_