Liberals to resettle 10,000 Syrian refugees by year-end, 15,000 fewer than election promise
The government will resettle only about 10,000 Syrian refugees by the end of the year, or less than half the 25,000 promised by Prime Minister Justin Trudeau during the election campaign.

Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship officials revealed the shortfall on Tuesday, as they presented the government’s plan for bringing the Syrian refugees to Canada. The entire 25,000 won’t arrive in Canada until the end of February, the officials said. The effort will cost as much as $678 million over six years.

The revelation represents the Liberal government’s first unfulfilled promise since the election. Trudeau had pledged to resettle 25,000 Syrian refugees by the end of the year during the campaign, after pictures of three-year-old Alan Kurdi’s body on a Turkish beach made the Syrian refugee crisis a major campaign issue.

Numerous refugee groups and other civil society organizations had warned in recent weeks that the promise was unrealistic, while some provincial and municipal leaders had called on the government to take its time because of security concerns. But Trudeau and his ministers had stood by the plan – at least until Tuesday.

Officials said a number of factors went into the decision to aim for 10,000 Syrian refugees instead of the full number. Those include the need to get documents for Syrians to leave the countries where they are currently located, the need to ensure proper accommodation, and challenges identifying all 25,000.

[np_storybar title=”Syrian refugees: By the Numbers” link=””]

5: The number of phases for Canada’s Syrian refugee plan which includes identification, processing, transportation, arrivals and integration.

6: The number of years in the government’s financial plan.

$678 million: The estimated federal cost of the refugee program, not including help for provinces.

500: The number of staff from all departments working on the Syrian refugee file overseas.

10,000: The number of refugees expected to come to Canada by Dec. 31, 2015.

15,000: The remaining refugees expected to come to Canada by February 2016.

10,000: The number of privately sponsored refugees.

15,000: The number of government-sponsored refugees.

– The Canadian Press [/np_storybar]

The Liberal election platform had also said that the government would sponsor all 25,000 Syrian refugees. However, government officials who presented the resettlement plan in a technical briefing (they cannot be named under government policy), said the government would sponsor only 15,000, with the remainder being privately sponsored.

The refugees will arrive in Canada after being screened for health and security risks overseas. The majority will come from Lebanon, Jordan and Turkey, though some may arrive from other places as well. Approximately four million Syrians are in those three countries after fleeing Syria’s nearly five-year civil war.

The government will prioritize complete families, women at risk, and members of the LGBT community. Single men will only be allowed to come to Canada if they identify as LGBT or are accompanying their parents as part of a family unit.

Those priority categories do not apply to privately sponsored refugees. While those asylum seekers will also be carefully screened, officials said, otherwise single men will be allowed to come to Canada like any other refugee. Applications, either private or government, that raise any questions will be set aside.

The government plans to use chartered flights to bring the refugees to Toronto and Montreal, but could turn to military aircraft if necessary. Privately sponsored refugees will go to their host communities upon arrival, while the government-sponsored refugees will head to 36 communities for integration.

Thirteen of the communities are in Quebec, with the other 23 communities in other parts of the country. A Canadian Armed Forces official said the military has 6,000 spaces on military bases available to house refugees. However, the hope was that there would be enough spaces in communities to take them all in.

Officials expected the first group of refugees to arrive in Canada in early December, though they didn’t have a specific date. Officials said 102 Syrian refugees have arrived since Nov. 4, which is when they started the clock on the commitment. The 3,089 resettled between July 2013 and Nov. 3 did not count toward the total.