OCAC OIL COMPANIES ADVISORY COUNCIL
Oil Companies Advisory Council

The Downstream Oil Sector (Refining, Marketing, Distribution) plays a very significant role in Pakistan's economic development, ensuring uninterrupted supply of petroleum product to the country in order to keep the wheels of the economy moving. With an annual sales of Rs. 1 trillion, direct employment of over 100,000 people, indirect employment (transport sector) of another 24,000 persons, capital investment of over 30 billion Pak Rupees over last 5 years, annual generation of taxes around Rs. 200 Billion, a world class IT infrastructure, skill sets ranging from Technical, IT, Finance, Sales, Marketing & HR, and plans initiated for provision of better product and better service, the Downstream Oil Sector is a significant contributor to the national well-being.

The members of OCAC currently comprise of the country's Five Refineries (Pak-Arab Refinery Limited PARCO, National Refinery Limited NRL, Pakistan Refinery Limited PRL, Attock Refinery Limited ARL and Byco Petroleum Pakistan Limited BPPL) Twenty Oil Marketing Companies (Pakistan State Oil Co. Limited PSO, Shell Pakistan Limited SPL, Attock Petroleum Limited APL, Total Parco Pakistan Limited TPPL, Puma Energy Pakistan (Pvt) Limited PUMA, Hascol Petroleum Limited HPL, Byco Petroleum Pakistan Limited BPPL, Be Energy Limited BEL, Zoom Petroleum Limited ZOOM, Gas & Oil Pakistan Pvt. Limited GO, Oilco Trading Company (Pvt.) Limited OILCO, Askar Oil Services (Pvt.) Limited AOSPL, Horizon Oil Company Pvt Limited HORIZON, OTO Pakistan (Pvt) Limited OTO, Quality 1 Petroleum (Pvt) Limited QUALITY1, Zoom Marketing Oil (Pvt) Limited ZMOPL, The Fuelers Private Limited FUELERS, Al Noor Petroleum Private Limited AL NOOR, Kepler Petroleum Private Limited KEPLER, Petrowell Private Limited PETROWELL) and One Pipeline Transportation Company (Pak-Arab Pipeline Co. Limited PAPCO). New entrants in the Downstream Oil sector are coming in the country and the number of member companies is likely to increase.

In order to coordinate all activities, OCAC plays a pivotal role in rationalizing these imports in such a manner that supply/demand is balanced. It is also a focal body for the Government and other agencies to interact with the oil industry.

Health Safety and Environment (HSE) is a very important aspect within the oil industry. There is also a growing awareness within the public that had hitherto not been present. To coordinate implementation of HSE standards within the oil industry, OCAC has set up a separate sub-committee for this purpose. This provides a forum to member companies who, even whilst competing in the market place, cooperate in HSE matters. This provides an opportunity to the members in sharing information and expertise, which in turn helps them in safe operations.

The OCAC is governed by an Executive Committee comprising of the Chief Executives of each of the member companies. A Chairman, who is nominated from among the member companies for a working term of one calendar year, heads the Executive Committee. OCAC's overall functioning is the responsibility of the Chief Executive Officer who is assisted by a Secretary General and a Secretary.

The significant objectives of the Council are as under:

To represent the downstream oil industry at various forums in matters of common interest affecting their operations in Pakistan

To establish short/long range demand/supply balances for various oil products and advise the Government and Member Companies in this respect

To pro-actively plan any Infrastructure Upgrades De-bottlenecking needed as per medium/long term petroleum product availability projections

To collect, prepare and circulate various trade statistics and other relevant information to member companies as well as the Government

To comment on and convey collective views of various members on matters concerning the oil industry's well being such as proposed legislation relating to taxation and other fiscal measures

Develop plans/suggestions to help Government to streamline the oil and gas sector

Some of the areas of OCAC work and areas of focus are:

Effective petroleum product supply logistics management

Plan to overcome any port constraints

Identifying the right energy wise for Pakistan

Petroleum product improvement plans: better, more environment friendly product for the Pakistani consumer

Follow-up with the Ministries of Petroleum and Finance to ensure the continued viability of the Downstream Oil Sector

OCAC COMMITTEES