Ralph Goodale
There was a big fuss today about a New York Times article reporting that middle class America is no longer substantially better off than median income earners in many other countries.

Right-wing apologists for the Harper Conservatives were quick to claim that this means big gains have been made by middle class Canadians. A more sober reading of the data suggests that the narrowing of the gap between middle class Americans and their Canadian counterparts is as much due to the US falling-back as it is to Canadians leaping forward.

And in reality, the issue for Canadians is not whether we are doing better or worse than the US. It’s how well (or poorly) we are doing in absolute terms. Compared to a few years ago, are we making enough progress? Is the Canadian middle class substantially better off?

The hard arithmetic is not encouraging. According to Statistics Canada data — accumulated before that agency was mangled by the Harper government’s war on facts and evidence — median after-tax family incomes in Canada in 1980 were $59,600. By 2011, they had risen to $68,000. That’s a gain of just 14% — 14% spread over 30 years!

Mr. Harper and Jason Kenney say that’s good enough for them. They proclaim the Canadian middle class is doing very well, any alleged angst is a myth and those who call for a better performance are just a bunch of whiners.

Really? Is income growth of LESS THAN HALF A PERCENTAGE POINT PER YEAR good enough for you?

The Conservative position is smug and complacent. They’re in rampant denial.

Feeble income growth among middle class Canadians is why more than three-quarters have no decent retirement security. It’s why two-thirds worry about being able to afford post-secondary education for their kids. It’s why more than half think their children may not have the chance to do as well in life as their parents.

None of these real life challenges is met by a statistical comparison to a middle class in America that has declined in relative terms. What’s needed is a new Canadian government that makes lifting the well-being of our middle class — and all those who are working so hard just to get there — an immediate Canadian priority.

We can do so much better than Mr. Harper’s grinding mediocrity.