Sign the Petition for a new 9/11 investigation
Architects and engineers have signed the Architects & Engineers for 9/11 Truth petition. Sign this petition

Petition Text

The Petition

PETITION TO THE HONORABLE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

See the petition accepted by the Clerk of the Parliament here

PETITION TO THE HONORABLE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA

We, the undersigned citizens of Canada

who now avail themselves of their ancient and undoubted right thus to present a grievance common to your Petitioners in the certain assurance that your honourable House will therefor provide a remedy, humbly sheweth our belief that there is sufficient doubt about the omissions and inconsistencies in the official United States of America 9/11 Commission Report to show that 9/11 was an act of state sponsored terrorism. Foremost, the official United States of America 9/11 Commission Report omits new forensic evidence of the use of explosives that might have been the actual cause of the destruction of the World Trade Center Twin Towers and the collapse of the third World Trade Center Building 7. And, as a result, Canada now being a partner with the United States of America in the Global War of Terror, therefore has a responsibility to verify the findings of the United States of America 9/11 Commission Report before committing our military and other resources to the conflict.

THEREFORE,

Your Petitioners pray for the Government of Canada to conduct a

PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW

of the omissions and inconsistencies in the official United States of America 9/11 Commission Report and of the new forensic evidence listed below. Your petitioners pray that the Government of Canada hear our policy recommendation to protect Canadians against future acts of state sponsored terrorism.

The new forensic evidence includes, but is not limited to:

•Total destruction of buildings with pulverization of concrete floors – proceeding symmetrically through the path of the greatest resistance – at nearly free-fall acceleration;

•Several tons of molten iron/steel found in the debris piles of all 3 high-rises and billions of previously molten iron microspheres in all of the WTC dust;

•Nano-thermite composite incendiaries discovered throughout the WTC dust.

•DVD Material entitled: “9/11: Blueprint for Truth” by AE911Truth.org ( View on-line in English)

•The peer-reviewed paper Active Thermitic Material Discovered in Dust from the 9/11 World Trade Center Catastrophe, by Niels H. Harrit, et al. posted at the Bentham Open Chemical Physics Journal.

Your Petitioners pray for the Government of Canada to conduct a parliamentary review using advice from citizens groups and expert witnesses in the field of 9/11 studies in order to protect Canadians against future acts of state sponsored terrorism and ensure that our military resources are spent properly.

Your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray,

The Undersigned

Artist’s Rendering of the Petition