Travel advice and advisories for Libya
Avoid all travel to Libya due to persistent insecurity throughout the country, including sustained armed conflict, a high risk of terrorist attacks, an unpredictable political situation and a high crime rate. Given the recent deterioration in the security situation near Tripoli, you should leave by commercial means as soon as it’s safe to do so.

Safety and security

Safety and security

Military hostilities Since April 3, 2019, military hostilities have increased among opposing Libyan forces in the west of the country. On April 4, the Prime Minister announced a state of emergency and authorized the mobilization of military and security units loyal to the Government of National Accord. If you are in a conflict area: Keep emergency provisions such as water and food

Keep up to date on the security situation

Make sure that your travel documents are in order

Follow the instructions of local authorities

Shelter in place until it is safe to leave the area Emergency consular assistance

Terrorism

There is a risk of terrorism. Attacks can occur at any time throughout the country. Extremist groups have specifically threatened and carried out attacks against Westerners and Western interests in Libya. Further attacks are likely.

Targets could include:

government buildings, including schools and embassies

places of worship

airports and other transportation hubs and networks

checkpoints

public areas such as tourist attractions, restaurants, bars, coffee shops, shopping centres, markets, hotels and other sites frequented by foreigners

foreign officials, diplomats and aid workers

teachers and other private-sector workers

The situation in Benghazi is particularly unstable and volatile. Attacks against foreign interests and foreigners occur regularly.

Be extremely vigilant and aware of your surroundings at all times in public places.

Political situation

The political situation is extremely fragile. Formal state security structures have largely collapsed.

Armed clashes

Sporadic clashes between armed groups continue to occur in all regions of Libya and with no warning.

Demonstrations

Demonstrations occur. Even peaceful demonstrations can turn violent at any time. They can also lead to disruptions to traffic and public transportation.

Avoid areas where demonstrations and large gatherings are taking place

Follow the instructions of local authorities

Monitor local media for information on ongoing demonstrations

More about mass gatherings (large-scale events)

Kidnapping

There is a high threat of kidnapping in Libya. Foreigners are common targets. Maintain a high level of vigilance at all times.

Border areas

You may face heightened risks at the border areas with Algeria, Chad, Niger, Sudan and Tunisia due to the presence of armed groups, the threat of banditry and an extreme kidnapping risk. Borders may close on short notice, including, in particular, the borders with Egypt and Tunisia.

Travel to the interior and to border areas without an officially sanctioned guide or specific permission from the Libyan authorities is forbidden, with the exception of official land border crossings to Egypt and Tunisia.

Crime

The crime rate is very high in Libya, where weapons are easily available and government forces do not have control of the country.

Carjackings and armed robberies are common occurrences.

Landmines

The risk of encountering unexploded ordnance and indiscriminately laid landmines is high wherever fighting has occurred. Exercise caution in these areas.

Road safety

The road system is extensive but many roads in the south are unpaved. There are only sand tracks in the desert.

Avoid all road travel in the southeast, due to the possibility of landmines, kidnapping, banditry and terrorism.

Travel on the coastal highway in the east of the country is dangerous, due to ongoing inter-factional fighting and the risk of kidnapping by extremist groups.

The rate of vehicle accidents is high. Poor driving skills, excessive speeds and traffic violations pose risks.

In the event of an accident, remain calm and contact the local police. If the accident resulted in loss of life or heavy damage, local authorities may detain motorists involved in an accident until the court case is settled.

There have been recent incidents of vehicle ambush and carjacking resulting in injuries.

Public transportation

Be cautious when using taxis. Negotiate fares prior to departure. Taxi drivers have been complicit in robberies targeting their passengers.

Air travel

We do not make assessments on the compliance of foreign domestic airlines with international safety standards.

General information about foreign domestic airlines

Airports

The Tripoli International Airport has been closed since 2014.

Currently, only Mitiga (in Tripoli), Benghazi, Misrata, Al Labraq (in Baida) and Tobruk airports offer international flights. Flights are frequently cancelled; tickets must be obtained in advance, and paid for in cash on site.