Alleged drug dealer arrested again
Posted Thursday, July 12, 2018 12:03 am

A Jasper man considered by police to be a major local drug dealer was arrested Wednesday, adding to a list of his alleged crimes that is still going through the court system as much as four years later.

Jasper Police Chief J.C. Poe said, "This is a prime example of us having to deal with the same people all the time. ... He is one of our major players here in town. He is one who has been a continual problem."

According to Jasper detective David Trotter, Nicholas Jermaine Poe, 35, who is not related to the police chief, was arrested for one count of trafficking heroin, two counts of an illegal possession of a controlled substance (one for cocaine and another on Alprazolam, which is used to treat anxiety and panic disorder), unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia (for digital scales), and fourth-degree receiving stolen property (for a stolen pistol, a .40-caliber Smith and Wesson semi-automatic). He will also be charged with two counts of unlawful distribution of a controlled substance.

J.C. Poe said Nicholas Poe was in the city jail late Wednesday afternoon and once warrants are obtained, he will be transferred to the Walker County Jail. Bond at not been set as of yesterday afternoon.

No amounts of confiscated drugs were calculated Wednesday, the chief said.

"We confiscated some crystal meth, crack cocaine, powder cocaine and heroin," he said, as well as pills of Alprazolam, two firearms, and an unstated amount of cash. One of the firearms was not stolen, he said, adding, "We haven't been able to find a report on it yet."

Jasper police and officers from the Alabama Law Enforcement Agency (ALEA) Drug Task Force (which Trotter is assigned to) came Wednesday morning to Nicholas Poe's house on the corner of 26th Street and Indiana Avenue in the Frisco area. The street address of the home, which had outdoor warning signs about private property and to beware of a dog, is 903 26th St.

The investigation for the latest arrests had been ongoing for a month after officers had information that the suspect was selling again after his last arrest, he said. Undercover operations took place, and that was followed up on Wednesday morning with a search warrant at the residence.

"We made entrance to the home and secured it," he said at the scene, noting the search was still underway. "We made entry through several means. We went through windows and doors."

The operation went smoothly. Nicholas Poe was injured as officers arrived and he "threw dope through the window and cut his arm," the chief said.

Firearms were found at the scene "and he is a convicted felon, so that is a violation there," he said.

A couple of adults at the residence were not arrested, the chief said. Department of Human Resources came to the scene and arranged for one 10-year-old child there to be turned over to her grandmother.

Jasper Mayor David O'Mary was at the crime scene Wednesday morning as last-minute evidence collection was going on.

"It is a successful operation that reflects on the commitment of our police department," O'Mary said. "It reflects on the training we provide our police officers. It reflects on the relationship we enjoy with (ALEA) as their tactical team joined our folks this morning to serve this search warrant and make the arrest."

O'Mary said when a large amount of drugs are taken off the street, one cannot quantify the value of that, saying it could help someone from becoming addicted or having an overdose.

"I salute our people for that. What our people know, when we have situations like this, I'm going to be on the ground supporting our people," he said.

J.C. Poe indicated he was frustrated with inaction on individuals like Nicholas Poe, saying people like him are dealers who are ruining lives and families.

He noted the man has been a continuing problem for the department with multiple charges over the years, "but he is still at home selling drugs. He needs to be in prison somewhere."

"We have charges still in limbo here (against him) since August 2014," he said, with cases now on the docket.

Trotter said Nicholas Poe already has three pending drug cases, all of which are distribution and possession cases, and all of which are felony cases in circuit court. He also has one count of discharging a firearm in 2015, in a case where he was allegedly in another residence.

"He also has seven (felony) cases waived to grand jury that we're waiting to testify on," Trotter said.



J.C. Poe said, "I'm extremely proud of our people here. Our narcotics guys have been working extremely hard, as well as our patrol people. They do an outstanding job. I can't be anymore prouder of them."

He also noted the cooperation with ALEA's task force.

"We got some good charges here and hopefully we'll got a good result from this guy going to prison and getting him out of our community," he said.