2000 CanLII 5762 (ON CA)
Regina v. Parker

[Indexed as: R. v. Parker]



49 O.R. (3d) 481

[2000] O.J. No. 2787

Docket No. C28732

Court of Appeal for Ontario Catzman, Charron and Rosenberg JJ.A. July 31, 2000

Charter of Rights and Freedoms -- Fundamental justice -- Prohibition on possession of marijuana without medical exemption violating right to liberty and security of the person in manner which does not accord with principles of fundamental justice -- Prohibition not justified under s. 1 of Charter -- Prohibition on possession of marijuana in s. 4 of Controlled Drugs and Substances Act declared to be of no force or effect -- Declaration of invalidity suspended for one year -- Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19, s. 4 -- Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, ss. 1, 7.

The accused was charged with cultivating marijuana under the now-repealed Narcotic Control Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-1. As the result of a second search of his home, he was also charged with possession of marijuana under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. He suffered from epilepsy and experienced frequent, severe and potentially life-threatening seizures. His attempts to control those seizures with conventional medication were only moderately successful. He found that he could substantially reduce the incidence of seizures by smoking marijuana. The accused could not locate a lawful source of marijuana and grew his own.

The charges were stayed at trial. The trial judge found that the accused required marijuana to control his epilepsy and that the prohibition against marijuana infringed his rights under s. 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. In order to protect the accused and others like him who need to use marijuana for medicinal purposes, the trial judge read into the legislation an exemption for persons possessing or cultivating marijuana for their "personal medically approved use". The Crown appealed.

Held, the appeal should be allowed in part.

The accused's liberty interest was engaged by the marijuana prohibition. The threat of criminal prosecution and possible imprisonment itself amounted to a risk of deprivation of liberty and, therefore, had to accord with the principles of fundamental justice. Further, liberty includes the right to make decisions of fundamental personal importance, including the choice of medication to alleviate the effects of an illness with life-threatening consequences. Deprivation of this right must also accord with the principles of fundamental justice. The choice of medication to alleviate the effects of an illness with life-threatening consequences is such a decision.

Deprivation by means of a criminal sanction of access to medication reasonably required for the treatment of a medical condition that threatens life or health also constitutes a deprivation of security of the person.

The prohibition on the possession and cultivation of marijuana for personal use to treat the accused's epilepsy deprived him of his rights to liberty and security of the person. The marijuana prohibition both exposed the accused to imprisonment if convicted and infringed his right to make decisions that were of fundamental personal importance. To intrude into that decision-making process through the threat of criminal prosecution is a serious deprivation of liberty. Moreover, to prevent the accused from accessing a treatment by threat of criminal sanction constituted a deprivation of his security of the person. The marijuana laws forced the accused to choose between commission of a crime to obtain effective medical treatment and inadequate treatment. Finally, the marijuana prohibition infringed the accused's security of the person by interfering with his physical and psychological integrity. Section 7 of the Charter protects the right to make choices concerning one's own body and control over one's physical and psychological integrity free from interference by criminal prohibition.

The principles of fundamental justice are breached where the deprivation of the right in question does little or nothing to enhance the state's interest. A blanket prohibition will be considered unfair and thus in breach of the principles of fundamental justice if it is unrelated to the state's interest in enacting the prohibition, and if it lacks a foundation in the legal tradition and societal beliefs that are said to be represented by the prohibition. The absence of a clear legal standard may contribute to a violation of fundamental justice. If a statutory defence contains so many potential barriers to its own operation that the defence it creates will in many circumstances be practically unavailable to persons who would prima facie qualify for the defence, it will be found to violate the principles of fundamental justice. An administrative structure made up of unnecessary rules, which result in an additional risk to the health of the person, is manifestly unfair and does not conform to the pri nciples of fundamental justice.

The regulation of marijuana has a very short history in Canada and lacks a significant foundation in our legal tradition. It is, in fact, an embarrassing history based upon misinformation and racism. While the marijuana prohibition is not firmly rooted in Canada, there is a well-established history of regulation of drugs in this country. However, of all of the drugs with potential therapeutic effects, marijuana stands out because it is subject to a complete prohibition. This prohibition results in a web of legislation that makes it impossible as a practical matter for a physician to prescribe marijuana and, therefore, for a patient to legally possess it pursuant to a prescription.

The common law treatment of informed consent, the sanctity of life and commonly held societal beliefs about medical treatment suggest that a broad criminal prohibition that prevents access to necessary medicine is not consistent with fundamental justice.

The state has an interest in protecting against the harmful effects of marijuana. The Crown expressedly renounced any reliance on the theory that marijuana is a "gateway" to harder drugs, that it provokes criminal activity, that it leads to a lack of motivation or causes psychosis. Health effects to humans include bronchial pulmonary harm; psychomotor impairment from marijuana use leading to a risk of automobile accidents and no simple screening device for detection; possible precipitation of relapse in persons with schizophrenia; possible negative effects on the immune system; possible long- term cognitive effects in children whose mothers used marijuana while pregnant; possible long-term cognitive effects in long-term users; and some evidence that some heavy users may develop a dependency. The other objectives of the prohibition are to satisfy Canada's international treaty obligations and to control the domestic and international trade in illicit drugs.

The blanket prohibition on possession and cultivation, without an exception for medical use, does little or nothing to enhance the state interest. To the extent that the state's interest in prohibiting marijuana is to prevent the harms associated with marijuana use including protecting the health of users, it is irrational to deprive a person of the drug when he or she requires it to maintain his or her health. If the purpose of the prohibition is to protect the health of users and thereby eliminate the related costs to society, the overbroad prohibition preventing access to the drug to persons like the accused, who require it to preserve their health, defeats that objective. Other harms, such as impaired driving, must be considered in context. For example, prohibiting the small number of seriously ill patients who require it from having access to marijuana does little to enhance the state interest in the safety of the highways.

As for Canada's international treaty obligations, the 1988 United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances requires states to prohibit possession, purchase and cultivation of marijuana for personal use, subject to the country's "constitutional principles and the basic concepts of its legal system". If under s. 7 of the Charter the prohibition and cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes is unconstitutional, it would be open to Parliament to enact such an exemption and still comply with its treaty obligations.

The Crown also supported the legislation as necessary to control the domestic and international trade in illicit drugs. While such an objective suggests a need for some form of control on the distribution of marijuana, the complete prohibition on the possession or cultivation of marijuana for personal therapeutic use does little to enhance this state interest.

The deprivation of the accused's rights to liberty and security of the person because of the complete prohibition on the possession or cultivation of marijuana in the former Narcotic Control Act does little or nothing to enhance the state's interest. The accused had established that his rights under s. 7 of the Charter were violated by the absolute prohibition on cultivation of marijuana in the Narcotic Control Act.

Under s. 3 of the Narcotic Control Act and s. 4 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, it is an offence to have possession of any narcotic or scheduled substance respectively, including marijuana, except as authorized by the Act or regulations. While the regulations theoretically contemplate that a physician could prescribe marijuana, the evidence from the government's witness was that since there is no legal source for marijuana, no pharmacist would fill the prescription and that the government would not look favourably upon a physician who purported to write such a prescription. That witness also established the practical impossibility of the accused obtaining a legal source of marijuana. The defence in the Narcotic Control Act and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act is practically unavailable to the accused and others like him who require marijuana for conditions threatening their life or health. This constitutes a violation of the principles of fundamenta l justice. Parliament has created a defence to the possession and cultivation offences if the person can comply with the regulations. Those regulations, for example, permitted a person to legally possess the drug under prescription from a physician. The government's own witness established that this defence or exemption is illusory. This is not consistent with the principles of fundamental justice.

Section 56 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act provides a source for the legal possession of marijuana. That section provides that the Minister may, on such terms and conditions as the Minister deems necessary, exempt any person or class of persons or any controlled substance from the application of the Act if, in the opinion of the Minister, the exemption is necessary for a medical or scientific purpose or is otherwise in the public interest. Section 56 reposes in the Minister an absolute discretion based on the Minister's opinion whether an exemption is "necessary for a medical . . . purpose", a phrase that is not defined in the Act. The Interim Guidance Document issued by Health Canada to provide guidance for an application for a s. 56 exemption sets out factors that the Minister "may" consider in deciding whether an exemption is necessary for a medical purpose. This document does not have the force of law and, in any event, merely sets out examples of factors the Minister may consider.

It does not purport to exhaustively define the circumstances. The document also suggests that the power under s. 56 is only to be exercised in "exceptional circumstances", a qualification not found in the statute itself. Even if the Minister were of the opinion that the applicant had met the medical necessity requirement, the legislation does not require the Minister to give an exemption. In view of the lack of an adequate legislated standard for medical necessity and the vesting of an unfettered discretion in the Minister, the deprivation of the accused's right to security of the person did not accord with the principles of fundamental justice.

If that conclusion is wrong and the deprivation of the accused's right to security of the person is in accord with the principles of fundamental justice because of the availability of the s. 56 process, s. 56 is no answer to the deprivation of the accused's right to liberty. The right to make decisions that are of fundamental personal importance includes the choice of medication to alleviate the effects of an illness with life- threatening consequences. It does not comport with the principles of fundamental justice to subject that decision to unfettered ministerial discretion.

The Crown did not suggest that the violations of s. 7 of the Charter could be saved under s. 1. In any event, many of the defects in the legislation that contribute to the deprivations of the accused's rights practically preclude the legislation from meeting the proportionality test under s. 1.

The trial judge's decision to stay the charges against the accused should be upheld. However, his remedy of reading a medical use exemption into the legislation was inappropriate. This is a matter for Parliament. The appropriate remedy is to declare the prohibition on the possession of marijuana in the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act to be of no force or effect and to suspend the declaration of invalidity for one year. The accused, however, could not be deprived of his rights during this year, and he was therefore entitled, as a personal remedy granted to him under s. 24(1) of the Charter, to a personal exemption from the possession offence under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act for possession of marijuana for his medical needs. The trial judge's decision that the charges against the accused be stayed is upheld.

APPEAL from a judgment of Sheppard J. (1997), 48 C.R.R. (2d) 352, 12 C.R. (5th) 251 (Ont. Gen. Div.) staying charges of cultivating and possessing marijuana and reading in a medical exemption to the prohibition on possession of marijuana in the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19.

R. v. Morgentaler, 1988 CanLII 90 (SCC), [1988] 1 S.C.R. 30, 63 O.R. (2d) 281, 26 O.A.C. 1, 44 D.L.R. (4th) 385, 82 N.R. 1, 31 C.R.R. 1, 37 C.C.C. (3d) 449, 62 C.R. (3d) 1; Rodriguez v. British Columbia (Attorney General), 1993 CanLII 75 (SCC), [1993] 3 S.C.R. 519, 82 B.C.L.R. (2d) 273, 107 D.L.R. (4th) 342, 158 N.R. 1, [1993] 7 W.W.R. 641, 17 C.R.R. (2d) 193, 85 C.C.C. (3d) 15, 24 C.R. (4th) 281, apld Other cases referred to Airedale N.H.S. Trust v. Bland, [1993] A.C. 789, [1993] 1 All E.R. 821, [1993] 2 W.L.R. 316 (C.A. and H.L.); B. (R.) v. Children's Aid Society of Metropolitan Toronto, 1995 CanLII 115 (SCC), [1995] 1 S.C.R. 315, 21 O.R. (3d) 479n, 122 D.L.R. (4th) 1, 176 N.R. 161, 26 C.R.R. (2d) 202, 9 R.F.L. (4th) 157 (sub nom. Sheena B. (Re)); Canada (Attorney General) v. Ontario (Attorney General), [1937] A.C. 326, [1937] 1 W.W.R. 299, [1937] 1 D.L.R. 673 (P.C.); Committee for the Commonwealth of Canada v. Canada (1991), 1991 CanLII 119 (SCC), 40 F.T.R. 240n, [1991] 1 S.C.R. 139, 77 D.L.R. (4th) 385, 120 N.R. 241, 4 C.R.R. (2d) 60 (sub nom. Lepine v. Canada); Corbiere v. Canada (Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs), 1999 CanLII 687 (SCC), [1999] 2 S.C.R. 203, 173 D.L.R. (4th) 1, 239 N.R. 1, 61 C.R.R. (2d) 189 (sub nom. Batchewana Indian Band (Non-Resident Members) v. Batchewana Indian Band); Cunningham v. Canada, 1993 CanLII 139 (SCC), [1993] 2 S.C.R. 143, 151 N.R. 161, 14 C.R.R. (2d) 234, 80 C.C.C. (3d) 492, 20 C.R. (4th) 57 (sub nom. R. v. Cunningham); Edmonton Journal v. Alberta (Attorney General), 1989 CanLII 20 (SCC), [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1326, 71 Alta. L.R. (2d) 273, 64 D.L.R. (4th) 577, 102 N.R. 321, [1990] 1 W.W.R. 577, 45 C.R.R. 1, 41 C.P.C. (2d) 109; Fleming v. Reid (1991), 1991 CanLII 2728 (ON CA), 4 O.R. (3d) 74, 48 O.A.C. 46, 82 D.L.R. (4th) 298 (C.A.); Ford v. Quebec (Attorney General), 1988 CanLII 19 (SCC), [1988] 2 S.C.R. 712, 19 Q.A.C. 69, 54 D.L.R. (4th) 577, 90 N.R. 84, 36 C.R.R. 1 (sub nom. Chaussure Brown's Inc. v. Quebec (Procureur Général)); MacKay v. Manitoba, 1989 CanLII 26 (SCC), [1989] 2 S.C.R. 357, 61 Man. R. (2d) 270, 61 D.L.R. (4th) 385, 99 N.R. 116, [1989] 6 W.W.R. 351, 43 C.R.R. 1; Malette v. Shulman (1990), 1990 CanLII 6868 (ON CA), 72 O.R. (2d) 417, 37 O.A.C. 281, 67 D.L.R. (4th) 321, 2 C.C.L.T. (2d) 1 (C.A.); New Brunswick (Minister of Health and Community Services) v. G. (J.) (1999), 1999 CanLII 653 (SCC), 552 A.P.R. 25, 66 C.R.R. (2d) 267, 177 D.L.R. (4th) 124, 216 N.B.R. (2d) 25, 244 N.R. 276, [1999] 3 S.C.R. 46, 50 R.F.L. (4th) 63, 26 C.R. (5th) 203, revg (1997), 187 N.B.R. (2d) 81, 478 A.P.R. 81, 145 D.L.R. (4th) 349 (C.A.); Perka v. R., 1984 CanLII 23 (SCC), [1984] 2 S.C.R. 232, 28 B.C.L.R. (2d) 205, 13 D.L.R. (4th) 1, 55 N.R. 1, [1984] 6 W.W.R. 289, 14 C.C.C. (3d) 385, 42 C.R. (3d) 113; R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd., 1985 CanLII 69 (SCC), [1985] 1 S.C.R. 295, 37 Alta. L.R. (2d) 97, 18 D.L.R. (4th) 321, 58 N.R. 81, [1985] 3 W.W.R. 481, 13 C.R.R. 64, 18 C.C.C. (3d) 385, 85 C.L.L.C. 14,023; R. v. Caine, [1998] B.C.J. No. 885 (Prov. Ct.), affd 2000 BCCA 335 (CanLII) (sub nom. R. v. Malmo-Levine); R. v. Clay (1997), 1997 CanLII 12451 (ON SC), 9 C.R. (5th) 349 (Ont. Gen. Div.), affd (2000), 2000 CanLII 5760 (ON CA), 49 O.R. (3d) 577 post (C.A.); R. v. Hamon (1993), 1993 CanLII 4139 (QC CA), 85 C.C.C. (3d) 490, 20 C.R.R. (2d) 181, 58 Q.A.C. 241 (C.A.) [leave to appeal to S.C.C. refused (1994), 1993 CanLII 4141 (QC CA), 20 C.R.R. (2d) 181n, 85 C.C.C. (3d) 490n, 167 N.R. 239n, 62 Q.A.C. 139n]; R. v. Hauser, 1979 CanLII 13 (SCC), [1979] 1 S.C.R. 984, 98 D.L.R. (3d) 193, 26 N.R. 541, [1979] 5 W.W.R. 1, 46 C.C.C. (2d) 481, 8 C.R. (3d) 89; R. v. Heywood, 1994 CanLII 34 (SCC), [1994] 3 S.C.R. 761, 120 D.L.R. (4th) 348, 174 N.R. 81, 24 C.R.R. (2d) 189, 94 C.C.C. (3d) 481, 34 C.R. (4th) 133; R. v. Jones, 1986 CanLII 32 (SCC), [1986] 2 S.C.R. 284, 47 Alta. L.R. (2d) 97, 31 D.L.R. (4th) 569, 69 N.R. 241, [1986] 6 W.W.R. 577, 25 C.R.R. 63, 28 C.C.C. (3d) 513; R. v. Keegstra, 1990 CanLII 24 (SCC), [1990] 3 S.C.R. 697, 77 Alta. L.R. (2d) 193, 117 N.R. 1, [1991] 2 W.W.R. 1, 3 C.R.R. (2d) 193, 61 C.C.C. (3d) 1, 1 C.R. (4th) 129; R. v. Malmo-Levine (2000), 74 C.R.R. (2d) 189, 2000 BCCA 335; R. v. Mills, 1999 CanLII 637 (SCC), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 668, 75 Alta. L.R. (3d) 1, 180 D.L.R. (4th) 1, 248 N.R. 101, [2000] 2 W.W.R. 180, 69 C.R.R. (2d) 1, 139 C.C.C. (3d) 321, 28 C.R. (5th) 207 (sub nom. R. v. M. (B.J.), Mills v. Canada (Attorney General)); R. v. Monney, 1999 CanLII 678 (SCC), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 652, 171 D.L.R. (4th) 1, 237 N.R. 157, 61 C.R.R. (2d) 244, 133 C.C.C. (3d) 129, 24 C.R. (5th) 97; R. v. Oakes, 1986 CanLII 46 (SCC), [1986] 1 S.C.R. 103, 53 O.R. (2 C.R. (5th) 87 (C.A.) [leave to appeal to S.C.C. granted January 27, 2000]; R. v. Smith, 1987 CanLII 64 (SCC), [1987] 1 S.C.R. 1045, 15 B.C.L.R. (2d) 273, 40 D.L.R. (4th) 435, 75 N.R. 321, [1987] 5 W.W.R. 1, 31 C.R.R. 193, 34 C.C.C. (3d) 97, 58 C.R. (3d) 193; R. v. Varga (1994), 1994 CanLII 8727 (ON CA), 18 O.R. (3d) 784, 90 C.C.C. (3d) 484, 30 C.R. (4th) 78 (C.A.) (sub nom. R. v. V. (E.)); Reference re ss. 193 and 195.1(1)(c) of the Criminal Code (Manitoba), 1990 CanLII 105 (SCC), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1123, 68 Man. R. (2d) 1, 109 N.R. 81, [1990] 4 W.W.R. 481, 48 C.R.R. 1, 56 C.C.C. (3d) 65, 77 C.R. (3d) 1; Schachter v. Canada, 1992 CanLII 74 (SCC), [1992] 2 S.C.R. 679, 93 D.L.R. (4th) 1, 139 N.R. 1, 10 C.R.R. (2d) 1, 92 C.L.L.C. ô14,036; Reference re s. 94(2) of the Motor Vehicle Act (British Columbia), 1985 CanLII 81 (SCC), [1985] 2 S.C.R. 486, 69 B.C.L.R. 145, 24 D.L.R . (4th) 536, 63 N.R. 266, [1986] 1 W.W.R. 481, 18 C.R.R. 30, 23 C.C.C. (3d) 289, 48 C.R. (3d) 289, 36 M.V.R. 240; Singh v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), 1985 CanLII 65 (SCC), [1985] 1 S.C.R. 177, 17 D.L.R. (4th) 422, 58 N.R. 1, 14 C.R.R. 13, 12 Admin. L.R. 137; Wakeford v. Canada (1998), 1998 CanLII 14931 (ON SC), 166 D.L.R. (4th) 131, 55 C.R.R. (2d) 56 (Ont. Gen. Div.); Wakeford v. Canada (1999), 1999 CanLII 15037 (ON SC), 173 D.L.R. (4th) 726, 63 C.R.R. (2d) 131 (Ont. S.C.J.) Statutes referred to California Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (U.S.), 11362.5 Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, ss. 1, 2, 7, 12, 15, 24(1) Constitution Act, 1982, s. 52 Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19, ss. 4, 4(1), 7, 7(1), 56 Dangerous Drugs Act 1965 (U.K.), c. 15 Medical Use of Marijuana Act (U.S., 1999) Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 (U.K.), c. 38 Narcotic Control Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-1, repealed S.C. 1996, c. 19, s. 94, ss. 2, 3, 4(2), 6, Schedule s. 3 Rules and regulations referred to Misuse of Drugs Regulations (U.K.), Schedules 1-2 Narcotic Control Regulations, C.R.C., c. 1041 Treaties and conventions referred to Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances 1988, C.T.S. 1990, 4; 28 I.L.M. Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971 International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1976), 993 U.N.T.S. 3, Art. 12 Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 Authorities referred to British Pharmaceutical Codex of 1949 Canada, "Interim Guidance Document" (Health Canada, May 1999) "Cannabis: The Scientific and Medical Evidence" (House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology, 1998) "Marijuana for Medicinal Purposes: A Status Report Therapeutic Uses of Cannabis" (British Medical Association)

Kevin R. Wilson, for appellant.

Aaron B. Harnett and Richard P. Macklin, for respondent.

Ed Morgan, for Epilepsy Association of Ontario, intervenor.

The judgment of the court was delivered by

[1] ROSENBERG J.A.: -- This is one of two appeals heard by this court concerning the constitutionality of the marijuana prohibition in the former Narcotic Control Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. N-1 and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, S.C. 1996, c. 19. The appeal in R. v. Clay [reported (2000), 2000 CanLII 5760 (ON CA), 49 O.R. (3d) 577 post] concerns the use of the criminal law power to penalize the possession of marijuana. This Crown appeal concerns the medical use of marijuana.

OVERVIEW

[2] It has been known for centuries that, in addition to its intoxicating or psychoactive effect, marijuana has medicinal value. The active ingredients of marijuana are known as cannabinoids. The cannabinoid that gives marijuana its psychoactive effect is tetrahydrocannabinol ("THC"). While less is known about the other cannabinoids, the scientific evidence is overwhelming that some of them may have anti-seizure properties. The most promising of these is cannabidiol ("CBD"). Smoking marijuana is one way to obtain the benefit of CBD and other cannabinoids with anti-seizure properties.

[3] The respondent Terrance Parker has suffered from a very severe form of epilepsy since he was a young child. For close to 40 years he has experienced frequent serious and potentially life-threatening seizures. He has attempted to control these seizures through surgery and conventional medication. The surgery was a failure and the conventional medication only moderately successful. He has found that by smoking marijuana he can substantially reduce the incidence of seizures. Since he has no legal source of marijuana, he has been growing it himself. On two occasions, the police searched his home and seized the marijuana. He was first charged with cultivating marijuana under the Narcotic Control Act. By the time of the second investigation, that Act had been repealed and he was charged with possession of marijuana under the new Controlled Drugs and Substances Act.

[4] The former Narcotic Control Act and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act prohibit under threat of imprisonment the possession and cultivation of marijuana. That prohibition is theoretically not absolute. Both statutes contemplate that drugs like marijuana may have medicinal value and therefore should be available through a regulatory process. If a drug receives the necessary regulatory approval, it can be made available to the public through a physician's prescription. A synthetic version of THC, known as Marinol, has been approved for use in Canada and is available by prescription. No drug company has applied for a licence to sell CBD and therefore it is not available in Canada.

[5] Parker decided to fight the charges against him by attempting to show that the prohibition on the cultivation and possession of marijuana in the two statutes is unconstitutional. Specifically, he claims that the legislation infringes his rights as guaranteed by s. 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Section 7 guarantees that everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived of those rights except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice. Put simply, Parker claims that he needs to grow and smoke marijuana as medicine to control his epilepsy. Because Parliament has made cultivation and possession of marijuana illegal, he faces the threat of imprisonment to keep his health. Parker argues that a statute that has this effect does not comport with fundamental justice. To support his claim at trial, Parker led a great deal of scientific and other evidence. That evidence demonstrated the therapeutic value of marijuana for treating a number of very serious conditions including epilepsy, glaucoma, the side effects of cancer treatment and the symptoms of AIDS.

[6] The government countered with its own evidence at trial. It argued that Parker does not need marijuana to control his seizures and that he has a number of other legal therapeutic alternatives; such as better treatment with conventional epilepsy medication or obtaining a prescription for Marinol.

[7] In reasons reported at (1997), 12 C.R. (5th) 251, 48 C.R.R. (2d) 352, Sheppard J. of the Ontario Court of Justice concluded that Parker requires marijuana to control his epilepsy and that the prohibition against marijuana infringes Parker's rights under s. 7 of the Charter. Sheppard J. stayed the cultivation and possession charges against Parker. Further, in order to protect Parker and others like him who need to use marijuana as medicine the trial judge read into the legislation an exemption for persons possessing or cultivating marijuana for their "personal medically approved use".

[8] The Crown appeals from that judgment. It argues that the trial judge made a factual error in finding that Parker requires marijuana for medical purposes. The Crown also argues that the legislation is valid and that there are legal means by which Parker can obtain marijuana. It says that the legislation is not unconstitutional simply because no drug company has attempted to have marijuana or CBD licensed for sale through prescription. It also argues that Parker could have applied for a special exemption from the Minister of Health under s. 56 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. It points to fresh evidence placed before this court that the Minister has granted such exemptions to other persons who need marijuana for therapeutic purposes. Finally, the Crown says the remedy granted by the trial judge was wrong and he should not have, in effect, amended the legislation, that this is a matter for Parliament.

[9] Parker supports the decision of the trial judge. The Epilepsy Association of Toronto has intervened in this appeal and it also supports the trial judge's decision. In addition, the Association attempts to raise a new argument, that the statutes also violate the equality provisions of the Charter.

[10] I have concluded that the trial judge was right in finding that Parker needs marijuana to control the symptoms of his epilepsy. I have also concluded that the prohibition on the cultivation and possession of marijuana is unconstitutional. Based on principles established by the Supreme Court of Canada, particularly in R. v. Morgentaler, 1988 CanLII 90 (SCC), [1988] 1 S.C.R. 30, 31 C.R.R. 1, where the court struck down the abortion provisions of the Criminal Code, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-46 and Rodriguez v. British Columbia (Attorney General), 1993 CanLII 75 (SCC), [1993] 3 S.C.R. 519, 17 C.R.R. (2d) 193, where the court upheld the assisted suicide offence in the Criminal Code, I have concluded that forcing Parker to choose between his health and imprisonment violates his right to liberty and security of the person. I have also found that these violations of Parker's rights do not accord with the principles of fundamental justice. In particular, I have concluded that the possibility of an exemption under s. 56 dep endent upon the unfettered and unstructured discretion of the Minister of Health is not consistent with the principles of fundamental justice. I have not dealt with the equality argument raised by the Epilepsy Association because that argument was not raised at trial.

[11] Accordingly, I would uphold the trial judge's decision to stay the charges against Parker and I would dismiss that part of the Crown's appeal. However, I disagree with Sheppard J.'s remedy of reading in a medical use exemption into the legislation. I agree with the Crown that this is a matter for Parliament. Accordingly, I would declare the prohibition on the possession of marijuana in the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act to be of no force and effect. However, since this would leave a gap in the regulatory scheme until Parliament could amend the legislation to comply with the Charter, I would suspend the declaration of invalidity for a year. During this period, the marijuana law remains in full force and effect. Parker, however, cannot be deprived of his rights during this year and therefore he is entitled to a personal exemption from the possession offence under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act for possessing marijuana for his medical needs. Since the Narco tic Control Act has already been repealed by Parliament, there is no need to hold it unconstitutional. If necessary, I would have found that Parker was entitled to a personal exemption from the cultivation offence for his medical needs.

[12] Following are my reasons for these conclusions. Because a principal part of the Crown's attack on the trial decision was on the trial judge's findings of fact, I will deal at some length with the evidence. I will then review the trial judge's findings on the law before setting out my own analysis of the legal issues. Finally, I will explain why I would grant a different remedy from the remedy granted by the trial judge.

THE FACTS

(i) The Facts of the Offences

[13] Marijuana was seized from the respondent on two different occasions. On July 18, 1996, police officers executed a warrant at the respondent's home and seized 71 marijuana plants. He was charged with cultivating cannabis marijuana contrary to s. 6(1) of the Narcotic Control Act and possession of cannabis marijuana for the purpose of trafficking contrary to s. 4(2) of the Act. On September 18, 1997, the police again attended at the respondent's home and seized three growing marijuana plants. By this time, the Narcotic Control Act had been repealed. On this occasion, the respondent was charged with possession of marijuana contrary to s. 4(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act.

[14] A short note on terminology. Section 3 of the Narcotic Control Act prohibits the unauthorized possession of a "narcotic". The term "narcotic" is defined in s. 2 of the Act as anything included in the schedule to the Act. Section 3 of the schedule lists "Cannabis sativa, its preparations, derivatives and similar synthetic preparations" including "Cannabis (marijuana)", "Cannabidiol" (CBD), and "Tetrahydrocannabinol" (THC). Section 6 prohibits the unauthorized cultivation of "marijuana". Section 2 defines marijuana as "Cannabis sativa L." In the evidence, the terms cannabis and marijuana tended to be used interchangeably. For simplicity, I will try to use only the term marijuana when referring to the plant and the raw part of it that is smoked by users. This appeal does not deal with "refined" marijuana such as cannabis resin (hashish). I will refer to the two active ingredients about which there was considerable evidence by their initials THC and CBD. Marinol is a synthetic form of THC.

[15] The Controlled Drugs and Substances Act is slightly different in form from the Narcotic Control Act. Section 4 prohibits the unauthorized possession of "substances" listed in certain schedules, including "Cannabis (marijuana)" and CBD and THC. Section 7 of the Act prohibits the unauthorized production of substances in the schedules and thus cannabis (marijuana). Again, for simplicity I will use the term marijuana to refer to the substance grown and used by Parker.

[16] To return to the facts, the charge of possession for the purpose of trafficking was based on Parker's admission to the police that he gives some of his marijuana to other persons who need it for their epileptic seizures. He was found guilty of that offence. The Charter challenge does not relate to that offence and it played no part in the proceedings in this court.

[17] There was no dispute about the facts upon which the cultivation charge under the Narcotic Control Act and the possession charge under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act were based. At one point in the proceedings, Parker had apparently considered relying on a defence of necessity. However, he did not pursue that defence and the only issue at trial was the constitutionality of the prohibition against possession and cultivation of marijuana where an accused claims that he or she requires the marijuana for medicinal purposes.

(ii) Parker's Health and Experience with Marijuana

[18] When he was four and six years of age, Parker suffered two serious head injuries. He was diagnosed with epilepsy after the first accident and thus has had epilepsy for almost 40 years. He suffers from the whole range of seizures associated with epilepsy. These range from petit mal seizures, which are brief spells where he almost collapses, to status epilepticus when he suffers a series of grand mal seizures and requires immediate emergency medical attention. Grand mal seizures leave Parker unconscious, violently twitching and writhing on the ground. He will sometimes vomit, lose control of his bowels, choke on his own saliva and smash his head against the ground.

[19] Parker also has various other types of seizures including the following:

Jacksonian: Limbs shake and vibrate uncontrollably, lasts for up to 45 seconds.

Complex partial (psychomotor): Vivid hallucinations and problems in perception that last up to three minutes; during one of these episodes Parker mistook the end of a subway platform for the back of a truck and jumped off; he was brought to his senses by the sound of an approaching train and was able to scramble to safety.

Partial continuous: Uncontrollable grinding of teeth and loss of control of left arm and leg for short bursts up to a minute. An episode can include dozens of attacks lasting more than a day.

Akinetic: Parker drops to the ground and lies unconscious for up to five minutes. He often injures his head and face in the fall.

[20] Parker has been prescribed many drugs for the treatment of his epilepsy. The primary drugs in his plan are Phenytoin (Dilantin) and Primidone (Mysoline). Both drugs have various side effects to which I will refer below when reviewing the expert evidence.

[21] The seizures associated with Parker's epilepsy severely disrupted his school attendance. As a child and young teen, Parker grew increasingly despondent over his medical condition and the terror he experienced with seizures. Aggressive medical treatment with various drugs did not improve his condition.

[22] At the age of 14, in an attempt to control his seizures, Parker underwent a right temporal lobectomy at the Toronto Hospital for Sick Children. The operation involved the opening of his cranium and the removal of brain matter. The operation was a complete failure and Parker suffered a grand mal seizure in the recovery room. Parker became depressed and suicidal and was hospitalized in various psychiatric hospitals. At the age of 16, Parker agreed to further surgery. Only local anaesthetic was used and thus Parker was awake while his skull was opened and further brain material was scraped away. The operation did not reduce the seizures.

[23] In the late 1960s, Parker was introduced to marijuana while an in-patient at a provincial institution. Parker's use was originally recreational. By 1974, he was a regular user and he had observed that while under the influence of marijuana, the frequency and intensity of his seizures sharply declined.

[24] In 1980, Parker reported his experience with marijuana to his physician and started to diarize his marijuana use and seizure frequency. Over a six-month period, he found that he experienced grand mal seizures when he did not take marijuana and experienced no seizures when he took marijuana in addition to his prescription medicine.

[25] In 1987, Parker's physician advised that the side effects of the prescription medications were so severe that higher dosages could not be used. Therefore, the physician advised him to regularly use marijuana in conjunction with his prescription medicine to control his seizures. The physician provided a report in September 1987 that included the following:

Mr. Parker has had many side effects over the years due to his anti-convulsant medications, which have prevented their perhaps more efficacious use in higher doses. These side effects are well-recognized in the medical literature. Hence, from a medical and quality-of-life point of view, I am of the opinion that it is medically necessary, in order to obtain optimal seizure control, that Mr. Parker regularly use marijuana in conjunction with his other anti-convulsant medications.

[26] In 1987, Parker was charged with possession of marijuana. He was acquitted on the basis of the common-law defence of necessity. A Crown appeal to the Ontario District Court was dismissed. Shapiro Dist. Ct. J. noted Parker's lengthy history of grand mal epilepsy and his attempts at treatment with drugs and through surgery and concluded that the trial judge could properly find that the necessity defence was made out.

[27] Parker continued to derive substantial benefit from smoking marijuana in conjunction with his prescription drugs. If he consumes marijuana on a daily basis, he experiences virtually no seizures. Without marijuana, within three days he experiences seizures again and will have three to five grand mal seizures a week and many more other lesser seizures. Parker is also able to use marijuana to avert oncoming seizures. When he experiences a prodrome, a precursor to a grand mal seizure, and consumes marijuana, he is able to combat the oncoming seizure.

[28] The seizures associated with Parker's epilepsy constitute a serious threat to his health and safety. He has been hospitalized over 100 times due to injuries sustained from seizures. He has been robbed while unconscious and arrested as being drunk, although he does not drink alcohol. Because of the severity of his symptoms, Parker is unable to work and is on a government disability pension.

[29] From 1980 to 1996, Parker was not under the care of an epilepsy specialist. He was under the care of a specialist at the time of the trial in 1997, having first seen him about three weeks before the trial. Parker has had his blood levels monitored about twice a year. The only change in medication that has been recommended by a physician in the recent past was from an emergency room physician who suggested that he increase the dosage of Dilantin from 300 mg to 400 mg per day. Parker declined due to his concern about liver damage at the increased dosage. Crown counsel conducted an extremely brief cross- examination of Parker, which showed that Parker had not asked to have Marinol prescribed for him.

[30] Parker's mother filed an affidavit on the appeal to update his medical condition. She states that Parker's health has greatly improved since the trial and she attributes this to the lack of seizures due to his use of marijuana.

[31] At trial, some evidence was given about Parker's participation in a study at the Addiction Research Foundation ("ARF") in 1979. He testified that he was given some pills containing what he was later told was some form of synthetic THC, a placebo, and a plant that had been sprayed with THC. He had little information at trial about the study or its conclusions. He believed that the study concluded that the use of THC had neither a beneficial nor detrimental effect on his seizures.

[32] On appeal, counsel for Parker produced the results of the study. No objection was taken to this evidence and indeed the appellant relied upon this material. This study assumed considerable importance on the appeal and therefore I set out its findings in some detail. The study was undertaken to assess Parker's claim that marijuana was beneficial in controlling his seizures. The authors of the study noted that "recently cannabidiol [CBD], a marijuana constituent which lacks psychotropic effects in man, has been studied in a wide variety of both natural and experimentally induced epileptic models and has been shown, almost uniformly, to be anti-convulsant". However, the ARF study of Parker dealt only with THC, in part, because it was available in a purified form.

[33] It is important to set out the conclusions from the study:

From the study it would appear that [THC] had neither beneficial nor detrimental effects on either the clinical or electroencephalographic features of this man's seizure disorder. Several factors however, make it difficult to correlate our findings with what actually happens while he is out of hospital smoking crude marijuana. The marked decrease in seizure frequency during hospitalization is a well recognized occurrence. Hospitalization also ensured anticonvulsant drug compliance to Dilantin particularly since it was subtherapeutic on admission and also after discharge. The use of pure [THC] is also open to criticism since the patient's experience had been with crude marijuana in which [THC] is only one of several cannabinoids including cannibidiol which may be more exclusively anticonvulsant. This patient however was followed at weekly intervals for four weeks after discharge with his anticonvulsants being supplied in weekly allotments. During this time he was regularly smoking crude marijuana obtained on the street. Seizure frequency remained low with only two seizures in the four weeks. The EEG's showed no significant difference from those done in hospital and the marijuana urine levels were just slightly below those measured in hospital. Dilantin levels were subtherapeutic but Tegretol and Mysoline remained within the therapeutic range.

Much more extensive clinical investigation is needed with both crude marijuana and the individual cannabinoids before any definitive statement can be made concerning either harmful or beneficial effects in epileptics. Perhaps different types of seizure disorders respond differently and Feeney has also suggested that the response depends to some extent on the pre-drug baseline seizure frequency and intensity, seizures being activated in individuals with a low baseline frequency and attenuated in those with a high baseline frequency. Until more work is done, however, we feel it prudent to advise epileptics against the use of marijuana.

(Footnotes omitted)

[34] The parties drew completely opposite conclusions from this study. Parker relies on the study as further evidence in support of the trial judge's findings of fact. On the other hand, the Crown suggests that the study supports its submission that findings made by the trial judge concerning Parker's need for marijuana to control his seizures are unsupported by the evidence. I will set out those findings of fact in some detail after my review of the expert evidence. Suffice it to say at this stage that the trial judge found as a fact that synthetic THC (Marinol) is not effective for Parker since it does not contain CBD, that Parker had shown control of seizures is best achieved through a combination of conventional medication and smoking marijuana, and that he had been reasonably diligent in attempting to control his seizures through conventional treatment.

[35] In my view, the ARF study confirms Parker's belief that THC does not have a therapeutic effect on him. The Crown overstates the case that the ARF study shows that if Parker properly monitored his intake of conventional medications he would not need to resort to marijuana use. As the authors point out, "marked decrease in seizure frequency during hospitalization is a well recognized occurrence". There was no suggestion that Parker's continued hospitalization was a reasonable alternative to his use of marijuana to control his seizure activity outside the hospital. It may be that hospitalization also ensured anticonvulsant drug compliance. However, the issue of Parker's use of conventional medication and compliance with that regime was squarely before the trial judge. It was open to the trial judge to accept Parker's evidence that he took his medication as prescribed. The ARF study also confirms that Parker's decision not to seek a prescription for Marinol was a reasonable one. In addition, no physician has apparently suggested that Parker use Marinol. As counsel for Parker aptly pointed out in oral argument, the only person who has "prescribed" Marinol for Parker is Crown counsel. Finally, the ARF study marginally supports the theory that it is CBD rather than THC that is the medicinal ingredient in marijuana at least in respect of control of seizures. It therefore supports the trial judge's finding in that regard in respect of Parker.

(iii) The Harmful and Therapeutic Effects of Marijuana

[36] The parties placed a considerable body of evidence before Sheppard J. about the medicinal use of and claims about marijuana. [See Note 1 at end of document] On consent, the parties filed the transcripts from the trial in R. v. Clay. The principal experts were Dr. Kalant, who had also testified for the Crown at the Clay trial, and Dr. Morgan, who testified on behalf of the defence. Both are highly qualified.

[37] It appears to me that the differences between the Crown and defence experts lay mostly in the emphasis they placed on certain facts and the inferences they drew. One fact looms very large in this case, as it did in the Clay case. The experts agreed that there is a need for better studies about the long- term effects of regular marijuana use and for better studies about the therapeutic value of marijuana.

[38] As I have indicated, the transcripts from the trial in R. v. Clay were filed on consent in this trial. That evidence set the background for the issues in this case as it set out the existing state of knowledge about the harmful health effects of marijuana. Sheppard J. adopted the findings of fact made by McCart J. in the Clay trial. Since those findings are fully set out in my reasons in the Clay appeal, I will only briefly summarize the findings of particular relevance to this appeal.

[39] Consumption of marijuana is relatively harmless compared to the so-called hard drugs and including tobacco and alcohol and there is no "hard evidence" that even long-term use can lead to irreversible physical or psychological damage. Marijuana use is not criminogenic (i.e., there is no causal relationship between marijuana use and criminality) and it does not make people more aggressive or violent. There have been no recorded deaths from consumption of marijuana. Marijuana does have an intoxicating effect and it would not be prudent to drive while intoxicated. As with tobacco smoking, marijuana smoking can cause bronchial pulmonary damage, especially in heavy users. There may be other side effects from the use of marijuana and its effects are probably not as benign as was thought some years ago. However, these other effects are not acute except in very narrow circumstances, for example, people with schizophrenia. I will return to the question of the harmful effects of marijuana when discussing the objectives of the marijuana prohibition in the legal analysis.

[40] On this appeal, the Crown disputes some of the findings by McCart J. and hence their acceptance by Sheppard J. The Crown relies upon evidence that Dr. Kalant gave at the trial in commenting on the findings by McCart J. [See Note 2 at end of document] Dr. Kalant's reservations about the findings made in the Clay trial are minor and, in any event, do not seriously affect the constitutional analysis in this case, which is concerned with the medical use of marijuana. [See Note 3 at end of document] For example, Dr. Kalant repeated the testimony he gave at the Clay trial that if the level of use went up "dramatically", the amount of harm produced by "heavy use" would undoubtedly also go up. For the purposes of this case, I would accept that common-sense observation, but there is no indication that the medicinal use of marijuana would lead to a dramatic use in marijuana generally.

[41] Dr. Kalant also pointed out that the phrase "hard evidence" was not defined in the reasons for judgment, and therefore the statement should not be accepted as a "statement of fact". In my view, this is a matter of semantics and reflects the difficulty of reconciling scientific proof with proof in litigation. In short, scientists can continue to study a problem until it is resolved. They find facts through continual testing, experimentation and research. A finding will only be accepted as a fact when it can be replicated under carefully controlled circumstances by many different researchers. This is a particularly onerous standard where, as with the harmful effects of marijuana, what is sought to be demonstrated is a negative, that marijuana does not cause serious physical or mental harm. The fact that on the current state of the research no such negative conclusion can be reached is not a statement for scientists that there is no harm, only that more studies may have to be done. Trial judges do not hav e that luxury. They are required to reach a conclusion on the basis of the record placed before them by the parties. When McCart J. said that there was no hard evidence of irreversible organic mental damage from the consumption of marijuana, he was making a finding that he was satisfied that no such harm had been demonstrated on the evidence presented in his courtroom. This finding was in any event qualified by the finding, accepted by Sheppard J., that there was a satisfactory body of evidence that heavy smoking of marijuana can cause bronchial pulmonary damage.

[42] I will now turn to the evidence concerning the medicinal use of marijuana. There are a number of active ingredients, cannabinoids, in marijuana. The main ingredient in marijuana that gives it the psychoactive effect is THC. As indicated earlier, THC is available in synthetic form and is available in pill [form] by prescription under the trade name Marinol. There is a dispute between the parties as to whether Marinol is effective in treating seizures associated with epilepsy or any of the other symptoms of diseases for which patients have resorted to marijuana such as glaucoma and AIDS.

[43] Other cannabinoids may have anti-seizure properties. One of the most promising may be cannabidiol (CBD). CBD does not have a psychoactive side effect. It is not available by prescription. The studies that have been done indicate that the cannabinoids increase the effectiveness of conventional drugs used to treat epilepsy and are not a replacement for those drugs. The goal for effective treatment of epilepsy is to maintain a steady blood level of medication.

[44] The Crown's witness, Dr. Kalant, did, in general, provide strong support for the respondent's position that marijuana does have therapeutic properties for treating epilepsy and other illnesses. He testified, for example, that "there is a lot of evidence showing a variety of cannabinoids, that is the pure compounds contained in and extracted from cannabis, do have anti-seizure activity". Most of this evidence has come from animal studies. He testified that of the various cannabinoids tested the most promising one was CBD. It has at least as much anti-convulsant effect as THC but is free of the psychoactive effects. Further, research shows that tolerance to the anti-convulsant action of THC occurs very quickly, "in a matter of days", so it loses its effect. This does not happen with CBD. As well, there is a simpler dose response relationship with CBD, meaning the more that is given, the greater the effect. With THC, while low doses may be good at controlling seizures, high doses can produce seizures. As he pointed out, this makes smoking marijuana that contains both THC and CBD a problematic delivery system, especially since smoked marijuana contains more THC than CBD. He emphasized that not enough human studies had been done. One good human study done by the Cunha group found that pure CBD taken with patients' regular medication improved the condition of all but one of the epileptic patients.

[45] Dr. Kalant also highlighted one of the paradoxical consequences of the drug laws. Marinol, which has these various side effects, especially that it causes the psychoactive effects of marijuana, is available in Canada while CBD, which does not have these side effects, is not. As he said:

I'm not sure why not because since it is essentially free of psycho-active effect and it has a well demonstrated anti- epileptic activity, I should think that it would be well worthwhile to do clinical trials and I really just don't understand why there has been no further clinical testing since the 1980 [Cunha] study.

[46] The defence witness, Dr. Morgan, testified that marijuana has been found useful for treatment of acute nausea and vomiting, as results, for example, from chemotherapy, and Marinol was originally approved for this purpose by the government. Smoking marijuana has been found to be effective in lowering fluid pressure in the eyes of patients with glaucoma. Marijuana is also effective in promoting weight gain and increase of appetite, which is particularly important, for example, for patients with AIDS who are suffering from HIV Related Wasting Syndrome. Marijuana was found to give relief to patients with pathologically elevated muscle tone such as patients with multiple sclerosis or spinal cord damage leading to spastic paralysis of the limbs. Marijuana is also an analgesic. Finally, marijuana has been found to have anti- seizure properties and thus is used by persons with epilepsy, like Parker. According to Dr. Morgan, there were a number of studies showing that THC or CBD have quite pronounced anti-epileptic activity. Dr. Morgan referred to the Cunha study and other literature suggesting that CBD was as effective as or more effective than THC in this respect. Dr. Morgan also referred to anecdotal reports of the effectiveness of marijuana for epileptics. In his view, marijuana is an effective anti- epileptic medication for some individuals.

[47] Dr. Morgan reviewed the side effects of the conventional medication that the respondent was taking. Dilantin, one of the most common drugs used to treat epilepsy, can produce sedation and drowsiness so the police have arrested patients because the police believe they are intoxicated. As well, the dose that produces the therapeutic effect is very close to the toxic dose. In chronic use, it can produce gingival hyperplasia, overgrowth of the gums, which requires surgery to correct. It has also been known to produce damage to the brain and liver. In general, it is a dangerous drug. Another drug used by Parker, Primidone, metabolizes in the body to Phenobarbital and has the same side effects, namely, drowsiness, sedation and severe dysfunction. Another drug, Depakene, can produce outright failure of the liver and patients have been known to die from its effect. It also has adverse effects on the foetus of a pregnant woman.

[48] On the other hand, marijuana, although it has a variety of effects in humans, has no overdose liability. There has never been a proven overdose death caused by marijuana in humans. Unlike the conventional medications, marijuana has an extremely wide safety margin. There is no reliable evidence that even chronic use of marijuana has an adverse impact on cognition or memory. Marijuana is not known to harm the foetus. Since marijuana and tobacco smoke are similar in character, it can harm the lungs. However, a regular marijuana smoker, even a therapeutic marijuana smoker, smokes much less than a tobacco smoker (three to five marijuana cigarettes a day compared to 30 to 50 tobacco cigarettes) and therefore inhales much less smoke. There is, therefore, reason to believe that the marijuana user will not suffer as much pulmonary harm as tobacco smokers. There are no reports of marijuana-only smokers developing emphysema or lung cancer.

[49] According to Dr. Morgan, Marinol is not very effective because the THC is destroyed the first time it passes through the liver. Thus, only about 5 per cent reaches the blood stream. Much more of the smoked marijuana becomes available to the body. Marinol is also essentially useless for acute situations. Smoked marijuana, on the other hand, can be used by persons who feel nausea coming over them, because it delivers the THC quickly and more effectively than Marinol. Marijuana gives acute relief of nausea and vomiting. Marinol is also very expensive. Marijuana is more effective, more efficient and much cheaper. Finally, Marinol, since it only contains THC, is of no use to individuals, particularly epileptic patients, who benefit from CBD.

[50] In summary, Dr. Kalant was wary of smoking as a way of delivering the therapeutic benefits of cannabis. He demonstrated greater concern about the risks from smoking marijuana, was concerned that smoking marijuana was a very inexact way to deliver the drug and that a very large amount of marijuana would have to be smoked to keep a therapeutic level of CBD in the patient's bloodstream. He was, in general, more cautious about the long-term effects of marijuana use because of the absence of research. Dr. Morgan was less concerned about the possible harmful side effects of smoking marijuana. He tended to discount the risks and dangers and thus could see little, if any, reason for refusing patients who need access to the drug.

[51] Dr. Morgan filed a further affidavit on the appeal and Dr. Kalant filed an affidavit in response. In his affidavit, [See Note 4 at end of document] Dr. Morgan states that there have been no striking pharmacological advances in the treatment of epilepsy since the trial and that the respondent remains among the minority of sufferers who "are clearly not fully responsive to conventional pharmacological treatment for his condition". As to the use of marijuana to treat epilepsy, Dr. Morgan referred to studies released since the trial. A study by the British Medical Association entitled "Therapeutic Uses of Cannabis" concluded that cannabinoids appear to be effective for a number of ailments including epilepsy and as an anti-nauseant and while further research was needed, "cannabinoids have a margin of safety superior to many conventional drugs". In his affidavit, Dr. Kalant fairly points out that the BMA study referred to the therapeutic benefits of pure cannabinoids and that the study does not recommend the use of smoked marijuana except for terminally ill patients. Of course, this overlooks the fact that there is no legal source for the cannabinoids, other than THC (Marinol).

[52] Dr. Morgan also referred to the status of research specifically concerning CBD. He stated that animal studies and a few human studies have indicated that CBD, not THC, may be the therapeutically active cannabinoid for treating epilepsy and this is a reason why Marinol does not answer the needs of some patients. He referred to a report by the United States Institute of Medicine. In general, that report recommended much more extensive study of the possible therapeutic effect of marijuana and the cannabinoids on a long list of illnesses. With respect to CBD, the report noted that the few human studies that had been done were likely too small to demonstrate efficacy and concluded that to date the potential anti- epileptic activity of CBD is not promising. The study emphasized that smoked marijuana is not recommended because of the risk factors (from smoking) but the authors also made these reasonable observations:

The goal of clinical trials of smoked marijuana would not be to develop marijuana as a licensed drug, but rather as a first step towards the possible development of nonsmoked, rapid-onset cannabinoid delivery systems. However, it will likely be many years before a safe and effective cannabinoid delivery system, such as an inhaler, will be available for patients. In the meantime, there are patients with debilitating symptoms for whom smoked marijuana might provide relief. The use of smoked marijuana for those patients should weigh both the expected efficacy of marijuana and ethical issues in patient care, including providing information about the known and suspected risks of smoked marijuana use.

And

Until a non-smoked, rapid-onset cannabinoid drug delivery system becomes available, we acknowledged that there is no clear alternative for people suffering from chronic conditions that might be relieved by smoking marijuana, such as pain or AIDS wasting. One possible approach is to treat patients as n-of-1 clinical trials, in which patients are fully informed of their status as experimental subjects using a harmful drug delivery system, and in which their condition is closely monitored and documented under medical supervision, thereby increasing the knowledge base of the risks and benefits of marijuana use under such conditions.

(Emphasis added)

[53] Dr. Morgan also discussed other studies of more general application. He referred to a symposium of the Society for Neuroscience on "Marijuana and Analgesia" which presented strong evidence that cannabinoids had direct diminishing effects on pain signals in animals. Dr. Kalant reasonably points out that the analgeisic effect of cannabinoids described in the study is "well demonstrated, but it does not require the smoking of cannabis". Of course, again, this does not seem to meet the problem that these other cannabinoids are apparently not available in Canada.

[54] At trial, the defence called evidence from persons suffering from glaucoma and epilepsy who have used marijuana to treat their systems. The defence also called Dr. John Goodhue, a general practitioner doing primary care in Toronto for persons who are HIV positive. Some of his patients have developed AIDS. He testified that some of his patients have successfully used smoked marijuana to treat the side effects from the many drugs AIDS patients must take.

[55] Based on the evidence adduced at trial, the trial judge found that the defence had established that smoking marijuana has a therapeutic effect in the treatment of nausea and vomiting particularly related to chemotherapy, intraocular pressure from glaucoma, muscle spasticity from spinal cord injuries or multiple sclerosis, migraine headaches, epileptic seizures and chronic pain. He accepted Parker's evidence as to the therapeutic effect of smoking marijuana in controlling his seizures. He also accepted that Parker's cultivation of marijuana was incidental to his need to possess marijuana for its therapeutic use for the treatment of his epilepsy. By cultivating marijuana he could control its quality. It was also an economic necessity since he has only disability benefits from the Canada Pension Plan to live on. He cannot afford to pay illicit street prices to obtain marijuana. The trial judge found as a fact that Parker had established he could best control his epileptic seizures through a combination of prescribed medications and the smoking of marijuana.

[56] At trial, the Crown argued that Parker had not shown that other legal means were not available to control his seizures. Crown counsel argued that Parker failed to seek sufficient medical attention, failed to request a prescription for Marinol, and failed to have his blood levels monitored by regular blood tests. The trial judge stated that he could "not accept" any of these failures as being supported by the evidence. He held that Parker had been receiving regular medical supervision for his prescribed drugs since 1969. He found that Parker had not sought a Marinol prescription because synthetic THC was not effective for him as demonstrated in the Addiction Research Foundation study. The drug reaches his blood stream much faster when it is inhaled. Further, Marinol does not contain CBD, which appears to have additional therapeutic value for him. Finally, the trial judge concluded that Parker does have regular blood work done during numerous emergency hospital admissions and regular medical visits. The trial judge concluded that he "found no basis on which to fault Mr. Parker for his management of his serious medical condition".

[57] The trial judge found that smoking marijuana is more efficient and at least five times faster in delivering THC and CBD to the blood stream than oral medication and, for people like Parker, more effective.

(iv) The Regulation of Drugs in Canada: Legal Means for Obtaining Marijuana as Medicine

(a) The evidence at trial

[58] As indicated, there was evidence that Marinol is available in Canada by prescription. Leslie Rowsell, the director of the Bureau of Drug Surveillance, a division of Health Canada, testified at the trial about the lawful means of obtaining marijuana. There is no person authorized to distribute raw marijuana. Mr. Rowsell testified that, while it would be open to a physician to prescribe marijuana, the Canadian government would not look favourably upon a physician who did so and, in any event, no pharmacy could legally fill the prescription.

[59] Mr. Rowsell gave evidence as to the method by which a new drug may be approved by the Bureau. A protocol to expedite the availability of new drugs formerly called the Emergency Drug Release Program, now the Compassionate Use Program, by which certain drugs were made available for the treatment of AIDS, would not be available since the program does not apply to narcotics. [See Note 5 at end of document]

[60] The other alternatives were for a person, usually a large drug company, to apply for a Drug Identification Number ("D.I.N.") or for a physician to request permission to conduct a clinical trial. It is fair to say that neither alternative was a practical solution for Parker. Even the less costly clinical trial method would still require expenditure of hundreds of thousands of dollars and depend on a clinician willing to set up a clinical trial and the respondent then being selected as one of the participants. No one has applied for a D.I.N. to market marijuana and apparently no one has applied to do a clinical study of marijuana. Since marijuana does not have a D.I.N., it is not approved for dispensing by pharmacists. Other more dangerous narcotics such as heroin can be prescribed by a physician and dispensed by a pharmacy, albeit heroin can only be used in a hospital setting. The Bureau has not investigated the potential medicinal benefits of marijuana.

[61] At trial, neither Mr. Rowsell nor anyone else mentioned the possibility of an exemption from the marijuana prohibition through an application for a ministerial exemption under s. 56 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. The trial judge accordingly made no findings in relation to that section.

(b) The evidence on appeal

[62] Parker filed an affidavit from Eugene Oscapella, a director of the Canadian Foundation for Drug Policy. Mr. Oscapella had testified at the Clay trial. In the affidavit, he provides information about Health Canada's use of the exemption in s. 56 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. In May 1999, Health Canada released the Interim Guidance Document that outlines the process for Canadians to obtain exemptions under s. 56. This document is attached as an exhibit to Mr. Oscapella's affidavit. Among other things, the applicant must identify:

[The] name and address of the fabricator or distributor who is licensed under CDSA, the Narcotic Control Regulations and the Food and Drug Regulations and who has the capacity to fabricate and distribute in accordance with international drug treaties, if applicable.

[63] Mr. Oscapella also attached a recent government document entitled "Marijuana for Medicinal Purposes: A Status Report". This report states that "the safety and efficacy of marijuana as a medicine has not been demonstrated in any country of the world" and therefore the first step is to gather scientific information and conduct clinical trials. The document states that the government is considering a proposal from a pharmaceutical company to conduct trials on inhaled cannabinoids. There was no indication when and if this proposal would be approved. The document also refers to the Compassionate Use Program, but points out that there is no "licit, licensed, non-governmental supplier anywhere from whom research-grade marijuana can be obtained" under that program. This document indicates that as of June 3, 1999, just over 30 requests have been made under s. 56 for marijuana for medical purposes. According to the document:

After all of the required information has been submitted, the Department aims to review the request within 15 working days. The Minister's decision to exercise discretion for each case is made in the context of the recommendation formulated as part of the review and the circumstances of each individual applicant.

[64] In addition, the document indicates that Health Canada, "will determine, on a case-by-case basis, the necessity of imposing other terms and conditions, particularly for use within the research context".

[65] According to Mr. Oscapella, the Minister of Health had granted two cannabis exemptions under s. 56. It was unclear what had happened to the other applicants or the 15-working-day guideline for processing applications, except that the Minister may have required further information, notwithstanding that according to Health Canada 15 applications were said to have been sufficiently well-detailed to be assessed as of August 26, 1999. Mr. Oscapella was cross-examined on his affidavit on September 21, 1999. He was told by officials at Health Canada that as of that date no further exemptions had been granted by the Minister.

[66] The day prior to the hearing of this appeal, the Minister issued a press release concerning the granting of further s. 56 exemptions. At the opening of the appeal we asked Crown counsel if he wished to apply for an adjournment to file fresh evidence on the operation of s. 56. He declined the invitation.

THE TRIAL JUDGE'S FINDINGS ON THE LAW

[67] The trial judge held that Parker had shown that there was a risk of deprivation of his right to life, liberty or security of the person by the marijuana prohibition. Most obviously, there was the risk of deprivation of liberty should Parker be convicted of an offence under the former Narcotic Control Act or the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. There was an additional risk of injury or death to Parker because he would not have access to marijuana in the prison setting to prevent seizures. Thus, prison would be a particularly dangerous place for Parker because of his medical condition. The anxiety about worrying about a seizure would "be a cruel and unusual punishment in itself". In terms of s. 7, jail not only would result in a deprivation of liberty, but also would put his life at risk and threaten the security of his person.

[68] The trial judge was satisfied that the possibility of Parker's obtaining Marinol in prison was not an answer since he was satisfied on the evidence that synthetic THC was not effective for Parker and he would need to receive CBD. He was also of the view that due process through the trial procedure did not afford Parker sufficient protection. Barring a medical discovery, Parker has a chronic need for marijuana and is therefore subject to arrest, search and seizure, and detention every day. The fact that he might succeed in defending a prosecution on the basis of a necessity defence, as he had in 1987, was no answer since each prosecution entailed financial cost, stress, uncertainty, arrest and loss of his stock of marijuana and marijuana plants thus interfering with his security of the person. The evidence established that Parker was traumatized by the police raids on his home.

[69] The trial judge was satisfied that the deprivation of life, liberty or security of the person was contrary to the principles of fundamental justice. He held that it is an aspect of fundamental justice that a person "possess an autonomy to make decisions of personal importance", including decisions as to health. Serious decisions regarding the management of illness and medical disability in consultation with a physician fall within this area of personal autonomy. Parker has made such a decision respecting his use of marijuana, the use of marijuana has allowed him to control his illness with some success and his decision has been supported by his physicians over the years. The trial judge made this critical finding [at p. 265 C.R.]:

I find he has established that this control is best achieved through a combination of prescribed medications and the smoking of marijuana. For this Applicant/Accused to be deprived of his smokable marijuana is to be deprived of something of fundamental personal importance.

[70] The trial judge found that the marijuana prohibition is overbroad because the legislation does not provide a procedural process for an exemption for an individual in Parker's circumstances. It does not accord with fundamental justice to criminalize a person suffering a serious chronic medical disability for possessing a vitally helpful substance not legally available to him in Canada. While the purpose of the Narcotic Control Act and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act is to safeguard the health of Canadians, that legislation has the dramatically opposite effect for Parker. The legislation prevents him from having access to a relatively safe drug that has demonstrated therapeutic benefit to him.

[71] In response to the Crown's argument that a continued marijuana prohibition was required so that Canada fulfilled its international obligations, the trial judge pointed out that, for example, the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances provides that the measures adopted by the contracting states to criminalize marijuana possession and prevent illicit cultivation must be "necessary" and respect fundamental human rights.

[72] The Crown conceded before the trial judge that if he found a violation of Parker's rights under s. 7, the violation could not be saved by s. 1 of the Charter.

[73] The trial judge adopted the following remedy. He concluded that rather than striking down the prohibition the proper remedy was to read in, pursuant to s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982, an exemption for "persons possessing or cultivating Cannabis (marijuana) for their personal medically approved use". This exemption applied to the marijuana possession and cultivation provisions of the former Narcotic Control Act and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, being ss. 3(1) and 6(1) of the former Act and ss. 4(1) and 7(1) of the latter. Parker was also entitled to the personal remedy, under s. 24(1) of the Charter, of a stay of proceedings of the charges laid against him and the return of the plants seized during the September 1997 arrest.

THE ISSUES

[74] The Crown makes the following arguments:

1. The conduct in respect of which Parker seeks Charter protection is outside the scope of s. 7 of the Charter.

2. The trial judge erred in finding that Parker had no legal alternative to control his epilepsy. This submission identifies two errors: (i) that Parker had not shown that Marinol could not treat his epilepsy and (ii) that Parker had not shown that if he maintained a proper regime of conventional medication and regular attendance at a specialist he could not control his epilepsy. The Crown argues that the trial judge erred by reversing the burden of proof by requiring it to establish that Parker's rights were not infringed and that any infringement was consistent with the principles of fundamental justice.

3. The trial judge erred in finding the legislation was overbroad because there was a possibility for legally obtaining marijuana. The fact that no one had taken the steps to have marijuana approved through the legal procedure set out in the legislation did not render the legislation unconstitutional.

4. The trial judge erred in finding that the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act violated Parker's rights because Parker could have applied for an exemption under s. 56 of the Act but had failed to do so and that the process for granting exemptions under s. 56 conforms with the principles of fundamental justice.

5. Assuming there was a breach of s. 7, the trial judge erred in his choice of remedy.

ANALYSIS

Introduction

[75] In the course of these reasons, I intend to address the arguments made by the Crown. However, it will be more convenient to deal with those arguments through an analysis that is structured around s. 7. Accordingly, I will consider these issues under the following headings. These headings should be understood as dealing with the therapeutic use of marijuana, not the broader claims dealt with in the Clay case:

1. The context.

2. The right to liberty implicated by the marijuana prohibition.

3. The right to security of the person implicated by the marijuana prohibition.

4. Does the marijuana prohibition deprive Parker or persons similarly situated of their rights to liberty and security of the person?

5. The principles of fundamental justice and the right to liberty and security of the person.

6. Is there a different analysis of fundamental justice under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act?

7. Can any violations be saved by s. 1?

8. The appropriate remedy for any violations.

1. The context

[76] This case depends upon the interpretation and application of s. 7 of the Charter:

7. Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security of the person and the right not to be deprived thereof except in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.

[77] In the companion case of R. v. Clay, I have already dealt with the submission that, broadly speaking, the marijuana prohibition violates s. 7 because it criminalizes people who have done nothing wrong. This case raises the narrower issue of the impact upon individuals claiming a need for marijuana as a matter of medical necessity, not recreational use.

[78] This aspect of the case raises an issue akin to the standing issue that I have touched upon in the Clay case. The Crown's approach to this appeal was to try to demonstrate that as a matter of fact Parker did not need marijuana to control his epilepsy. I deal with that issue below. However, it is also open to Parker to challenge the validity of the legislation on the basis that it was overbroad or unconstitutional in some other way in its application to other persons. The Crown respondent appeared to concede this in the Clay appeal. In any event, that conclusion follows from the decisions of the Supreme Court of Canada in R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd., 1985 CanLII 69 (SCC), [1985] 1 S.C.R. 295, 13 C.R.R. 64, and R. v. Morgentaler, supra. In both cases, the accused were held to have standing to challenge the law under which they were charged although the alleged infringement of the Charter concerned the rights of some other person.

[79] The decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in Morgentaler is of particular assistance because the issues in that case were similar to the issues here. The accused physicians relied upon s. 7 of the Charter to challenge a criminal offence based upon the interference with the health of pregnant women seeking abortions. In his dissenting reasons at p. 133, McIntyre J. suggested that the question of the s. 7 violation was hypothetical since, "[t]here is no female person involved in the case who has been denied a therapeutic abortion". However, Dickson C.J.C. was satisfied that the accused physicians had standing. As he said at p. 63:

As an aside, I should note that the appellants have standing to challenge an unconstitutional law if they are liable to conviction for an offence under that law even though the unconstitutional effects are not directed at the appellants per se: R. v. Big M Drug Mart Ltd., at p. 313. The standing of the appellants was not challenged by the Crown.

[80] Therefore, it is open to Parker to challenge the validity of the marijuana prohibition not only on the basis that it infringes his s. 7 rights because of his particular illness, but that it also infringes the rights of others suffering other illnesses.

[81] The trial judge identified a number of ways in which Parker's liberty and security interests were affected by the marijuana prohibition. In one sense, it would have been sufficient to identify the clearest of those infringements, the possibility of imprisonment upon conviction for the offence. This interference with Parker's liberty interest would conceivably be sufficient to require a determination of whether the deprivation was in accordance with the principles of fundamental justice.

[82] However, in my view, this would not adequately capture the defects in the legislation and would fail to come to grips with the context in which the issue arises. As Wilson J. said in Edmonton Journal v. Alberta (Attorney General), 1989 CanLII 20 (SCC), [1989] 2 S.C.R. 1326 at pp. 1355-56, 64 D.L.R. (4th) 577 a right or freedom may have different meanings in different contexts. "The contextual approach attempts to bring into sharp relief the aspect of the right or freedom which is truly at stake in the case as well as the relevant aspects of any values in competition with it." Thus, the importance of the right or freedom must be assessed in context rather than in the abstract and its purpose must be ascertained in context.

[83] Although Wilson J. was particularly concerned about the importance of context for the s. 1 analysis, context is important for analyzing a right, such as s. 7, that to some extent contains its own balancing test and which may or may not be amenable to further balancing under s. 1. The dominant aspect of the context in this case is the claim by Parker and other patients that they require access to marijuana for medical reasons. They do not, like the appellant in the Clay case, assert a desire for marijuana for recreational use. Parker does not claim a right to use marijuana on the basis of some kind of abstract notion of personal autonomy. The validity of the marijuana prohibition must be assessed in that particular context. The context here is not simply that the marijuana prohibition exposes Parker, like all other users and growers, to criminal prosecution and possible loss of liberty. Rather, Parker alleges that the prohibition interferes with his health and therefore his security interest a swell as his liberty interest.

[84] Related to this aspect of the case is that Parker does not seek to avoid the marijuana prohibition to assist in the treatment of some mild discomfort. If it is not properly controlled, his seizure activity can be life-threatening. Further, the evidence concerning the use of marijuana to assist in the treatment of other illnesses centred on patients with profound symptoms: AIDS patients suffering from wasting disease, cancer patients receiving chemotherapy and patients suffering from glaucoma, to name just a few.

[85] Having said that, it must be acknowledged that the scope of the liberty and security interests protected by s. 7 is still a matter of considerable debate: see for example, New Brunswick (Minister of Health and Community Services) v. G. (J.), 1999 CanLII 653 (SCC), [1999] 3 S.C.R. 46 at pp. 75-76, 177 D.L.R. (4th) 124 at p. 146, per Lamer C.J.C. As I will explain, it is important for the purposes of this case that, although Parker raises important concerns about health and access to drugs for therapeutic purposes, those concerns are raised in the criminal context.

[86] As framed by the appellant, the question of whether Parker's conduct attracts s. 7 protection is intertwined with its assertion that Parker had a legal alternative to marijuana, either Marinol or better management through conventional medication, and thus his choice to smoke marijuana is nothing more than a personal preference. Thus, the Crown asserts that the marijuana prohibition does not affect Parker's physical or mental integrity in any fundamental way and so his security of the person is not engaged.

[87] I cannot agree with this characterization of the issues for a number of reasons. I am satisfied that the trial judge had ample evidence from which he could conclude that Parker was not asserting a mere preference for an illegal treatment over a legal one. I will deal with that below. The Crown's focus on the evidence respecting Parker also fails to come to grips with the compelling evidence placed before the trial judge that marijuana is of therapeutic benefit to other patients.

2. The right to liberty implicated by the marijuana prohibition

[88] The leading decision on the Charter implications where medical treatment and the criminal law intersect is R. v. Morgentaler. In that case, three judges wrote for the five- person majority, each adopting different reasons for finding that the abortion provisions of the Criminal Code infringed the guarantee to liberty or security under s. 7 of the Charter. Wilson J. took the broadest view as she found that the decision of a woman to terminate her pregnancy is protected by the right to liberty. She held, at p. 166, that the right to liberty, "properly construed, grants the individual a degree of autonomy in making decisions of fundamental personal importance" and again, at p. 171, that the right to liberty "guarantees to every individual a degree of personal autonomy over important decisions intimately affecting their private lives". The woman's decision to terminate a pregnancy is within this protected zone of personal autonomy, since, as she wrote at p. 171, it "will have profound psychological, economic and social consequences" for her. Dickson C.J.C., writing for himself and Lamer J., found it unnecessary to consider this aspect of liberty since he preferred to rest his decision on the right to security of the person. Beetz J., writing for himself and Estey J., also based his decision on security of the person. He noted, however, at p. 112 in his discussion of the principles of fundamental justice that certain aspects of the law that he found did comport with fundamental justice, such as a second opinion as to the need for the abortion, "would need to be reevaluated if a right of access to abortion is founded upon the right to 'liberty' in s. 7 of the Charter."

[89] In subsequent cases, a majority of the Supreme Court of Canada has accepted that liberty includes a degree of personal autonomy over fundamental personal decisions. The most restrictive view is that of Lamer C.J.C., and summarized in his reasons in B. (R.) v. Children's Aid Society of Metropolitan Toronto, 1995 CanLII 115 (SCC), [1995] 1 S.C.R. 315 at p. 341, 122 D.L.R. (4th) 1:

"the principle that must be adopted is that generally speaking s. 7 was not designed to protect even fundamental individual freedoms if those freedoms have no connection with the physical dimension of the concept of 'liberty'". He reiterated this view in his reasons in New Brunswick (Minister of Health and Community Services) v. G. (J.). Also see his earlier reasons in Reference re ss. 193 and 195.1(1)(c) of the Criminal Code (Manitoba), 1990 CanLII 105 (SCC), [1990] 1 S.C.R. 1123, 56 C.C.C. (3d) 65 especially at pp. 1174-75.

[90] The broader view was adopted by La Forest J., writing for himself, L'Heureux-Dubé, Gonthier and McLachlin JJ. on this issue in B. (R.) at p. 368:

Freedom of the individual to do what he or she wishes must, in any organized society, be subjected to numerous constraints for the common good. The state undoubtedly has the right to impose many types of restraints on individual behaviour, and not all limitations will attract Charter scrutiny. On the other hand, liberty does not mean mere freedom from physical restraint. In a free and democratic society, the individual must be left room for personal autonomy to live his or her own life and to make decisions that are of fundamental personal importance.

(Emphasis added)

[91] L'Heureux-Dubé J., writing for herself and Gonthier and McLachlin JJ. in G. (J.) at para. 117, again adopted this position in the context of a mother's right to legal representation at a hearing that would give the Minister of Health and Community Services custody of her children for a further six months. She also noted that Bastarache J.A., as he then was, had taken a broader approach in his dissenting opinion in the Court of Appeal. Bastarache J.A. wrote as follows at (1997), 145 D.L.R. (4th) 349 at p. 368, 187 N.B.R. (2d) 81 (C.A.):

No clear majority exists on the question of the applicability of s. 7 to parental control. I have already indicated that I personally favor [sic] a more generous interpretation of the "liberty" interest than that proposed by Chief Justice Lamer. I would however restrict the scope of the "liberty" interest in s. 7 to essential personal rights that are inherent to the individual and consistent with the essential values of our society, as suggested by La Forest J. at p. 389 [in B. (R.) v. Children's Aid Society of Metropolitan Toronto]. I would hold that this is a case where a close analogy can be made with the application of s. 7 to the criminal law and where an extension of the traditional interpretation of the "liberty" interest advocated by Lamer C.J. is required.

[92] Accordingly, I believe that I am justified in considering Parker's liberty interest in at least two ways. First, the threat of criminal prosecution and possible imprisonment itself amounts to a risk of deprivation of liberty and therefore must accord with the principles of fundamental justice. Second, as this case arises in the criminal law context (in that the state seeks to limit a person's choice of treatment through threat of criminal prosecution), liberty includes the right to make decisions of fundamental personal importance. Deprivation of this right must also accord with the principles of fundamental justice. I have little difficulty in concluding that the choice of medication to alleviate the effects of an illness with life-threatening consequences is such a decision. Below, I will discuss the principles of fundamental justice that would justify state interference with that choice.

3. The right to security of the person implicated by the marijuana prohibition

[93] This case also clearly implicates the right to security of the person of Parker and others who claim to need marijuana for therapeutic purposes. In Morgentaler, Dickson C.J.C. held at p. 56 that "state interference with bodily integrity and serious state-imposed psychological stress, at least in the criminal law context, constitute a breach of security of the person". Beetz J. held in the same case at p. 90 that security of the person "must include a right of access to medical treatment for a condition representing a danger to life or health without fear of criminal sanction". Wilson J. held at p. 173 that the security of the person guarantee protects "both the physical and psychological integrity of the individual".

[94] In R. v. Monney, 1999 CanLII 678 (SCC), [1999] 1 S.C.R. 652 at p. 685, 133 C.C.C. (3d) 129 at p. 156, Iacobucci J. held, relying upon Singh v. Canada (Minister of Employment and Immigration), 1985 CanLII 65 (SCC), [1985] 1 S.C.R. 177, 17 D.L.R. (4th) 422, that "state action which has the likely effect of impairing a person's health engages the fundamental right under s. 7 to security of the person".

[95] In G. (J.), Lamer C.J.C. writing for all members of the court on this issue held, at p. 77 S.C.R., p. 147 D.L.R. that, "the right to security of the person does not protect the individual from the ordinary stresses and anxieties that a person of reasonable sensibility would suffer as a result of government action". However, he held at p. 77 S.C.R., p. 147 D.L.R. that it does protect against "serious and profound effect on a person's psychological integrity". The effects of the state interference "must be assessed objectively, with a view to their impact on the psychological integrity of a person of reasonable sensibility" (at p. 77 S.C.R., p. 147 D.L.R.).

[96] The Supreme Court also had to deal with s. 7 in the context of the criminal law and medical treatment in Rodriguez v. British Columbia (Attorney General), a case concerning the validity of the assisted suicide provisions of the Criminal Code and their impact on a terminally ill woman. Sopinka J., speaking for the majority of the court at pp. 587-88, summarized security of the person in that context as follows:

In my view, then, the judgments of this Court in Morgentaler can be seen to encompass a notion of personal autonomy involving, at the very least, control over one's bodily integrity free from state interference and freedom from state-imposed psychological and emotional stress. In Reference re ss. 193 and 195.1(1)(c) of the Criminal Code

(Man.), supra, Lamer J. (as he then was) also expressed this view, stating at p. 1177 that "[s]ection 7 is also implicated when the state restricts individuals' security of the person by interfering with, or removing from them, control over their physical or mental integrity". There is no question, then, that personal autonomy, at least with respect to the right to make choices concerning one's own body, control over one's physical and psychological integrity, and basic human dignity are encompassed within security of the person, at least to the extent of freedom from criminal prohibitions which interfere with these.

(Emphasis added)

[97] In view of these very broad statements, I conclude that deprivation by means of a criminal sanction [See Note 6 at end of document] of access to medication reasonably required for the treatment of a medical condition that threatens life or health constitutes a deprivation of security of the person. Such a deprivation fits easily within any of the above statements. It falls squarely within the holding by Beetz J. in Morgentaler. Depriving a patient of medication in such circumstances, through a criminal sanction, also constitutes a serious interference with both physical and psychological integrity.

4. Does the marijuana prohibition deprive Parker or persons similarly situated of their rights to liberty and security of the person?

(i) Introduction

[98] In my view, Parker demonstrated at trial that the prohibition on the possession and cultivation of marijuana for personal use to treat his epilepsy deprived him of his rights to liberty and security of the person.

[99] The appellant argues that the trial judge's findings are tainted by error because he placed the burden on the Crown to prove that there was no deprivation of his rights. This submission appears to be based, in part, on a statement by the trial judge that he could not "accept" the Crown's submissions that Parker failed to seek sufficient medical attention, failed to request a prescription for Marinol and failed to have his blood levels monitored on a regular basis. The trial judge's reasons for judgment, read as a whole, do not disclose any error as to the burden of proof. The trial judge began his analysis of s. 7 by noting that the onus to establish the violation rested with Parker. He then went on to make the factual and legal findings I have set out above. I have undertaken the factual review to also show that the trial judge's findings are supported by the evidence. It remains to situate those findings within the legal analysis of liberty and security of the person.

[100] Before doing so, I would make this comment. Much of the Crown's submissions in this court were an attempt to isolate various parts of the evidence. Thus, Mr. Wilson referred to individual pieces of the expert evidence and contrasted them with Parker's evidence. As I have indicated, he placed a great deal of weight on the ARF study to demonstrate that Parker had a legal alternative. However, the trial judge was required to consider all of the evidence. He had the benefit of the testimony of Parker and the other witnesses who gave viva voce testimony. That evidence established to the trial judge's satisfaction that Marinol was not a viable alternative for Parker and that he has received a clear benefit from smoking marijuana that is unavailable to him through conventional treatment alone. These factual findings, for which there is support in the evidence, are entitled to deference by this court and I would not interfere with them.

(ii) Right to liberty

[101] I agree with the trial judge that the onus of establishing a violation of the right to liberty is easily satisfied because upon conviction Parker is liable to imprisonment. The trial judge went on to hold that the impact of incarceration was particularly severe for Parker since, deprived of access to marijuana in the jail setting, he was at a real risk of death or injury from seizures. Since any form of incarceration is sufficient to trigger this aspect of the right to liberty, I do not think it necessary or advisable to attempt to quantify the severity of the deprivation. Like the trial judge, I would consider this collateral consequence of deprivation of liberty, if necessary, as an aspect of security of the person.

[102] In my view, Parker has also established that the marijuana prohibition infringed the second aspect of liberty that I have identified -- the right to make decisions that are of fundamental personal importance. As I have stated, the choice of medication to alleviate the effects of an illness with life-threatening consequences is a decision of fundamental personal importance. In my view, it ranks with the right to choose whether to take mind-altering psychotropic drugs for treatment of mental illness, a right that Robins J.A. ranked as "fundamental and deserving of the highest order of protection" in Fleming v. Reid (1991), 1991 CanLII 2728 (ON CA), 4 O.R. (3d) 74 at p. 88, 82 D.L.R. (4th) 298 (C.A.).

[103] To intrude into that decision-making process through the threat of criminal prosecution is a serious deprivation of liberty. For the purposes of this appeal, it is unnecessary to decide whether the decision-making must meet some objective standard to fall within this aspect of liberty. The evidence established that Parker's choice was a reasonable one. He has lived with this illness for many years. He has tried to treat the illness through highly in