Conservative Gives Idiot CNN Anchor A Lesson On Automatic Weapons
Conservative radio host Ben Ferguson gave CNN’s Don Lemon an embarrassing lesson about guns on Live TV Wednesday night. Lemon tried to start an argument with the radio host about automatic weapons, but it soon became clear that the CNN reporter had no idea what he was talking about.

“The gun law says that you and I can’t just go out and buy an automatic weapon, so let’s deal with the facts here,” Ferguson said. “A semi-automatic weapon is a gun that you and I are allowed to own, and in different places they have different rules. But to imply that anyone can walk out and buy an automatic weapon is just not true, Don.”

Lemon replied that he was able to buy an “automatic weapon” in the days after the 2012 movie theater shooting in Colorado.

“I have maybe shot a gun three, four times in my life — I don’t even live in Colorado. I think most people can go out and buy an automatic weapon,” Lemon added, according to The Blaze. “I don’t understand your argument there. It took me 20 minutes.”

Ferguson had a feeling that Lemon had no idea what he was talking about, so he asked him to define an automatic weapon.

“For me, an automatic weapon is anything that you can shoot off a number of rounds very quickly. I was able to buy an AR-15 in 20 minutes,” Lemon said.

Yeah…right…

Ferguson then jumped on the ignorant Lemon and gave him a lesson about guns he won’t soon forget!

“With all due respect, you don’t know what you’re talking about,” Ferguson fired back. “An automatic weapon is when you pull the trigger one time and it continually shoots off one after another, after another.”

Lemon awkwardly tried to defend himself, but the writing was clearly on the wall for him.

“Let me finish, Ben. But listen. I think you are getting into semantics. Regardless of what you want to call it, an automatic or a semi-automatic weapon.”

“It’s a big deal,” Ferguson interrupted. “It’s the difference between breaking the law and not breaking the law.”

Lemon then clarified that he was able to shoot several shots “very quickly” and could easily have killed someone, but he added that “no one is saying you should take away anyone’s Second Amendment right.”

Yikes…someone give those liberal reporters a lesson about guns ASAP!