Financial help – Refugees
The Canadian government has several programs to help refugees settle in their new home.

Resettlement Assistance Program

The Government of Canada gives resettlement help to Convention Refugees Abroad.

In some cases, they offer this help to members of the Country of Asylum Class who have been:

identified as refugees with special needs and

admitted to Canada as government-assisted refugees.

If you claimed refugee protection from inside Canada, you are not eligible for this program.

These funds are used to help pay for:

meeting you at the airport or port of entry

a temporary place to live

help finding a permanent place to live

basic household items and

general help with life in Canada.

You can also use this money for income support for up to one year, or until you can support yourself, whichever comes first.

Immigration Loans Program

The Immigration Loans Program helps refugees resettled from overseas pay for:

travel documents and

transportation to Canada.

Loans are approved according to your needs and ability to repay.

Loans may also be available to other newcomers to Canada to cover expenses such as:

rental housing

telephone deposits, and

work tools.

Interest is charged on Immigration Loans Program loans. The Department of Finance sets the interest rate each January.

Repaying your immigration loan

At any time, if you cannot repay your loan, you can ask us to review your repayment plan.

If you have questions, or want to ask us to review your repayment plan, contact us by:

Telephone

Toll free: 1-800-667-7301,

Hours: Monday to Friday, 8 am to 4 pm (Eastern Standard time)

Please have your loan documents available when you call.

Email, fax or mail

Email: collection@cic.gc.ca

Fax: 819-934-3884

Mailing address: 365 Laurier Avenue West, Ottawa Ontario, K1A 1L1

Clearly describe your situation. Be clear about exactly what you would like us to consider. Include your PAYEE number (located in the bottom right section of your statement) so that we can access your file.

We can only discuss your immigration loan. You can find information on other topics such as permanent resident cards, application status, and travel documents online.

Visit our Help Centre for more information on immigration loans.