House of Representatives
PRESS RELEASES

SOURCE: Press and Public Affairs Bureau

House overwhelmingly passes death penalty bill

08 March 2017 09:12:34 AM

The House of Representatives, voting 217-54 with one abstention, passed Tuesday night House Bill 4727 or the proposed “Death Penalty Law,” which seeks to reinstate the punishment of death for drug-related heinous crimes.



The re-imposition of the death penalty will require the repeal of Republic Act No. 9346 entitled “An Act Prohibiting the Imposition Of Death Penalty in the Philippines”, and further amendment of Act No. 3815, as amended, or “The Revised Penal Code,” and Republic Act No. 9165, otherwise known as the “Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act Of 2002.”



The bill defines heinous crimes as “grievous, odious and hateful offenses, which by reason of their inherent or manifest wickedness, viciousness, atrocity and perversity are repugnant and outrageous to the common standards and norms of decency and morality in a just, civilized and orderly society.”



It cites the policy of the State “to foster peace and order, and ensure obedience to its authority, to protect life, liberty and property and to promote the general welfare which are essential for the enjoyment by all the people of the blessings of democracy in a just and humane society.”



Towards this end, and in the interest of justice, public order and the rule of law, and the need to rationalize and harmonize penal sanctions, Congress finds compelling reasons to impose the death penalty on heinous crimes committed by offenders who are a continuous threat to society.



Under the bill, the death penalty shall be imposed on the following offenses: (1) importation of dangerous drugs; (2) sale, trading, administration, dispensation, delivery, distribution, and transportation of dangerous drugs; (3) maintenance of a den, dive, or resort where any dangerous drug is used or sold; (4) manufacture of dangerous drugs; and (5) possession of 10 grams or more of dangerous drugs.



The death penalty shall also be enforced when the crime is committed under the influence of dangerous drugs, provided that the offense committed is punishable by reclusion temporal or 12 years and one day up to 20 years.

However, the imposition of capital punishment is not automatic, as the proposed law provides for an automatic review by the Court of Appeals or by the Supreme Court, and a majority vote is required for it to be imposed.



Moreover, death penalty shall not be imposed when the offender is below 18 years old or more than 70 years old when the crime was committed.



Among those who voted in favor of the bill was Rep. Emi Calixto-Rubiano (Lone District, Pasay City) who said her affirmative decision was based on consultations and meetings with her constituents, which reflected overwhelming support for the death penalty reimposition.



“After a series of consultations and meetings with the different sectors in our city, which started as early as November 2016, and after the survey I commissioned just last month to get the sentiments of my constituents, majority, if not all, favored the reimposition of the death penalty. Being their lone representative and voice here in Congress, I bring with me today the decision of my people. Therefore I vote Yes in favor of House Bill 4727,” said Calixto-Rubiano.



Rep. Aniceto "John" Bertiz III (Party-list, ACTS OFW), in explaining his affirmative vote, said heinous crimes in the country continue unabated mostly due to uncontrolled drug trafficking.



“We cannot afford to see more lives wasted, more futures destroyed by big-time drug syndicates operating in our country. Our OFWs who are working so hard for their families deserve to know that their own government will be just as tough on drug traffickers as most other countries are,” said Bertiz.



Bertiz added “Pinagtatawanan at pinapalusutan lang po tayo ng mga West African drug syndicates na ginagawang transshipment ang Pilipinas at ginagamit ang ating mga kababayan bilang drug couriers abroad. Tulad po sa kaso ni Mary Jane Veloso, yung sangkot na African nationals, hindi man lang natin naipakulong at naparusahan. Kung may death penalty, sila na mismo ang iiwas sa Pilipinas. At ang mahalaga, ‘yung mga kawani ng pamahalaan na nasa bulsa ng drug lords ay maari na ring maparusahan ng kamatayan.”



Bertiz said it is also his desire and conviction to include other heinous crimes such as rape with murder, large-scale human trafficking, child pornography and plunder in the coverage of the bill.



“What these crimes do not only to the direct victims themselves but also to their families and the entire society is equivalent to death. The approval of this bill must ensure not just the reinstatement of capital punishment but likewise the reformation in our criminal justice system. Our children deserve a peaceful and orderly society. This vote is for them. I vote yes!,’’ said Bertiz.



Rep. Ruwel Peter Gonzaga (2nd District, Compostela Valley) likewise voted in favor of the bill, saying the enactment into law of HB 4727 will not violate the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). He said the late President Corazon Aquino ratified the ICCPR on October 23, 1986. The Batasan Pambansa did not concur with the ratification made by the President of the ICCPR simply because the Batasan Pambansa was abolished by virtue of Proclamation No. 3 signed by Mrs. Aquino establishing a Revolutionary Government.



“ICCPR could not have attained the status of a treaty, thus it has no binding effect here in our Philippines jurisdiction. On the other hand, assuming ICCPR is a legitimate treaty, still HB 4727, if enacted into law, will not violate the ICCPR,”said Gonzaga.



Gonzaga said Article 6 Paragraph 2 of the ICCPR states “In countries which have not abolished the death penalty, sentence of death may be imposed only for the most serious crimes.’’



Gonzaga said this comment was interpreted by the ICCPR Human Rights Committee by issuing General Comment No. 6 dated July 7, 1982, stating that, ‘’while it follows from Article 6 Paragraph 2 to Paragraph 6 that state parties are not obliged to abolish the death penalty totally, they are obliged to limit its use, and in particular, to abolish it to other than the most serious crimes.’’



Gonzaga also said that Fr. Joaquin Bernas, in his book, Philippine Constitution: Comprehensive Reviewer, states, ‘’Article 6 Paragraph 2 of the covenant explicitly recognizes that capital punishment is an allowable limitation on the life to right, subject to the limitation that it may be imposed for the most serious crimes.’’



The second issue clarified by Gonzaga is that the death penalty, if enacted into law, will not violate the Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR. “The Second Optional Protocol to the ICCPR is not a treaty nor an international agreement because the ratification of the President did not have the concurrence of at least two-thirds of all members of the Senate as required under Section 21 Article 7 of the Constitution,” said Gonzaga.



Gonzaga said as to whether the death penalty is cruel, unconstitutional, excessive, and so on, the Supreme Court had ruled, unchangingly, and answered this issue in the negative in the cases of Harden vs Director, People vs Limaco, People vs Camano, People vs Puda, People vs Marcos, and People vs Echegarray.



Rep. Rozzano Rufino B. Biazon (Lone District, Muntinlupa City) also voted for the bill, saying his return to the House in the 17th Congress has given him another opportunity by his constituents to represent them. He said his view about illegal drugs remains the same that “it is a menace to society, it brings about moral decay, it fuels crime and brings misery in the life of anyone and everyone who gets entangled in its web.’’



With the recent revelations about drug operations inside the New Bilibid Prison, Biazon said he is not surprised that the current administration, with its stance against illegal drugs, and the population in general, is taking a close look at the extent of the drug problem.



“But let me say that these revelations are not new to this representation, whose district plays host to the New Bilibid Prison. As far back as my first term in 2001, there had already been rumors going around about the illicit trade going on inside the secure prison walls. That is one of the reasons why I have consistently taken this stance over the years,” said Biazon.



Biazon said the Constitution allows capital punishment for compelling reasons involving heinous crimes. “The continued proliferation of the illegal drug trade with its devastating effects is a compelling reason. And the resulting crimes are heinous. Under the authority of the People of Muntinlupa City for me to be in this Chamber, I vote yes," said Biazon.



Deputy Speaker and Camarines Sur First District Rep. Rolando Andaya, Jr. said the real crime deterrent is the certainty of apprehension, the certainty of prosecution, and the certainty of conviction.



“Ano ang punto ko, hindi lang parusa kundi ang buong sistema ang i-reporma. Sang-ayon ako sa hindi mandatory ang death penalty, sang-ayon ako sa automatic review, sang-ayon ako na iisa lang ang sakop ng batas na ito. I vote in the affirmative,” said Andaya.



Meanwhile, leading those who voted against the bill was Rep. Edcel Lagman (1st District, Albay). He cited two overriding reasons for his vote: one, the imposition of death penalty would openly defy the country’s irrevocable commitment not to re-impose the death penalty as a State party to the Second Optional Protocol to the International Convention on Civil and Political Rights; and two, the 1987 Constitution abolished death penalty. However, it allowed Congress to re-impose it for compelling reasons on heinous crimes.



These two stringent conditions are separate but concurring. Lagman said the proponents have failed to comply with the Constitutional prerequisites.



Rep. Kaka Bag-ao (Lone District, Dinagat Islands) said her “No” vote to the bill was based on fundamental values anchored on social justice and human rights, and dignity.



“Ang urong-sulong na pagtanggal ng krimen na nasasakop sa parusang bitay tulad ng rape, plunder, murder ay indikasyon na wala namang sapat na pamantayan para sa compelling reason at heinousness na sinasaad na kondisyon ng Supreme Court para sa pagbabalik ng parusang bitay,” said Bag-ao. / Editorial and Newswriting Group