ID to vote
There are three options to prove your identity and address

1) Show one of these pieces of ID your driver's licence

your provincial or territorial ID card

any other government card with your photo, name and current address



or

2) Show two pieces of ID At least one must have your current address health card

Canadian passport

birth certificate

certificate of Canadian citizenship

citizenship card

social insurance number card

Indian status card

band membership card

Métis card

card issued by an Inuit local authority

Canadian Forces identity card

Veterans Affairs health card

old age security card

hospital card

medical clinic card

label on a prescription container

identity bracelet issued by a hospital or long-term care facility

blood donor card

CNIB card

credit card

debit card

employee card

student identity card

public transportation card

library card

liquor identity card

parolee card

firearms licence

licence or card issued for fishing, trapping or hunting

utility bill (e.g. electricity; water; telecommunications services including telephone, cable or satellite)

bank statement

credit union statement

credit card statement

personal cheque

government statement of benefits

government cheque or cheque stub

pension plan statement

residential lease or sub-lease

mortgage contract or statement

income tax assessment

property tax assessment or evaluation

vehicle ownership

insurance certificate, policy or statement

correspondence issued by a school, college or university

letter from a public curator, public guardian or public trustee

targeted revision form from Elections Canada to residents of long-term care facilities

letter of confirmation of residence from a First Nations band or reserve or an Inuit local authority

letter of confirmation of residence, letter of stay, admission form or statement of benefits from one of the following designated establishments: student residence seniors' residence long-term care facility shelter soup kitchen









We accept e-statements and e-invoices. Print them or show them on a mobile device.

OR

3) If your ID does not have your current address, take an oath Show two pieces of ID with your name and have someone who knows you attest to your address. This person must show proof of identity and address, be registered in the same polling division, and attest for only one person.

Important information about ID

Your voter information card is not a piece of ID.

a piece of ID. We accept pieces of ID in their original format. If your document was issued electronically, like an e-statement or an e-invoice, bring a printout or show it on a mobile device.

We accept different pieces of ID from the same source if the documents serve different purposes. For example, we accept an invoice and a transcript from the same school.

Your name and address must be printed on the ID. They can't be added by hand, unless they are added by the issuer of the document, like a residence administrator or a guardian.

We accept expired ID, as long as it has your name and current address.

The pieces of ID listed above are authorized by the Chief Electoral Officer. No other pieces will be accepted.

The pieces of ID required for a federal election are not the same as for provincial, territorial or municipal elections.

Frequently asked questions

Can I use ID with a mailing address – PO box, rural route or general delivery?

Yes, if your mailing address appears in your voter registration file. If you're not sure what address we have on file, check your voter registration here or call your local Elections Canada Office.

Can I use my passport to vote?

Yes. You can use your passport to prove your identity (name). But you also need to show a second piece of ID with your name and address. Why can't my passport count as proof of my name and address? Passport holders write their own address into their passport. For a piece of ID to count as proof of address, the address must be added by the issuer of the document. That's why we accept a passport as proof of identity (name), but not as proof of address.

What is a letter of confirmation of residence? How can I get one?

You can use this letter as your proof of address – along with a second piece of ID – if you live in or receive services from a: student residence

seniors' residence

long-term care facility

shelter

soup kitchen

First Nations' band or reserve

Inuit local authority. This proof of address will be valid only if it is signed by the administrator of one of the facilities listed above. How can I get one? Print the letter of confirmation of residence form and ask the administrator of your facility to complete and sign it. You can ask the administrator to print it for you.

We will also accept a letter from the administrator that is printed on the letterhead of the establishment.

The administrator should contact the local returning officer to make sure the facility is listed with Elections Canada. Facilities can be added to the list once the election has been called.

If the name of the facility is not on our list, your letter will not be accepted at the polls.

When you go to register and vote, bring this letter and a second piece of ID with your name.

I'm homeless or I have no fixed address. How can I prove my address?

You can use a letter of confirmation of residence to prove your address. If you stay in a shelter: Print the letter of confirmation of residence form, if you can, and ask the administrator to complete it and sign it. We will also accept a letter from the administrator that is printed on the shelter's letterhead. When you go vote, bring the letter and a second piece of ID with your name.

If you live on the streets and receive services from a shelter or soup kitchen: Print the letter of confirmation of residence form, if you can, and ask the administrator to complete it and sign it. We will also accept a letter from the administrator that is printed on the shelter's or soup kitchen's letterhead. When you go vote, bring the letter and a second piece of ID with your name.

How do I know if someone is registered in the same polling division as me?