What is PTI
Introduction

Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf is a political party on paper, but it is way bigger than that. It's a dream for a prosperous Pakistan where every man and woman has high self esteem and takes care of fellow citizens per the priniciples of humanity. The goal of its founder Imran Khan is to ensure Justice for all as he believes that a just society has the best chance to succeed. At the core, PTI just wants to make sure that we as a nation are the best version of ourselves and make a name for us in this world. We believe that Pakistan is a very special country, full of natural resources and full of earnest & intelligent people.

But unfortuntely due to the corrupt leadership of the country and lack of justice, we have failed to maximize our capability. It's our dream to see Pakistan as a self sufficient nation who makes its own decision prioritizing the interest of its people.

One of the initial goals of PTI was to make our Justice system independent so that all countrymen, be it rich or poor, can get the same level of Justice. We are proud to achieve that in Pakistan after playing the leading role in the lawyers movement and by constantly advocating a system that is fair for all regardless of their social class or demographics. The other big stance of PTI is that we need to get rid of corrupt leaders in Pakistan who have stolen from the people of Pakistan and made enormous wealth abroad.

History

PTI was founded on April 25, 1996 in Lahore. PTI won its first seat during the 2002 Elections when Imran Khan won the National Assemly seat of Mianwali. PTI boycotted the 2008 elections due to the principal stance against corruption and in 2013, we received 7.5 million votes, second highest votes in the elections. We made the Government in Kyhber Pakhtunkhuwa and our focus there has been on the common man. Even our worst rivals give us credit for making Police independent to faciliate Justice for all, revamping the public schools system which has seen 34,000+ private school kids switching to government schools, changing the health policies to ensure we take care of the people in need, and making a significant reduction in corruption.

The iconic moment for PTI was the mammoth Jalsa on October 30, 2011 at Minar-e-Pakistan, where people from all demographics, especially Youth and Females showed up in huge numbers to show Imran Khan that they are with him to fight the status quo of Pakistan. Shortly after, the Karachi Jalsa of December 2011 confirmed that this movement has changed Pakistan forever as the Youth of the country started to take ownership of the country and their resolve for change in Pakistan was rock solid. This is surely a movement comparable to Jinnah's movement for Pakistan. Imran Khan calls it the struggle for Naya Pakistan.

Promises & Oaths

Imran Khan has made six promises to Pakistan and in return he asks people to take four oaths. The promises are as follows:

I will never lie to the nation. Me and my government will wage a 'Jihad' against injustice in the country I will keep all my wealth in Pakistan, I will not be like other leaders who rule in Pakistan but keep their wealth abroad. I will not take or allow others to take unfair benifit during PTI’s tenure in the government. I will guard the nation's tax. It will not be spent on Governor, PM and CM houses. The PTI government will break the walls of the Governor houses. We as a nation will stand with our overseas Pakistanis.

The fours oaths from Pakistanis he requests are as follows:

Help with eradication of Status Quo from Pakistan Don't be afraid of the oppressors and fight the evil together Speak truth and be faithful to Pakistan. Work together to make Pakistan a prosperous and independent country

Our Ideology

As a nation we cannot progress as long as our economy depends on handouts from international lenders and donors. The policies of international lenders have strangulated the capacity of the ordinary citizen to live a life of dignity. We must strive for self-reliance. The goal of self-reliance does not in any way imply that we isolate ourselves from the global economy. It only shows our conviction that by restoring the trust of the people in public institutions we can harness their potential and mobilize them for a better tomorrow.

We offer a new and credible leadership that is committed to restoring Pakistan's political and economic sovereignty by building a new bond of trust between the government and the people. Only through the active participation of the people can we collectively mobilize our human and material resources to forge ahead on the road to a confident and self-reliant nation.

We are committed to political stability through credible democracy, transparency in government and accountability of leadership. We believe in federalism and functional provincial autonomy to the provinces.

We strive a moderate society that banishes hatred and religious bigotry. We are focused on addressing the root causes of religious extremism, which are injustice, poverty, unemployment, and illiteracy while Islam and the Two-Nation Theory remain the bedrock of Pakistan's foundations, religious dogma must not be used to whip up passions to create fear in society. On the contrary, a truly Islamic society advocates tolerance, moderation and freedom to practice the religion of one's choice without fear. Sectarianism is a curse that must be eliminated from society.

Our family values bind society. We must preserve and strengthen them, as they are our strengths for the future. Despite the grinding poverty and injustice, it is the structure of the family that keeps the social fabric intact. Mere passing laws do not change ground realities that force parents to send their children to work. We cannot ignore the present dismal of the children in terms of their right to healthcare, nutrition, and education. Our mothers need to be healthy and educated to properly nurture our young.

An Islamic Society must care for its senior citizens who are most vulnerable. They need special attention and care as not only are they vulnerable, but also most valuable and yet most neglected part of society.

Pakistan is a great experiment in nurturing and sustaining political unity among diverse people based on common ideology. Despite the common strands of national unity, we have rich and diverse cultures, including those of the religious minorities. Cultural and ethnic diversity doesn't bring discord but makes our society rich and tolerant. We must nurture and allow every opportunity for this diversity of culture and traditions to flourish.

Our Mission

To establish a just society based on humane values while continuously upholding the self-esteem of the nation. The PTI will restore the sovereign and inalienable right of the people to choose political and economic options in accordance with our social, cultural, and religious values. We are broad-based movement for change whose mission is to create a free society based on justice. We know that national renewal is only possible if people are truly free.

Our leadership approaches the people with sincerity and a sense of history and we pledge to commitment to:

Freedom from Political, Economic and Mental Slavery - A self reliant modern Islamic Republic

Freedom from Injustice - Inexpensive and quick dispensation of justice

Freedom from Poverty - 50 percent increase in per capita income in 5 years

Freedom from Unemployment - Two million new jobs every year

Freedom from Homelessness - 2.0 lac new housing units every year and complete ownership right to millions living in Katchi Abadis

Freedom from Illiteracy - Full literacy in 5 years

Freedom to Generate Wealth

Freedom from Fear - Complete Freedom of thought and expression

Freedom for Women - Free education up to Matric for girls from poor households.

Equal right for minorities - no religious discrimination

To conclude, PTI is an idea whose time has come!

"Jab Raaj Karegi Khalq-e-Khuda

Lazim Hai Ke Hum Bhi Dekhen Gey "