Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada
Version 2 - 2013

For more information, please contact the NGO who is organizing the Ready Tours in your region.

These tours are free of charge and are held in our Vancouver , Toronto and Montreal offices to inform refugee claimants about:

The Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB) collaborates with several non-governmental organizations (NGO) to help refugee claimants prepare for their upcoming hearings through Ready Tours.

This guide is for people who are claiming refugee protection in Canada. It will give you basic information about:

You can find all of these documents on the IRB web site .

This guide provides general information about the refugee protection process. It is not a legal document. For more precise legal information, please see the Immigration and Refugee Protection Act , the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations and the Refugee Protection Division Rules .

You can be given refugee protection in Canada if you meet the United Nations (UN) definition of a Convention refugee , or if you are a person in need of protection . The UN defines Convention refugees as people who have a well-founded fear of persecution because of their race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership in a particular social group. Membership in a particular social group can include, but is not limited to, sexual orientation, gender identity, domestic violence and HIV status. Persons in need of protection must show that if they return to their home country, they will face a danger of torture, a risk to their life or a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment.

The IRB is an independent tribunal responsible, through its Refugee Protection Division (RPD), for deciding refugee protection claims in Canada.

Definitions

Abandoned claim: If you do not do everything necessary for the Refugee Protection Division (RPD) to make a decision about your claim, the RPD may decide that you do not want to continue with your claim. For example, this can happen if you do not provide your Basis of Claim Form on time, if you do not go to your hearing, or if you do not contact the RPD when you are asked to do so.

If the RPD declares your claim abandoned, you will not be allowed to continue with your claim or make another claim in the future.

Basis of Claim Form (BOC): The form in which you give information about yourself and about why you are claiming refugee protection in Canada.

Convention refugee: A person who meets the definition of « refugee » in the 1951 United Nations Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees. You are a Convention refugee if:

you have left your home country (your country of nationality or, if you do not have one, the country where you usually lived in the past);

you have a well founded fear of persecution based on your race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership in a particular social group; and

you are unable or, because of your fear, unwilling to try to get the protection of your home country.

Contact information: this is the information needed to be able to contact you or your counsel. It includes your current full address and your phone numbers where you can be reached. Your counsel's contact information must also include his or her fax numbers and email address.

Counsel: A person who represents you in the refugee protection process.

If your counsel is charging you a fee or receiving other payment, they must be a member in good standing of a provincial law society (lawyers and paralegals, in a province that allows paralegals to be members of the law society), of the Chambre des notaires du Québec, or of the Immigration Consultants of Canada Regulatory Council

Counsel can also be a family member, a friend or a volunteer who represents you without charging you a fee.

Designated country of origin (DCO): A country designated as a DCO by the Minister of on Citizenship and Immigration under IRPA. Refugee protection claims made by nationals of Designated Countries of Origin are scheduled to be heard earlier than other claims.

Designated representative (DR): A person who is responsible for protecting the interests of a child less than 18 years old or of an adult who is unable to understand what the refugee protection process is about. The designated representative is also responsible for explaining the refugee protection process to that person. In the case of children less than 18 years old, the designated representative is usually the child's parent. However, another family member, a legal guardian, a friend or a worker from a social services agency can also be the designated representative if they meet the requirements.

Eligibility / eligible to be referred: This is the first step in the refugee protection claim process. An officer from the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) or Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) decides whether your claim meets certain basic conditions. If it does, the officer sends (« refers ») it to the Refugee Protection Division (RPD) of the IRB, which will make a decision on your claim for refugee protection.

Excluded person: A person who cannot be considered a Convention refugee or a person in need of protection because he or she has committed a serious, non political crime outside Canada, a crime against peace, a war crime, or a crime against humanity, and people who are guilty of acts that are contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations. It also includes people who do not need protection because they live in a country where they have rights and obligations that are similar to those of a citizen of that country.

Inland Office: Any office of Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) or the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) inside Canada.

Legal aid: A service offered by some provincial or territorial governments in Canada, in which the government may pay for certain legal services for some people who do not have enough money to pay a lawyer.

Member: The Refugee Protection Division (RPD) decision-maker who hears your claim and decides whether to accept it.

Minister's participation: When the Minister of Public Safety or the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration decides to participate in your claim and becomes a party in the refugee protection process. A representative from the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) or Citizenship and Immigration Canada (CIC) (Minister's counsel) acts for the Minister before the Refugee Protection Division (RPD).

Party: The claimant and, if the Minister participates in your claim, the Minister.

Permanent resident: The right to live, work, study and remain in Canada under specific residency obligations.

Person in need of protection: A person in Canada who would be subjected personally to a danger of torture, a risk to their life, or a risk of cruel and unusual treatment or punishment if they were returned to their home country (their country of nationality or, if they do not have one, the country where they usually lived in the past).

Port of Entry (POE): An airport, a seaport or a Canada-United States border crossing.

Refugee Appeal Division (RAD): The Division of the IRB that decides appeals of decisions made by the Refugee Protection Division (RPD). In most cases, RAD will proceed without a hearing, on the basis of the documents provided by the parties and the RPD record.

Refugee protection: The protection given by Canada to a Convention refugee or a person in need of protection.

Refugee Protection Division (RPD): The division of the Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada (IRB) that hears claims for refugee protection made in Canada and decides whether to accept them.

Withdrawing: If you decide not to continue with your refugee protection claim, you must tell the Refugee Protection Division (RPD) in writing that you are withdrawing your claim.

Working days: Do not include Saturdays, Sundays or other days on which the Board offices are closed.