Thunnus thynnus (Atlantic Bluefin Tuna)
Conservation Actions:

There are several conservation measures for this species mainly based on regulation of fisheries activities. The International Commission for the Conservation of the Atlantic Tuna (ICCAT) was established in 1967. Fisheries quotas have been set up since 1982, and a comprehensive pluri-annual recovery action plan adopted by the ICCAT contracting parties in 2007, including time closure for fishing activities and mandated reduction in fishing capacity. However, many conservation measures are not fully enforced and illegal catch continues. Enforcement of the existing measures is needed to prevent extinction of this species. Also, although the Bluefin Tuna probably has more data collected on it than most other fish species, uncertainties in the data make much of it unreliable. It is crucial to improve the quality of data if fisheries managers are going to be able to improve their methods.



High priority also needs to be given to protecting spawning adults in the Gulf of Mexico and Mediterranean Sea. Large adults in the northern foraging region in the Gulf of Maine and Gulf of St. Lawrence also need protection because this region represents critical refugia (Rooker et al . 2008).



Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean

For EU Member States, driftnet fishing for tuna has been banned since 1st January 2002, while the ban entered into force in 2004 for all the other Contracting Parties to ICCAT, as well as the GFCM Member States, but a driftnet fishing activity is still officially permitted in Morocco. The ICCAT further believes that a time area closure could greatly facilitate the implementation and the monitoring of rebuilding strategies. In 2006, ICCAT established a management plan to rebuild the stock to B MSY by 2022 with 50% or greater probability (Rec. 06-05). As various issues related to implementation of the plan have come up, the plan has been amended and strengthened every year since. In [Rec. 09-06] the Commission established a total allowable catch for eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean Bluefin Tuna at 13,500 t for 2010. The current management plan (Rec. 10-04) calls for rebuilding to be achieved with at least 60% probability. It includes a number of conservation measures (country-specific TACs, minimum size limit, closed fishing seasons, management controls of fishing and farming capacity) as well as Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS) measures (vessel registers, vessel monitoring systems, observer programs, transshipment prohibitions, weekly catch reporting, etc.). ICCAT has also approved a research program with different components aimed at improving data and knowledge of Bluefin Tuna biology and behaviour. It is still early to see what practical improvements these efforts will have on rebuilding the stock and improving stock assessments, but it is generally agreed that investments in research and MCS need to be sustained if overfishing is to be avoided.



Deferring effective management measures will likely result in even more stringent measures being necessary in the future to achieve the ICCAT objectives. STECF agrees with the ICCAT SCRS that the minimum catch size should be set at 25 kg in order to avoid misreporting and/or discarded catches of mature fish between 25 kg and 30 kg. There remains an urgent need to have more reliable and complete size frequency data (particularly, but not only, for early year-classes 1–3) for the period following the introduction of a TAC in the Mediterranean. Tagging programs, fishery independent surveys and mining of historical data will all contribute to a better understanding of the status of this species and should be encouraged (STECF 2009).



Western Atlantic

In 1998, the Commission initiated a 20-year rebuilding plan designed to achieve BMSY with at least 50% probability. In response to recent assessments, in 2008 the Commission recommended a total allowable catch (TAC) of 1,900 t in 2009 and 1,800 t in 2010 [Rec. 08-04] (ICCAT SCRS 2010). Probabilities of achieving BMSY within the Commission rebuilding period were projected for alternative catch levels. The "low recruitment scenario" suggests that biomass is currently sufficient to produce MSY, whereas the "high recruitment scenario" suggests that BMSY has a very low probability of being achieved within the rebuilding period. Despite this large uncertainty about the long term future productivity of the stock, under either recruitment scenario current catches (1,800 t) should allow the biomass to continue to increase. Also, catches in the order of 2,500 t (the level established in previous TACs) would prevent the stock from rebuilding (ICCAT SCRS 2010).



As noted previously by the SCRS, both the productivity of western Atlantic Bluefin and western Atlantic Bluefin fisheries are linked to the eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean stock. Therefore, management actions taken in the eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean are likely to influence the recovery in the western Atlantic, because even small rates of mixing from east to west can have significant effects on the west due to the fact that eastern plus Mediterranean resource is much larger than that of the west (ICCAT SCRS 2010, STECF 2009).



Directed longline fishing for bluefin in the Gulf of Mexico is prohibited although a bycatch of one Bluefin Tuna is allowed during fishing directed at Yellowfin Tuna. Effective 5th May 2011, NMFS requires the use of “weak hooks” by pelagic longline vessels fishing in the Gulf of Mexico with the hopes that smaller Yellowfin Tuna will be retained on the hook and larger Bluefin Tuna will pull free (NMFS 2011). It is not yet clear if this technique will avoid adding to the thermal stress that longline-caught bluefins face on the spawning grounds in the Gulf of Mexico (Block et al . 2005).



It is strongly recommended that long-term larval studies in the Gulf of Mexico continue to assess the size of the population and to determine the potential impact of the Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill on the western Atlantic population, especially as the oil spill occurred during spawning season in May and June 2010. In addition, all tuna long-lining should be prohibited in the Gulf of Mexico during the spawning season in order to try to rebuild the population.