Ailuropoda melanoleuca (Giant Panda)
Habitat and Ecology:

A member of the order Carnivora, Giant Pandas have evolved to specialize on a diet of bamboo (Schaller et al. 1985). Bamboo is a poor food source, low in protein and high in lignin and cellulose, and wild Giant Pandas can only digest an average of 17% of dry matter and about 27% of hemi-cellulose (Dierenfeld et al. 1982, Schaller et al. 1985). Thus, to meet their daily energy requirement, Giant Pandas must consume a large amount of bamboo, up to 12.5 kg per day, and defecate more than 100 times daily (Schaller et al. 1985). Pandas have large, muscular jaws with skeletal features to accommodate the musculature and its famous “pseudothumb” used to hold and manipulate bamboo for processing. However, compared with other herbivores, the Panda has very low digestive efficiency because its digestive tract still resembles that of its carnivorous ancestors. The Panda’s feeding strategy emphasizes volume, requiring it to allocate much of its time to foraging (approximately 14 hours daily).



While morphological and behavioural adaptations provide some compensation for poor digestive efficiency, the Panda’s ability to survive on such a low-quality food source remained mysterious for decades. Even whole-genome sequencing found no specific genes responsible for the digestion of cellulose and hemi-cellulose (Li et al. 2010). An explanation was uncovered in a recent metagenomics study that found the Panda’s gut microbes play an important role in digesting bamboo fibers (Zhu et al. 2011a). Additional adaptations to poor quality diet are found in the Panda’s extreme strategy of energy conservation, with daily energy expenditure comparable to that of a sloth or reptile (Nie et al. 2015). Pandas demonstrate a suite of adaptations to reduce energy expenditure. The thick pelage conserves energy lost through body heat, and it has long been known that pandas are conservative in movement and physical activity. Smaller than expected organs also are indicative of energy-conservation adaptation, and down-regulation of resting metabolic rate has been achieved through a mutation in the synthesis pathway for thyroid hormones.



Giant Pandas also compensate for digestive inefficiency by selecting the most nutritious parts of bamboo plants and by altering diet selection seasonally commensurate with changes in nutritional profiles of bamboo species (Schaller et al. 1985, Pan et al. 2014, Wei et al. 1999, Nie et al. 2014, Wei et al. 2015b). They demonstrate strong preference for seasonally available new bamboo shoots, rich in nutrition and energy and low in fibre. Outside the late spring bamboo shoot season, Pandas favour leaves, although more stems are incorporated into their diet during the winter months when leaf quality and quantity diminishes. This convergence of foraging strategies across variations in climate, bamboo species, and topographic profile indicates an adaptive strategy that serves the species well. Still, as an energy-limited species that spends more than 50% of its time foraging, Panda numbers may be limited by the availability of high quality bamboo and the time required to process bamboo in the digestive system.



Early coarse-scale radio tracking using VHF transmitters provided foundational data on home range size and documented the solitary nature of the Panda’s existence (Schaller et al. 1985, Yong et al. 1994, Pan et al. 2014). Although Panda home ranges overlap generously, direct encounters between individuals are rare. Seasonal elevational migration has been documented in the Qionglai (Schaller et al. 1985) and Qinling mountains (Yong et al. 1994, Liu et al. 2002, Pan et al. 2014). At both sites, the seasonal movements track changes in resources, providing access to bamboo species that provide greater nutritional value. Research integrating behavioural, nutritional, and movement data provide new insights into these seasonal migration patterns, demonstrating that these movements facilitate consumption of higher concentrations and/or a more balanced intake of key nutrients such as Nitrogen (N), Phosphorus (P), and Calcium (Ca) (Nie et al. 2014). Female-biased dispersal has been demonstrated with genetic data in the Minshan and Liangshan Mountains (Zhan et al. 2007, Hu et al. 2010).



Fine-scale documentation of |Panda movement behaviour had to await the advent of Global Positioning System (GPS) technology. Published accounts using high-resolution GPS telemetry revised and added to previous findings (Zhang et al. 2014, Hull et al. 2015). VHF-based radio tracking inevitably leads to large amounts of missing data when animals at more distant locations are not detected, thus it is unsurprising that GPS tracking substantively revised home range size upwards, and that core area overlap and opportunity for social interactions is now understood to be greater than previously believed. Other interesting phenomena were also detected, such as the documentation of female-biased dispersal (confirmed with genetic data; Zhan et al. 2007), and sudden, large movements that temporarily took a female far outside of her home range during the mating season. Fine-scale movement data showed that Pandas exhibited individualistic and multiphasic movement paths within seasonal core habitats and large-scale movements between habitats. Tortuous movement paths indicated when pandas searched for and found foraging resources. Pandas frequently return to the same foraging patches, indicating that they likely have well-developed spatial memory.



Using various measures of habitat suitability, efforts to map Panda habitat have proven valuable for guiding the establishment of the Panda reserve system (Shen et al. 2008, Feng et al. 2009, Qi et al. 2012). Giant Pandas typically occupy temperate montane forests at altitudes of 1,500–3,000 m (Hu and Wei 2004). Range-wide analysis of ecological covariates associated with Panda presence suggested that Giant Pandas are associated with old growth forests, a finding previously unrecognised in studies implemented on smaller spatial scales (Zhang et al. 2011). As an obligate bamboo specialist, the Giant Panda’s reliance on this resource is clear, yet it has usually been ignored in habitat suitability models because mapping bamboo understory using remote sensing techniques is difficult (Linderman et al. 2005). Including understory bamboo in habitat models dramatically decreases estimates of available habitat and increases measures of fragmentation. Advances in remote sensing techniques, such as Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer (ASTER), Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer (MODIS), Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) and Wide Dynamic Range Vegetation Index (WDRVI), combined with new analytical techniques, such as artificial neural network analysis, have helped remove obstacles to including bamboo understory in maps of habitat suitability (Wang et al. 2009; Viña et al. 2008, 2010). Enhanced understanding of Panda habitat requirements and improvements in mapping technologies provide managers and policy makers with better tools for conservation decision-making (Loucks et al. 2003, Xu et al. 2006, Swaisgood et al. 2011, Qi et al. 2012).



Giant Pandas are a solitary and seasonal-breeding mammal, only coming together during the breeding season, from March to May, for reproductive purposes (Schaller et al. 1985, Pan et al. 2014, Nie et al. 2012b). Male Pandas occupy large home ranges overlapping several females and are known to congregate around oestrous females. Male Pandas are able to locate females across large areas, and demonstrate fierce and injurious aggression in competition for access to females. Early in these encounters escalated aggression is common, but, in a possible strategy to conserve energy and minimize risk of injury, once dominance is established, contact aggression is largely replaced with non-contact aggression. Individual males are able to locate and mate with multiple females sequentially, so the mating system might be considered scramble competition polygyny.



Because Pandas live a solitary existence, they must rely heavily on chemosignals to communicate with one another without necessitating face-to-face encounters. Giant Pandas make use of a system of traditional communal scent mark stations that provide them with reliable locations they can visit to deposit signals and investigate signals left by other Pandas (Schaller et al. 1985). Studies documenting habitat characteristics of preferred marking sites, including tree species and microhabitat (Nie et al. 2012a), extend our understanding of habitat requirements for the species. If habitat that promotes communication is not maintained, then poor communication may hinder breeding in the wild, as has been shown for captive Pandas (Swaisgood et al. 2004).



Denning ecology is an important field of study among ursids, and other species giving birth in dens, because access to adequate dens can be important for offspring survival. Forest management practices that affect the availability of suitable dens can either significantly harm or enhance cub survival (White et al. 2001). Ursid young, being extremely altricial, are particularly vulnerable. The Giant Panda lies at the extreme end of this continuum, with the mother weighing nearly 1,000 times the cub’s weight at birth (Gittleman 1994). Den quality may therefore be critical for Pandas. Giant Pandas do not hibernate, but females use rock caves or tree cavities to rear offspring that are produced every 2–3 years (Schaller et al. 1985, Pan et al. 2014, Zhu et al. 2001). Preferred dens are characterized by a small opening to buffer against the elements and provide a warmer and drier environment for rearing offspring (Zhang et al. 2007). Dens tend to be located close to water, presumably so the mother can leave the vulnerable cub (almost always a single cub) unattended for a shorter period of time while she drinks. It has also been proposed that tree dens, once more numerous in primary forests before logging converted many forests in Panda habitat to second growth, are a limiting resource for Giant Pandas (Zhang et al. 2011). The importance of this resource may explain why national survey data indicate that pandas are more often found in primary than secondary forest.



It was once believed, and sometimes still mis-stated, that Pandas’ biological deficiencies were responsible for their own decline. Because of early problems with captive breeding, Pandas gained a reputation for having notoriously low levels of interest in mating; however, Pandas in the wild experience no mating problems and have high reproductive rates (Wei and Hu 1994, Pan et al. 2014). Once a better understanding of the biology and behaviour of the species was incorporated into husbandry practices, captive Pandas began to mate naturally and experienced exponential population growth (Swaisgood et al. 2006, Zhang and Wei 2006, Martin-Wintle et al. 2016). Moreover, its well-known specialization on bamboo is not (as once thought) an evolutionary cul de sac, as it opens up a foraging niche with plentiful resources and few competitors (Wei et al. 2014). Dietary specialization is often seen as an extinction risk factor, but this may not be the case for the Panda, which specializes on widespread and abundant bamboo. Thus, pandas are well-adapted to their environment and have reproductive rates sufficiently high to explain the recovery of populations once bans on poaching and habitat restoration efforts commenced (Wei et al. 2014).