Reductions in federal oversight of aquatic systems in Canada: implications of the new Navigation Protection Act
Amanda K. Winegardner,a* Emma E. Hodgson,b* Adrienne M. Davidsonc*

aDepartment of Biology, McGill University, Montréal, QC H3A 1B1, Canada.

bSchool of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA.

cDepartment of Political Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON M5S 3G3, Canada.



Paper handled by associate editor John Post

Received August 20, 2014. Accepted December 8, 2014.

Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences, 2015, 72(4): 602-611, https://doi.org/10.1139/cjfas-2014-0385

The reduction of environmental legislation and regulation has become a common practice for governments looking to reduce government overhead while boosting private sector investment. Following this trend, in 2012 Canada enacted major legislative changes to its environmental policies. The Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA) was overhauled, and related Acts, including the (federal) Navigable Waters Protection Act (NWPA), saw their regulatory processes reduced. There is a need for aquatic scientists to better understand the potential implications for environmental protection and the systems we study. We provide an overview of changes to the CEAA and NWPA before quantifying the duration and outcomes of NWPA-triggered assessments, as well as the implications of changes to the CEAA and NWPA. We find that 87% of environmental assessments that were triggered by the NWPA in the last 10 years were completed within 2 years and that the majority resulted in project approval. Of the assessments reviewed, 58% were on water bodies that are no longer protected under the new Navigation Protection Act, suggesting that the combination of these changes and new Acts will result in substantial reductions of environmental assessments on aquatic systems.

It is clear from the Transport Canada report that considerations regarding the environmental importance of these waterways were not a part of the process of determining Appendix A waterways. The process plainly represents the legislative move back to the original intent of the NWPA, namely the preservation of navigation rights. The information contained in the Waterway Selection Analysis, particularly the quantitative formulas, demonstrate that while the initial list of 1070 waterways appears to have been determined through an objective–quantitative process, the qualitative process was much more subjective. Indeed, in the absence of raw data from the qualitative analyses, there are a number of questions that cannot be clearly answered. In particular, we are unable to definitively determine the degree to which vested, non-science interests affected the inclusion (or exclusion) of specific waterways from the list proposed for Appendix A. We are also unable to determine the level of subjective decision-making that may have reduced the list of water bodies from its initial 1070 down to 163.

From the qualitative analysis, 163 water bodies were subsequently listed on Appendix A of the NPA: 21% of the (468) lakes and 12% of the (536) rivers. The three oceans considered, Atlantic, Pacific, and Arctic, were also all listed under the NPA, though there is no specific mention of the 60+ specific harbours, sloughs, and basins that were considered separately in the qualitative analysis (“Note C” in S3 1 ).

Despite the absence of data associated with waterway selection, the Waterway Selection Analysis showed that the determination of Appendix A waterways occurred through a two-step process. The first step was a quantitative analysis of Canadian waterways with respect to their importance for navigation. A composite measure of waterway usage was generated based on an equal weighting of ( i ) levels of service along the waterway as identified by Canadian Hydrographic Services (CHS) Canada; ( ii ) the volume of freight over 5 years; ( iii ) the historical number of works of navigation on each waterway; and ( iv ) the level of importance of a waterway, as assigned by Navigable Waters Protection Program regional managers. The combination of these scores provided a measure of the importance of individual waterways for the purposes of navigation (“Note A” in S3 1 ). From the initial (unknown) number of waterways included for analysis, the quantitative analysis produced 1070 water bodies — 468 lakes–reservoirs–lagoons, 536 rivers–creeks–brooks–canals, and 66 other water bodies (bays, etc.) — for consideration in the second step, the qualitative analysis.

The qualitative Waterway Selection Analysis released through the ATIP request included elements outlining the qualitative and quantitative analyses, but no complete list of raw data for either. Details from the ATIP are provided in Supplementary Material S3 1 : equations used in a quantitative analysis (S3 “Note A”); factors considered in the qualitative analysis (S3 “Note B”); a list of water bodies that passed from a quantitative analysis to the qualitative analysis (S3 “Note C”); and an outline of how a subset of water bodies were considered in the qualitative analysis (S3 “Note D” — these were water bodies denoted as marginally important in the quantitative analysis and give insight into how the qualitative factors were applied). The Waterway Selection Analysis did not include the full list of water bodies originally considered in the quantitative analysis, nor did it provide the raw data for the quantitative analysis or for the qualitative analysis (except for a subset of 21 lakes and rivers).

With the NWPA already unlinked from the CEAA (in the earlier omnibus bill), the repeal of NWPA and the introduction of the NPA suggests that the motivation behind the changes is more closely connected to the role of government in project oversight and of the regulatory burden. To understand the thinking behind the NWPA changes, and in particular the selection of the Appendix A list of lakes, rivers, and oceans (Supplement S1 1 ), the authors made an Access to Information and Privacy (ATIP) request to the Division of Transport Canada, which oversees the implementation of the NWPA (NPA) legislation for the qualitative analysis used to select these water bodies. This qualitative report had been referenced in media reports (e.g., letter by Denis Lebel referred to in McGregor 2012 ), and upon receiving a section of the qualitative report “Bill C45, Schedule 2: Waterway Selection Analysis”, we discovered reference to a quantitative analysis upon which this “Waterway Selection Analysis” was based. Our subsequent ATIP request for the quantitative report was denied, citing “cabinet confidence.” Cabinet confidence is a convention in Canada’s Westminster Parliamentary System, which sees Cabinet committee meetings held behind closed doors, with all related documents and discussions relating to the meetings held confidential ( Dyck and Cochrane 2013 ).

Because the CEAA (1992) repeal predated the legislative changes to the NWPA, the substantive reduction in the number of water bodies requiring federal approval of projects under NPA ultimately did not reduce federal environmental oversight. That change occurred 6 months earlier, when the EA-triggering function of the NWPA was removed from Canada’s environmental legislation. Nonetheless, the overall impact for regulatory oversight and far-reaching environmental protection remains the same; at the end of the day, the 2012 legislative changes reduced the role of federal government in environmental protection (for the basic chronology of changes to both of the NWPA and the CEAA, see Supplementary Material S2 1 ).

Fig. 1. Visual depiction of environmental assessment (EA) processes under both the Navigable Waters Protection Act (NWPA) and Navigation Protection Act (NPA). “No EA” (highlighted in blue; for the coloured version of this figure, refer to the Web site at http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/full/10.1139/cjfas-2014-0385 ) means that there is no single federal EA process conducted. Other EAs may occur either at the provincial or territorial level or projects may be linked under a single EA process. Key contrasts include the increase in the number of different scenarios (and those leading to a No EA decision) under the NPA, a termination of regular EAs taking more than 1 year to complete, and the introduction of definitions for “minor” and “major” work under the NPA.

In October 2012, the government introduced a second omnibus bill, C-45, the Jobs and Growth Act. It was in this Act that the NWPA was repealed, replaced with the new NPA. Central to this legislative amendment was a change to the scope of federal government oversight. The former NWPA applied to any “navigable water” defined under the Act “as any water body, natural or man-made, capable of carrying a water-borne vessel” ( Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure 2014 ); thus, under the original NWPA, many water bodies across the country fell under the protection of this Act. The new NPA does not use this definition of navigability, and instead federal oversight applies only to a list of water bodies of 98 lakes, 62 rivers or river segments, and the three major oceans (refer to online Supplementary Material S1 1 , henceforth referred to as Supplement S1 1 , Appendix A). The federal government must approve projects on NPA-listed lakes and rivers; however, this process no longer includes EAs. Rather, whether a project undergoes an EA depends on whether it falls on the CEAA-designated project list. However, the Minster of the Environment can “order an assessment for any project not included in the project list where there may be adverse environmental effects related to federal jurisdiction” ( Perrault 2013 ). (For information on differences between EA triggers prior to 2012, see Fig. 1 .)

The introduction of the updated CEAA in 2012 fundamentally restructured environmental governance in Canada. The NWPA (along with other statutes) were removed as EA triggers. In place of the trigger function, CEAA (2012) specifies the requirement of EAs based on a “designated projects list,” which means that it is the project type and the scope of work that determines the requirement of an environmental assessment (the full projects list can be found online at http://laws.justice.gc.ca/PDF/SOR-2012-147.pdf ). The Minister of the Environment also has authority to request assessments for projects not on the list. In addition to these actions, federal environmental responsibility was consolidated under three agencies: the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency, the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission, and the National Energy Board ( CEAA 2012 ).

(3) What are the implications of the changes to both the CEAA and the NWPA for water bodies in Canada? More specifically, is the NPA likely to enhance, reduce, or have no effect on environmental oversight?

The objectives of this paper are to investigate and explore the logic behind regulatory change (of the NWPA and CEAA) and to understand the potential impact of these changes for Canada. By focusing our investigation on NWPA-triggered EAs during the period of 2003–2012, we seek to understand the following:

Canada’s far-reaching environmental protection of land and water through the CEAA (1992) , however, was relatively short-lived. In 2012, the CEAA (1992) was repealed as part of the omnibus budget Bill C-38; the new Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (2012) that replaced it removed NWPA approvals process as a trigger for environmental assessments, severing the link between the NWPA and environmental protection. In October that same year, the NWPA was overhauled to become the Navigation Protection Act (NPA). This most recent change signaled a return to the narrow mandate first envisioned for the Act after Confederation, restricting both the types of projects and number of waterways requiring approvals under the NPA. This is what was intended by policy makers, as Member of Parliament Jim Hillyer noted in a House of Commons debate ( Hillyer 2012 ): “[T]he Navigable Waters Protection Act has nothing to do with environmental protections. This [the changes to the NWPA] is not a move against environmental protection; it is a move against useless regulations that neither protect the environment nor help the economy. That is all it is.” Today the new NPA protects navigation rights on a small number of waterways and restricts certain activities (such as dewatering) on all navigable waters (a detailed discussion of changes to the Act can be found in the section Background on legislation and legislative changes).

The NWPA was never designed to provide environmental protection. However, during the creation of environmental legislation in Canada in the 1990s, the NWPA was linked to that goal. The Canadian Environmental Assessment Act (CEAA), which was passed in 1992, structured a link between the NWPA project approvals process and environmental protection by requiring that all proposed projects defined as “work” under the NWPA automatically triggered a federal environmental assessment (EA). The legislative combination of the NWPA and CEAA together meant that nearly all waterway projects in Canada were provided blanket environmental oversight.

Some of Canada’s oldest legislative Acts focus on water, water resources, and water use. The Navigable Waters Protection Act (NWPA; as of 2012 formally cited as the Navigation Protection Act 1985 ) and the International Boundary Waters Treaty Act ( 1985 ) serve as two key examples, first receiving Royal Assent in 1882 and 1909, respectively. The NWPA was enacted to protect the accessibility of waterways for the purpose of navigation to the government of the newly formed Dominion of Canada ( Navigation Protection Act 1985 ); and, while it made no mention of the importance of water to First Nations, Métis, and Inuit in Canada, it highlighted the early importance of freshwater resources to Canadian national identity.

There were a number of EAs terminated prematurely because of the change in the law; thus, we examined the quantile regressions using the comprehensive EA set both with EAs terminated by the legislative change of 6 July 2012 and without. This was to ensure that we did not inflate the relationship between length of EA and start date by including EAs that were terminated all at once and prematurely.

To determine the relationship between EA start and end dates in the comprehensive (one-third) dataset, we used ordinary least squares regression (OLS) with EA start dates as the independent variable and both EA end dates and number of years to completion as dependent variables. All analyses were completed using the statistical computing environment R version 3.02 ( R Core Team 2013 ). We tested for a significant effect of NPA listing on the relationship between assessment start and end date with an ANCOVA. For the relationship between assessment start date and number of years to completion, we also used the R package quantreg ( Koenker et al. 2013 ) to apply quantile regression. Quantile regression is a regression technique that examines the relationship between a response variable (in this case EA length in years) and an independent variable (assessment start date) using the entire distribution of the response variable, whereas most linear models only use the mean of the response variable ( Cade and Noon 2003 ). This allows researchers to look for relationships between an upper or lower quantile of a response variable and an independent variable, which may be different than the effect on the mean. This is appropriate in cases where upper bounds of a variable may be more predictive than mean values, such as when examining bloom events of cyanobacteria (e.g., see Taranu 2013 ).

We were interested in mean time to completion for archived EAs of lakes and rivers in Appendix A, for ocean waters, and for the comprehensive analysis of EAs. We determined the fraction of all archived EAs since 2003 that were triggered for water bodies currently covered under the NPA to quantify the fraction of EAs that would no longer be triggered under the new legislation. We also recorded the reason for EA termination and number of laws that caused the assessment to be triggered. The database search was initiated on 15 February 2014 and completed on 26 April 2014.

The second set of data collected using the archived database was for a comprehensive analysis of all archived NWPA-triggered EAs and not just water bodies listed in Appendix A of the NPA. By extracting the information for one-third of the 2426 records, we identified ∼800 records of EAs for use in this study. We selected every third record owing to the magnitude of records and time constraints in an attempt to obtain information on a representative subset of EAs. This search was conducted similar to our previous one; using Advanced Search for EAs, we selected EAs triggered by a “Law List Regulation”, specifically the NWPA. This comprehensive analysis of one-third of the 2426 records was conducted independently of the NPA-listed lake and rivers search, and therefore some of the records included in the comprehensive analysis would have also shown up in that first search. Because there are three oceans that are also listed under both the NWPA and the NPA, we were interested in the proportion of EAs that were triggered for oceans. Using the ∼800 EAs scanned for the comprehensive analysis, we identified which ones were on ocean waters and used this to estimate the total fraction of EAs conducted on oceans.

The archive for the Canadian Environmental Assessment Registry ( http://www.ceaa-acee.gc.ca/050/index-eng.cfm ) contains 2426 records for NWPA-triggered assessments (out of 42 414 total records) occurring on water bodies from 2003 to 2012 (up to the changes to the CEAA). Archived assessments were collected for two sets of analyses. First, we looked at archived assessments for all lakes and rivers in Appendix A of the NPA. Using the tools under the Advanced Search for EAs, we selected EAs triggered by a “Law List Regulation”, specifically the NWPA, and the search term of the listed water body (“lake name” or “river name”). For every project assessment directly on an Appendix A (214) water body, we recorded the location, reason for assessment, which law(s) the EA was triggered by (for example the Fisheries Act in addition to the NWPA), start and end dates, and the final decision. The search of rivers yielded many results for EAs conducted on tributaries to the listed rivers. As such, these were also recorded, but were excluded from analyses on trends in archived EAs for rivers.

We were interested in whether the length of EAs was related to when an EA was started. The linear model (OLS regression) between EA length (years) and EA start date resulted in an adjusted R 2 of 0.19 when all termination decisions were included and 0.031 with the reduced dataset (both P < 0.001), with EA length decreasing in later years. While the relationship between EA length and EA start date was weaker when excluding the large chunk of EAs terminated on 6 July 2012, regressing the quantiles for both sets of data show that slope coefficients become progressively steeper with extreme quantiles (see Supplement S4 a , S4 b 1 ) (not as steep for reduced dataset) and with increasing adjusted R 2 values (see Supplement S4 c , S4 d 1 ).

Fig. 2. Length of time to complete environmental assessment (EA) triggered by the Navigable Waters Protection Act ( Navigation Protection Act 1985 ). Panel (A) shows length of assessment and is divided into approved assessments (blue) and terminated assessments (red), with a line representing the new allowable maximum of 2 years for assessments (∼87% of EAs fall below this line). (For the coloured version of this figure, refer to the Web site at http://www.nrcresearchpress.com/doi/full/10.1139/cjfas-2014-0385 .) The size of the circle indicates how many additional Acts of legislation triggered an EA (e.g., larger circles mean that an EA was triggered by the NWPA as well as other Acts). Grey quantile regression lines represent the linear models of the quantiles (0.1, 0.15, 0.25, 0.35. 0.45, 0.55, 0.65, 0.75, 0.85, 0.9, 0.95) with the median (dot-dashed line) and mean (dashed line) fit also indicated. Note that this plot includes all EA data used in this study, including EAs terminated on 6 July 2012 as a result of the legislative change from NWPA to the NPA. The same plot with the 6 July 2012 terminations removed (not shown) showed no marked changes. Panel (B) shows assessments from Fig. 2A and the end finding of the EA: “2012 change”: EA was terminated because of the legislative change of 6 July 2012; “Withdrawn”; project proposal was withdrawn by proponent and EA subsequently terminated; “Project changed”; scope of the project changed, EA terminated and restarted with project, or EA was terminated because new project was determined not to require an EA; “Terminate”; a decision was made not to perform an assessment of the project, project status variable. Approved assessments were not shown on panel (B).

Under the CEAA (2012) , environmental assessments have a set timeline of completion of 1 year (0.25-year extension possible), with 2 years allowed for panel reviews ( Kirchhoff and Tsuji 2014 ). NWPA-triggered environmental assessments found in the CEAA archive took a mean of 0.95 years (SD = 1.32 years) to complete (from the search of 1/3 of total archived reports), with 86.9% completed within 2 years, 72.6% completed within 1 year, and 52.7% completed within 6 months ( Fig. 2A ). Of these assessments, Appendix A lakes had a mean EA completion time of 1.29 years (SD = 1.62 years), with 76.4% within 2 years, while EAs on Appendix A rivers took 1.13 years (SD = 1.21 years), with 83.3% completed in less than 2 years. Assessments on NPA-included oceans were completed in a mean time of 1.1 years (SD = 1.61 years). See Table 2 for a breakdown of assessment outcomes. There were similar relationships between EA end and start dates for both nonlisted and NPA-listed waters; OLS regression resulted in an adjusted R 2 of 0.73 ( P < 0.001) (adjusted R 2 = 0.66 for NPA-listed waters and 0.76 for nonlisted, P < 0.001). This similarity was further verified by an ANCOVA of the slopes of these regression lines. There was a significant effect ( F = 11.14, P = 0.0088) of whether an EA was conducted on a now-NPA-listed water, but no significant interaction between listing and assessment start date ( F = 0.01, P = 0.896), suggesting that the slope of the regression line is similar regardless of whether EAs are on NPA-listed waters or not. Most of the assessments that took a longer time to complete fell into the categories of termination owing to the change in legislation, the applicant withdrew, or there was a decision made to no longer perform an EA ( Fig. 2B ).

NWPA-triggered EAs accounted for 5.72% of all archived environmental assessments occurring between 30 October 2003 and 6 July 2012. Of the total 2426 EAs documented on NWPA lakes–rivers in the archived database, 6.1% and 5.0% were conducted on lakes and rivers, respectively, that are also currently listed under the NPA. An additional 1.6% of the EAs were completed on tributaries to the rivers currently listed. We estimated that 30.7% of these EAs were conducted on ocean basins (see Table 1 for a provincial breakdown). A substantial number of the projects assessed for these ocean basin records were designated as aquaculture. Aquaculture is not an activity covered under the new CEAA, meaning that even if an aquaculture project occurs on an NPA-listed water body, it may not require a federal EA (though depending on the project, a provincial or territorial EA may be required). At least 58% of the projects approved under the NPWA (and thus required an EA) will no longer have any formal federal oversight under the NPA, as these projects occurred on waters not included in the Appendix A list (Supplement S1 1 ). However, given that EAs are no longer triggered through the CEAA, but are rather determined through the designated projects list, barring a full comparison it is difficult to determine how many would still require an EA under CEAA (2012) . It is also interesting to note that our comprehensive analysis of EA archives showed that 140 of the ∼800 records would have triggered an EA under both the old NWPA and the former Fisheries Act (before 2012 changes). Therefore, it is conceivable that with concurrent changes to the Fisheries Act in 2012, approximately 1/5 of the projects we assessed from the archives that would have previously resulted in an EA under two different triggers would no longer trigger an EA at all if their project type is not on the designated list.

In this paper Top of page Introduction Methods Results Discussion « References

Discussion

Federal changes to environmental legislation have come under increasing scrutiny in Canada, with numerous “Access to Information” requests by the media and unprecedented activism by Canadian scientists (Turner 2013). The purpose of this study was to explore, in detail, various ways in which the removal of NWPA-triggered EAs under the CEAA (2012) and reduction of water bodies covered under the NPA may impact federal oversight of projects on water bodies in Canada and the subsequent protection and monitoring of water resources. According to then-Minister of the Transport, Denis Lebel, the impetus behind changes to the NWPA was to reduce the number of federal EAs required for proposed projects: “...the Navigable Waters Protection Act has always been about navigation, not the environment. It has been the case since 1882. There is not a word about the environment in the actual act…We will continue to focus on navigation and cut red tape” (Lebel 2012b). Arguably, the changes to the NPA were enacted to (i) reduce the time between project proposal and start of development, as evidenced by new maximum EA timelines of 2 years (if sent to a review panel), and (ii) reduce potential negative economic impacts to provinces or territories and industry from excessive federal oversight.

Our findings suggest that the discussion by the government regarding the burdensome nature of the NWPA in its connection to the CEAA (Standing Committee on Environment and Sustainable Development 2012) to be, at the very least, subject to interpretation. Based on our comprehensive survey of the NWPA-triggered EAs, approximately 24% of all NWPA-triggered EAs were co-triggered by other statutes (including the Fisheries Act, Historic Canals Regulations, and the National Energy Board Act, among others). Additionally, with an average of 270 NWPA-triggered EAs occurring nationally each year, the majority of which were finalized within the government’s 2-year timeline, it is not clear that the NWPA is an overly burdensome piece of legislation.

From our research, three main issues have emerged in terms of the process by which the NWPA became the NPA: (i) transparency within the development of the list of water bodies included in the NPA; (ii) whether analyses of the length of NWPA-triggered EAs provide justification for reducing “red tape” in the assessment process; and (iii) implications for environmental protection in Canada as we consider the NWPA–NPA in concert the CEAA and other relevant legislation.

Transparency Much of the initial media coverage of the new NPA focused on questions regarding the inclusion of lakes and rivers in Appendix A (Supplement S11). To understand the decision process behind water bodies listed in Appendix A, we submitted an ATIP request. Our (ATIP) request for the qualitative report was granted; however, the subsequent ATIP request for the quantitative report (see Background on legislation and legislative changes and Supplement S31) was denied with the rationale of “cabinet confidence”. Our inability to see the quantitative analysis introduces some level of uncertainty. In the Waterway Selection Analysis, it is clear there was a formula used in the quantitative analysis for weighting navigation for each water body considered. However, without the quantitative report and (or) the raw data from both the quantitative and qualitative analyses, we are unable to determine the original list of water bodies considered for listing under the NPA and thus whether any bias or political influence impacted the process. The absence of the raw data from the qualitative analysis is particularly problematic in this regard because of the (apparently) substantial filtering of water bodies that proceeded from the quantitative analysis to the qualitative analysis reducing 1070 oceans, bays, basins, lakes, rivers, and harbours down to 163 listed in Appendix A (Table 1).

Length of EAs triggered by the NWPA In 2012 the federal government conducted a mandatory 7-year review of the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act. The resulting report highlighted a number of recommendations aimed at streamlining the EA process (Standing Committee on Environment and Sustainable Development 2012). Numerous sections in the report discuss the lengthy process required to complete EAs and note that “[p]roponents need certainty that an EA process will be done in a reasonable and, if possible, defined period of time” (Standing Committee on Environment and Sustainable Development 2012, p. 3). Although the report repeatedly references the unreasonable amount of time that EAs take, it does not indicate what amount of time would be reasonable for an EA to take, nor does it state the average length of time for an EA. Our data clearly indicates that archived EAs triggered by the NWPA between 2003 and 2012 were, on average, completed within less than 1 year (73%), with 53% of all EAs completed within 6 months. Similarly, de Kerckhove et al. (2013) found that submissions triggered by the Fisheries Act were processed within 1 year for mitigated impacts and within 2 years for authorized impacts. While the CEAA review does not indicate what a “reasonable” time frame is, it mandates completion of EAs within 1 year (2 years if sent to a review panel). If 2 years is the legislated timeframe and can be taken as a “reasonable amount of time”, then clearly the majority (87%) of archived EAs triggered by the NWPA were completed within that amount of time. Further research could focus on commonalities among the 13% of NWPA-triggered assessments that took longer than 2 years to complete. The quantile regression provides evidence that EAs were already becoming progressively shorter, prior to the legislative change of 6 July 2012. Changes to the CEAA that came into force on 6 July 2012 meant that a substantial number of EAs were terminated prematurely. The weaker linear relationship observed when this data was excluded from OLS regression suggests that including these EAs artificially increased the relationship between EA length and time. However, the steepening of slope coefficients with increasing quantiles (Supplement S41) found in both analyses demonstrates the importance of analyzing this data using quantile regression. Using only the mean of EA length does not demonstrate a strong relationship with start date, but there is a stronger relationship when examining the longest EAs. The results show that the mean slope of this relationship may be muted by other, unmeasured or recorded factors.