About the Data
Edited by David Leonhardt Follow Us:

The Upshot a plainspoken guide to the news

The data in today’s article on income comes from LIS, a group that maintains the Luxembourg Income Study Database. Staff members at LIS — based in Luxembourg and at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York — gather data on household income from around the world and harmonize the statistics, so that numbers from different countries can be compared. Government agencies typically conduct the underlying income surveys.

The data stretched back to the 1970s, though the most common years for the harmonized data sets are 1980, 1985, 1990, 1995, 2000, 2004, 2007 and 2010. The sample sizes of the underlying surveys vary from about 5,000 to 120,000 households.

At the request of The New York Times, a team of LIS researchers — Janet Gornick, the group’s director and a professor at the Graduate Center; Branko Milanovic, a senior scholar at LIS; and Thierry Kruten, the operations manager of LIS — conducted a study to compare incomes of about 20 countries across income distributions.

The income category in the study is often referred to as disposable household income. It includes income received from work, from wealth and from direct government benefits, such as retirement or unemployment benefits. The measure then subtracts direct taxes paid, such as income taxes. The definition does not include sales taxes or noncash benefits, such as health care provided by a government or employer. (Americans tend to face lower than average sales taxes, but they also receive less comprehensive health benefits and thus must use more of their disposal income on health care.)

The income definition also does not include income from capital gains, a significant source of nonsalary income for many wealthy individuals. As a result, many of the estimates for top incomes are probably low.

We have focused on per capita income, although LIS also publishes online the numbers for household income and equivalized income (a measure that counts each new addition to a household as less than one person). The trends across all three definitions are similar.

To compare incomes across countries, the researchers applied a common adjustment known as purchasing power parity. This adjustment takes into account the relative cost of similar items — say, a Toyota or a Big Mac — in different countries. These differences tend to be relatively small among high-income countries.

LIS calculated incomes in terms of 2005 dollars. To make the numbers more directly comparable to current prices, the article expresses incomes in 2014 dollars, using the Consumer Price Index. This final step provides an estimate of incomes in current dollars but does not alter any cross-country comparisons or historical trends.