DILG allocates P578M for potable water supply projects for 2014
From the Department of Interior and Local Government

The Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) has allocated P578 million for various potable water supply projects under the Sagana at Ligtas na Tubig (SalinTubig) program for 2014.

SalinTubig provides potable water to poor communities with limited to no access to safe, drinking water as part of the government’s effort to achieve Goal No. 7, specifically Target 7C of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).

Target 7.C aims to halve by 2015 the proportion of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation.

Secretary of the Interior and Local Government Mar Roxas said that a total of 54 municipalities have been identified by the DILG and the National Anti-Poverty Commission (NAPC) as recipients of SalinTubig for 2014.

The program, he explained, is part of government efforts to save families and communities from health risks posed by water-borne diseases.

“Bahagi ito ng programa nating iligtas ang mga pamilya at komunidad sa panganib na dala ng sakit mula sa maruming tubig,” Roxas said.

According to Roxas, 64% of these municipalities still do not have a water district and the beneficiaries belong to the poorest of the poor with no access to potable water and with high incidence of water borne-diseases.

Through SalinTubig, the DILG chief hopes to provide potable water supply to more communities in the municipalities identified as project beneficiaries.

“Sa pagsisimula ng taon, inaasahan na magkakaroon ng pagkukunan ng sagana at ligtas na tubig ang mas marami nating kababayan sa malalayong lugar,” Roxas said of the project.

“This also partially fulfills our international commitment to reduce the number of Filipinos with no access to potable water supply,” he added.

Last year, under the SalinTubig program, some P659 million were allocated by the DILG for water projects that benefitted a total of 64 municipalities. For 2012, P770 million was spent for 80 municipalities.

The project beneficiaries were identified based on three criteria namely:

1. High poverty incidence per town;

2. Access to potable water is less than 50 per cent of population;

3. High incidence of water-borne diseases.

Through SalinTubig, the DILG will grant subsidy to eligible local government units (LGUs) for the implementation of potable water projects.

Level 1 and Level 2 projects will be implemented by the LGUs, while Level 3 potable water projects will be implemented in coordination with the Local Water Utilities Administration (LWUA).

Level 1 project refers to “Point Source Supply” such as rain and river catchment; treatment facility, spring development, shallow waters as potential source.

Level 2 project, on the other hand, refers to Source Development such as communal wells, spring boxes, deep(er) wells, and construction of basic near-source distribution system i.e. Transmission pipes, communal tap distribution, and for water sourced from surface (river or spring) or ground (drilled).

Qualified LGUs must first pass a certification from the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) and LWUA for aquifer stability and preservation.

dilg.gov.ph