Consequences of Electoral Reform in Japan
25 Conclusion: Are Mixed‐Member Systems the Best of Both Worlds?

23 The United Kingdom Comes of Age: The British Electoral Reform “Revolution” Of the 1990S

19 The Mixed‐Member Proportional System and Its Consequences in Bolivia

18 The Legislative Consequences of MMP Electoral Rules in Venezuela

17 The Consequences of Electoral Reform in Japan

14 An Initial Assessment of the Consequences of MMP in New Zealand

13 The Political Consequences of Germany's Mixed‐Member System: Personalization at the Grass Roots?

11 Hedging Against Uncertainty: Regime Change and the Origins of Hungary's Mixed‐Member System

9 Electoral Reform in Bolivia: Origins of the Mixed‐Member Proportional System

8 The Sources of Electoral Reform in Venezuela

7 The Causes of Electoral Reform in Japan

6 The Politics of Reform in Israel: How the Israeli Mixed System Came to Be

4 Choosing MMP in New Zealand: Explaining the 1993 Electoral Reform

2 “Extreme” Electoral Systems and the Appeal of the Mixed‐Member Alternative

Introduction: The Electoral Reform of the Twenty‐First Century?

In January 1994, the Japanese Diet (Parliament) passed two major political reform laws, the first changing the system used to elect its Lower House (the House of Representatives) and the second aimed at cleaning up campaign finance practices. After this, Japanese parties, candidates, and voters were faced with a completely new set of rules for Lower House elections, and the purpose of this chapter is to assess the effects of this electoral system revision. First describes the old electoral system, in which the members of the Lower House were elected by single, non‐transferable vote (SNTV) from multi‐member districts, and the new one, which is a mixed‐member majoritarian (MMM) system; key changes are pointed out. The following two sections describe the political changes that seem to have followed from the electoral reform, discussing first the interparty dimension (party‐system consequences) and second, the intraparty dimension (party organization and personalistic politics), with specific reference to whether or not the MMM system has solved the problems of the SNTV system (intraparty competition and its personalistic consequences) and thereby increased the efficiency of the electoral system. The last part briefly discusses the inadequacy of equilibrium‐based analyses for the study of dynamic processes.

PRINTED FROM OXFORD SCHOLARSHIP ONLINE (www.oxfordscholarship.com). (c) Copyright Oxford University Press, 2018. All Rights Reserved. Under the terms of the licence agreement, an individual user may print out a PDF of a single chapter of a monograph in OSO for personal use (for details see www.oxfordscholarship.com/page/privacy-policy ).date: 21 October 2018

Oxford Scholarship Online requires a subscription or purchase to access the full text of books within the service. Public users can however freely search the site and view the abstracts and keywords for each book and chapter.

Please, subscribe or login to access full text content.

If you think you should have access to this title, please contact your librarian.

To troubleshoot, please check our FAQs , and if you can't find the answer there, please contact us .