Home
Pokhran: Defence Research and Defence Organisation (DRDO) successfully flight tested a 500 kg class Inertial Guided Bomb from Su-30 MKI Aircraft from the Pokhran test range. The guided bomb achieved the desired range and hit the target with high precision, according to DRDO. ( Pokhran: Defence Research and Defence Organisation (DRDO) successfully flight tested a 500 kg class Inertial Guided Bomb from Su-30 MKI Aircraft from the Pokhran test range. The guided bomb achieved the desired range and hit the target with high precision, according to DRDO. (

Mumbai: A salesperson displays a saree printed with photos of Shiv Sena founder Bal Thackeray and his son and party's chief Uddhav Thackeray at a showroom, following NDA's victory in Lok Sabha polls. Mumbai: A salesperson displays a saree printed with photos of Shiv Sena founder Bal Thackeray and his son and party's chief Uddhav Thackeray at a showroom, following NDA's victory in Lok Sabha polls.

New Delhi: Union Minister Maneka Gandhi leaves after the conclusion of the Cabinet meeting, at South Block. New Delhi: Union Minister Maneka Gandhi leaves after the conclusion of the Cabinet meeting, at South Block.

Hyderabad: BJP's Secunderabad candidate G Kishan Reddy being felicitated by state party President K Laxman after his victory in the Lok Sabha elections. Hyderabad: BJP's Secunderabad candidate G Kishan Reddy being felicitated by state party President K Laxman after his victory in the Lok Sabha elections.

Chennai: DMK President MK Stalin leaves after meeting with alliance party's leaders and newly elected MPs after the Lok Sabha elections 2019, at Anna Arivalayam. Chennai: DMK President MK Stalin leaves after meeting with alliance party's leaders and newly elected MPs after the Lok Sabha elections 2019, at Anna Arivalayam.

Bhopal: Senior Congress leader Digvijay Singh addresses a press conference after his defeat in the Lok Sabha elections. Bhopal: Senior Congress leader Digvijay Singh addresses a press conference after his defeat in the Lok Sabha elections.

Amritsar: Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) President and candidate from Firozpur constituency Sukhbir Singh Badal pays obeisance at Golden temple after winning the Lok Sabha election seat. Amritsar: Shiromani Akali Dal (SAD) President and candidate from Firozpur constituency Sukhbir Singh Badal pays obeisance at Golden temple after winning the Lok Sabha election seat.

New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP President Amit Shah meet party's senior leader LK Advani after their victory in the Lok Sabha elections. New Delhi: Prime Minister Narendra Modi and BJP President Amit Shah meet party's senior leader LK Advani after their victory in the Lok Sabha elections.

New Delhi: Union Ministers Smriti Irani and Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi, Narendra Singh Tomar leave after the conclusion of the Cabinet meeting, at South Block. New Delhi: Union Ministers Smriti Irani and Mukhtar Abbas Naqvi, Narendra Singh Tomar leave after the conclusion of the Cabinet meeting, at South Block.