Employment Insurance Regular Benefits
Qualifying period: The qualifying period is the 52 weeks before the start of your claim (or the time since the start of your last claim, whichever is shorter).

Average insurable earnings: The average income earned on which EI contributions were paid. This is used to calculate the weekly benefit rate to which you are entitled.

Your EI benefits are taxable. This means that federal and provincial or territorial taxes, where applicable, will be deducted from your payment.

For most people, the basic rate for calculating benefits is 55% of the weekly average insurable earnings. Effective January 1, 2015, the maximum yearly insurable earnings is $49,500 . This means that you can receive a maximum amount of $524 per week.

Below are some examples that will help you better understand how your benefits are calculated.

We will calculate the amount of your weekly benefits based on your total earnings before deductions during the “best weeks” in your qualifying period. (This includes tips and commissions.) Your qualifying period is the 52-week period prior to the start date of your EI claim. Your best weeks are the weeks that you earned the most money. In regions of Canada with the highest rates of unemployment, we will calculate using the best 14 weeks; in regions of Canada with the lowest rates of unemployment, we will use the best 22 weeks. In other regions, the number of weeks used to calculate benefits will be somewhere between 14 and 22, depending on the unemployment rate in those regions.

The Employment Insurance rate and the maximum amount are reviewed each year. For the most recent amount, visit the Service Canada website.

Need more information on the divisor used to calculate benefits ? See Table 2 in Section 3.

In this case, with the exception of severance payments from your employer, it is up to you to request an extension of your benefit period and to provide supporting evidence, if requested. To find out how to proceed, visit the Service Canada website and click on "Access My Service Canada Account" or call 1-800-206-7218 ( TTY : 1-800-529-3742).

The benefit period can be extended to a maximum of 104 weeks in certain situations, but the number of weeks that benefits can be paid will not change. The benefit period can be extended if your benefits are interrupted because you find yourself in one of the following situations:

Table 3 – Number of weeks of benefits that will be paid based on the number of hours of insurable employment and the regional rate of unemployment

You will stop receiving benefits once the first of the following has occurred:

The number of weeks for which you may receive benefits does not change even if you move to another region after your benefit period begins.

You can receive regular benefits for a period that varies from 14 to 45 weeks. However, the benefits corresponding to the number of weeks payable must be paid within a maximum of 52 weeks following the start date of your benefit period. If, for any reason, you interrupt your benefit claim, you cannot reactivate it after this 52-week period, even if you have not yet received all the benefits to which you were entitled.

The number of weeks for which you may receive benefits is determined at the beginning of your benefit period and depends on the following:

What will happen if I work or receive other payments during my benefit period?

That depends on your situation. Two types of income can affect your EI benefits:

income earned while you are receiving EI benefits; and

benefits; and payments made to you by your employer when you stop working.

If you work and earn income while receiving benefits You cannot work full-time while receiving regular benefits as you will no longer be considered unemployed. However, you are entitled to work part-time and keep a portion of your benefits. Usually, if you work and receive regular benefits at the same time, you are entitled to earn a certain amount without having your benefits reduced. You can usually earn up to $50 per week or 25% of your weekly benefit, whichever is higher. Any money earned above that amount will be deducted dollar for dollar from your benefit. However, until August 6, 2016, a Working While on claim pilot project is in place which changes the way earnings are deducted. Under this pilot project, once you have served the waiting period, if your earnings are equal to or less than 90% of your weekly earnings that were used to calculate your benefit rate, your benefits will be reduced at a rate of 50% of your earnings each week. Any earnings that exceed this 90% threshold will be deducted dollar for dollar from your benefits.

Example Isabelle collects EI benefits. She receives the maximum amount allowed, which is $524 a week. During her benefit period, she finds part-time work for $10 an hour. She works 20 hours a week, earning a total of $200. Therefore her benefits will be reduced by $100 ($200 x 50% = $100). She will be paid $424(benefit rate $524 - $100 = $424). When you work and receive benefits at the same time, you must not combine the hours and earnings of more than one week. It is essential that you report your work earnings and hours during the week in which you worked. If you notice that you made an error on your report (for example, if you forgot to report some work hours or you did not report them in the right week), tell us immediately so that we can make the necessary corrections.

Other Income while receiving benefits Many types of income are considered earnings to be deducted from benefits payable to you. You must report any income you receive to Service Canada when you file your benefit claim and if you receive income during your claim, you must indicate this on your reports. Some examples of income which may be received are: damages and interest for wrongful dismissal;

call-back pay;

a partial payment of an amount owed;

income from self-employment; or

income from a pension plan through the employer, a pension plan for military service or work in a police force, the Canada Pension Plan or the Quebec Pension Plan, or provincial employment plans. Note In certain situations, a retirement pension may not be deducted from EI benefits. If you return to work while in receipt of a retirement pension and accumulate sufficient insurable hours after the start of your pension payments to establish a new claim, while still in receipt of the retirement pension, the pension payments will not be deducted from benefits on your new claim. Some income has no effect on your regular benefits, including: pension payments from a registered retirement savings plan ( RRSP ) or a registered retirement income fund ( RRIF );

) or a registered retirement income fund ( ); disability pensions;

survivor or dependent benefits;

additional voluntary contributions that are paid into a pension fund;

the Old Age Security pension;

the portion of the pension payable to the spouse in the event of a legal separation or divorce; or

a pension paid by Veterans Affairs Canada.

If your employer made a payment to you when you stopped working When you stopped working, you may have received severance pay, vacation pay, or an amount that was put into an RRSP. If this is the case, the date on which you begin to receive benefits may be delayed. For example, if you received severance pay equal to 12 weeks of earnings, the payment of your regular benefits will be delayed by 12 weeks, whether you received this amount as a lump-sum payment or it was paid to you over 12 weeks. In this situation, you will still have to file a benefit claim as soon as you become unemployed so that your claim can be processed as quickly as possible. You may also receive severance pay, vacation pay, or termination pay after filing your benefit claim. These amounts must also be reported; they will be processed in the same way as if you received them when your employment ended. The addition of these amounts to your insurable earnings may, among other things, extend the duration of your benefit claim or increase the amount of the benefits to which you are entitled. However, you could be in a situation where you do not know whether you will receive the severance pay that you are owed (for example, if your employer declares bankruptcy). You may be required to pay back part or all of the EI benefits that you received if severance pay was paid to you afterwards. If you believe that you are in this situation, contact us. If you receive vacation pay or pay in lieu of notice following a layoff, these amounts are insurable and will be included in the calculation of your weekly average earnings.

If you receive money during the waiting period Any amounts you earn or are allocated during the two-week waiting period, including vacation pay or severance pay, will be deducted during the first three weeks in which you should receive benefits, because there is no allowance for earnings during the waiting period. These amounts are deducted dollar for dollar.

Note These three weeks do not have to be consecutive or immediately follow the two-week waiting period. For each example, the dates indicated always represents Sunday.

Example 1 – Total amount of earnings deducted during the first week of benefits Anne is unemployed and filed a claim for benefits, which was approved. Her benefit period began on January 1. She had to serve a two-week waiting period, from January 1 to January 14. Her first week of benefits began on January 15. Her weekly benefit amount is $300. She received vacation pay of $195 during the two-week waiting period. Normally, this amount must be deducted in the first three weeks during which benefits are to be paid. However, since this amount is less than the amount of her weekly benefits ($300), it will be deducted only in the first week of benefits, which began on January 15. The calculation is the following: $300 (amount of benefits) – $195 (amount of vacation pay) = $105. Therefore, Anne will receive $105 in her first week of benefits. There will be no other amount to deduct afterward.