Major election reform in Italy as parliament approves new law
Italy 's parliament on Monday gave final approval to a new electoral law championed by Matteo Renzi despite furious objections from the opposition and some members of the ruling Democratic Party.

The electoral overhaul, which becomes law after more than a year of discussion in both chambers of parliament, is a central part of the Italian prime minister's political and economic reform agenda .

The legislation, which only takes effect in July 2016, is based on proportional representation but guarantees a big majority to the winning party and gives party bosses wide powers to handpick preferred candidates.

Mr Renzi says it will provide political stability to Italy, which has already seen four different governments since the start of the decade , and end the backroom horsetrading between parties often needed to form ruling coalitions.

"There will be a system in which our country will finally be a point of reference for political stability which is a precondition for economic and cultural development," Mr Renzi said earlier on Monday.

Opponents complain that the new law concentrates too much power in the hands of the winning party and does not allow voters to directly choose their representatives.

Opposition parties have appealed to Sergio Mattarella, the Italian president, not to sign off on the bill in order to prevent it becoming law. They have also threatened to organise a popular referendum to try to have it repealed.

Renato Brunetta (left) and Silvio Berlusconi (Getty Images)

"We say no, because this law has been conceived to create a one-party state," said Renato Brunetta, floor leader of former prime minister Silvio Berlusconi's Forza Italia party. Forza Italia previously supported the bill, but changed its mind following a dispute over the election of Mattarella in January.

The 630-seat Chamber of Deputies approved the bill in a secret ballot by 334 votes to 61. With most opposition politicians refusing to take part, the result indicated that 40-50 dissidents in Mr Renzi's Democratic Party (PD) voted against him.

Analysts said the chief beneficiary of the reform was likely to be the 40-year-old Mr Renzi himself, who faces a weak and divided opposition and holds a clear lead in opinion polls.

Mr Renzi brushed aside resistance from PD rebels last week by imposing confidence votes to prevent further amendments being added, which would have prolonged its parliamentary passage.

Together with a separate reform of the senate that will see the upper house reduced to a non-elected chamber with limited powers, the overhaul is intended to ensure stable governments able to last a full five-year term.

Mr Renzi said Italy, one of the world's slowest growing economies, had had 63 governments since the Second World War but that none had been strong or durable enough to push through core reforms, despite wide recognition that change was needed.

How Italy's new electoral law works

Here are the main aspects of the new law:

The system is based on proportional representation. Multiple candidates from party lists are elected in 100 constituencies nationwide. However national party bosses decide the lead candidate on each list, effectively giving them control over most of the deputies who are elected to parliament. At least 40 per cent of their lead candidates must be women Parties that get less than 3 per cent of the vote are excluded from parliament. If the winning party gains at least 40 per cent of the vote, it gets a winner's bonus that automatically gives it 340 seats in the 630-seat Chamber of Deputies If no party wins 40 per cent, a run-off ballot between the two largest parties is held two weeks after the first election to determine which party gets the winner's bonus The law only takes effect from July 2016, in order to give Mr Renzi time to pass a separate reform of the upper house senate. He wants to abolish the senate as an elected chamber and turn it into an assembly with reduced powers made up of mayors and regional councillors

The new electoral law, which only applies to the lower house of parliament, cannot be used until the reform of the senate is completed.