Office of the Inspector General

U.S. Department of Justice

OVERSIGHT INTEGRITY ?k GUIDANCE

A Report of Investigation of Certain

Allegations Relating to Former FBI

Deputy Director Andrew McCabe

Oversight Review Division February 2018

Table of Contents

I.

Introduction and Summary of Findings.................................................... 1

II.

Relevant Statutes, Policies, and Practices ................................................ 3

III.

A.

Lack of Candor ........................................................................... 3

B.

FBI Policies and Practices Regarding Media Contacts and Leaks ......... 3

Factual Findings .................................................................................. 4

A.

Background Facts ....................................................................... 4

1.

2.

3.

B.

Andrew McCabe ................................................................. 4

The Clinton E-mail Investigation .......................................... 4

The Clinton Foundation Investigation .................................... 5

Events Leading to the October 30 Article and its Aftermath ............... 5

1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

Comey Refuses To Confirm the Existence of the

CF Investigation (July 7) or Other Investigations

(September 28) ................................................................. 5

McCabeaPADAG Call on the CF Investigation (August 12) ........ 5

The October 23 WSJ Article and Aftermath ............................ 5

The Attorney General Expresses Strong Concerns to McCabe

and other FBI Officials about Leaks, and McCabe Discusses

Recusing Himself from CF Investigation (October 26) .............. 6

McCabe Is Excluded from a Meeting Regarding Clinton E-mails

Found on the Weiner Laptop (October 27) ............................. 7

McCabe Authorizes Special Counsel and AD/OPA To Talk to

Barrett Regarding CF Investigation and To Disclose August 12

McCabe-PADAG Call ........................................................... 8

The October 30 WSJ Article ................................................. 9

McCabe Admonishes Two FBI Executives for Leaks in the

October 30 WSJ Article Regarding the CF Investigation ......... 11

Comey Expresses Concern About Leaks at his Staff Meeting

and Discusses the October 30 WSJ Article with McCabe

(October 31) ................................................................... 11

Knowledge of Other FBI Executives .................................... 13

McCabe Admonishes NY-ADIC for CF Investigation Leaks

Following November 3 WSJ Article (November 4) ................. 14

INSD Opens an Investigation of the WSJ Leak (May 2017) ..... 14

INSD Interviews McCabe under Oath on May 9..................... 15

McCabeas Initial Account under Oath to the OIG on

July 28, 2017 .................................................................. 18

McCabe Calls the OIG on August 1 To Correct his Testimony .. 19

INSD and the OIG Interview Special Counsel under Oath

Regarding the October 30 Article (August 7, September 7,

October 26) .................................................................... 20

i

17.

18.

19.

IV.

INSD Interviews McCabe Again (August 18)......................... 20

The OIG Assumes Responsibility for the Investigation

(August 31) .................................................................... 21

The OIG Interviews McCabe under Oath on November 29 ...... 21

OIG Analysis ..................................................................................... 22

A.

Lack of Candor ......................................................................... 22

1.

2.

3.

4.

Lack of Candor with Then-Director Comey on or around

October 31, 2016.............................................................

Lack of Candor in Interview under Oath with INSD Agents

on May 9, 2017 ...............................................................

Lack of Candor in Interview under Oath with

OIG Investigators on July 28, 2017 ....................................

Lack of Candor in Interview under Oath with

OIG Investigators on November 29, 2017 ...........................

22

27

29

31

B.

Media Policies ........................................................................... 32

C.

Conclusion ............................................................................... 35

ii

I.

Introduction and Summary of Findings

This misconduct report addresses the accuracy of statements made by thenFederal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Deputy Director Andrew McCabe to the FBIas

Inspection Division (INSD) and the Department of Justice (Department or DOJ)

Office of the Inspector General (OIG) concerning the disclosure of certain law

enforcement sensitive information to reporter Devlin Barrett that was published

online in the Wall Street Journal (WSJ) on October 30, 2016, in an article entitled

aFBI in Internal Feud Over Hillary Clinton Probe.a A print version of the article was

published in the WSJ on Monday, October 31, 2016, in an article entitled aFBI,

Justice Feud in Clinton Probe.a

This investigation was initially opened by INSD to determine whether the

information published by the WSJ in the October 30 article was an unauthorized

leak and, if so, who was the source of the leak. On August 31, 2017, the OIG

opened an investigation of McCabe following INSDas referral of its matter to the OIG

after INSD became concerned that McCabe may have lacked candor when

questioned by INSD agents about his role in the disclosure to the WSJ. Shortly

before that INSD referral, as part of its ongoing Review of Allegations Regarding

Various Actions by the Department and the FBI in Advance of the 2016 Election, the

OIG identified FBI text messages by McCabeas then-Special Counsel (aSpecial

Counsela) that reflected that she and the then-Assistant Director for Public Affairs

(aAD/OPAa) had been in contact with Barrett on October 27 and 28, 2016, and the

OIG began to review the involvement of McCabe, Special Counsel, and AD/OPA in

the disclosure of information to the WSJ in connection with the October 30 article.

In addition to addressing whether McCabe lacked candor, the OIGas

misconduct investigation addressed whether any FBI or Department of Justice

policies were violated in disclosing non-public FBI information to the WSJ.

The OIGas misconduct investigation included reviewing all of the INSD

investigative materials as well as numerous additional documents, e-mails, text

messages, and OIG interview transcripts. The OIG interviewed numerous

witnesses, including McCabe, Special Counsel, former FBI Director James Comey,

and others.

As detailed below, we found that in late October 2016, McCabe authorized

Special Counsel and AD/OPA to discuss with Barrett issues related to the FBIas

Clinton Foundation investigation (CF Investigation). In particular, McCabe

authorized Special Counsel and AD/OPA to disclose to Barrett the contents of a

telephone call that had occurred on August 12, 2016, between McCabe and the

then-Principal Associate Deputy Attorney General (aPADAGa). Among the purposes

of the disclosure was to rebut a narrative that had been developing following a

story in the WSJ on October 23, 2016, that questioned McCabeas impartiality in

overseeing FBI investigations involving former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton,

and claimed that McCabe had ordered the termination of the CF Investigation due

to Department of Justice pressure. The disclosure to the WSJ effectively confirmed

the existence of the CF Investigation, which then-FBI Director Comey had

1

previously refused to do. The account of the August 12 McCabe-PADAG call, and

other information regarding the handling of the CF Investigation, was included in

the October 30 WSJ article.

We found that, in a conversation with then-Director Comey shortly after the

WSJ article was published, McCabe lacked candor when he told Comey, or made

statements that led Comey to believe, that McCabe had not authorized the

disclosure and did not know who did. This conduct violated FBI Offense Code 2.5

(Lack of Candor a No Oath).

We also found that on May 9, 2017, when questioned under oath by FBI

agents from INSD, McCabe lacked candor when he told the agents that he had not

authorized the disclosure to the WSJ and did not know who did. This conduct

violated FBI Offense Code 2.6 (Lack of Candor a Under Oath).

We further found that on July 28, 2017, when questioned under oath by the

OIG in a recorded interview, McCabe lacked candor when he stated: (a) that he

was not aware of Special Counsel having been authorized to speak to reporters

around October 30 and (b) that, because he was not in Washington, D.C., on

October 27 and 28, 2016, he was unable to say where Special Counsel was or what

she was doing at that time. This conduct violated FBI Offense Code 2.6 (Lack of

Candor a Under Oath).

We additionally found that on November 29, 2017, when questioned under

oath by the OIG in a recorded interview during which he contradicted his prior

statements by acknowledging that he had authorized the disclosure to the WSJ,

McCabe lacked candor when he: (a) stated that he told Comey on October 31,

2016, that he had authorized the disclosure to the WSJ; (b) denied telling INSD

agents on May 9 that he had not authorized the disclosure to the WSJ about the

PADAG call; and (c) asserted that INSDas questioning of him on May 9 about the

October 30 WSJ article occurred at the end of an unrelated meeting when one of

the INSD agents pulled him aside and asked him one or two questions about the

article. This conduct violated FBI Offense Code 2.6 (Lack of Candor a Under Oath).

Lastly, we determined that as Deputy Director, McCabe was authorized to

disclose the existence of the CF Investigation publicly if such a disclosure fell within

the apublic interesta exception in applicable FBI and DOJ policies generally

prohibiting such a disclosure of an ongoing investigation. However, we concluded

that McCabeas decision to confirm the existence of the CF Investigation through an

anonymously sourced quote, recounting the content of a phone call with a senior

Department official in a manner designed to advance his personal interests at the

expense of Department leadership, was clearly not within the public interest

exception. We therefore concluded that McCabeas disclosure of the existence of an

ongoing investigation in this manner violated the FBIas and the Departmentas media

policy and constituted misconduct.

The OIG is issuing this report to the FBI for such action as it deems

appropriate.

2

II.

Relevant Statutes, Policies, and Practices

A.

Lack of Candor

The Offense Codes Applicable to the FBIas Internal Disciplinary Process

punish FBI employees for alack of candor.a Offense Code 2.5 (Lack of Candor a No

Oath) prohibits a[k]nowingly providing false information when making a verbal or

written statement, not under oath, to a supervisor, another Bureau employee in an

authoritative position, or another governmental agency, when the employee is

questioned about his conduct or the conduct of another person.a Offense Code 2.6

(Lack of Candor a Under Oath) prohibits a[k]nowingly providing false information in

a verbal or written statement made under oath.a Under both offense codes, lack of

candor is defined to include afalse statements, misrepresentations, the failure to be

fully forthright, or the concealment or omission of a material fact/information.a

B.

FBI Policies and Practices Regarding Media Contacts and Leaks

The then-existing FBI Policy on Media Relations, Section 3.1, authorized the

FBI Director, the FBI Deputy Director, the Associate Deputy Director, and the

Assistant Director for the Office of Public Affairs (OPA) to speak with the media on

behalf of the FBI. Other FBI executives could only speak with the media aat OPAas

request or following coordination with, and approval by, OPA at FBIHQ.a Section

3.4 of this policy provided, in relevant part, that disclosures to the media amust not

address an ongoing investigationa except as indicated in that section. The section

provides two examples of when it amay be permissible to selectively release [nonclassified] information to assure the public that an investigation is in progressa with

prior approval of specific components at FBI headquarters:

(1) to protect the public interest, welfare or safety

(2) to solicit information from the public that might be relevant to an

investigation.

Section 3.3 of the policy also provides that all releases must be consistent

with all applicable laws and regulations and policy as itemized in Section 5, which

includes the United States Attorneysa Manual (USAM), Title 1-7.000, aMedia

Relations.a Title 1-7.000 of the USAM establishes specific guidelines for the release

of information relating to criminal and civil cases by the FBI and other DOJ

components. The USAM guidelines expressly state that they are consistent with 28

C.F.R. ASS 50.2, which provides that awhere background information or information

relating to the circumstances of an arrest or investigation would be highly

prejudicial or where the release thereof would serve no law enforcement function,

such information should not be made public.a 28 C.F.R. ASS 50.2(a)(3)(iv).

Among other things, Section 1-7.530 of the USAM provides that:

A. Except as provided in subparagraph B., of this section, components and

personnel of the Department of Justice shall not respond to questions

about the existence of an ongoing investigation or comment on its nature

3

or progress, including such things as the issuance or serving of a

subpoena, prior to the public filing of the document.

B. In matters that have already received substantial publicity, or

about which the community needs to be reassured that the

appropriate law enforcement agency is investigating the incident,

or where the release of information is necessary to protect the

public interest, safety or welfare, comments about or confirmation

of an ongoing investigation may need to be made. In these

unusual circumstances, the involved investigative agency will

consult and obtain approval from the United States Attorney or

Department Division handling the matter prior to disseminating any

information to the media.

James Comey, who was the FBI Director at the time the WSJ article was

published, told the OIG that the authority to disclose the existence of a pending

investigation is aconfined to the Director and the Deputy Directora and that in

making such decisions athe default is we donat talka about pending investigations.

He also told the OIG that asignificant disclosures about investigations . . . always go

through mea and that he could not remember any disclosure by any of the three

Deputy Directors that served under him during his tenure that did not involve aclose

coordinationa with him. Comey also told the OIG that the FBI does not disclose aa

criminal investigation . . . anonymously sourced in a newspaper.a

III.

Factual Findings

A.

Background Facts

1.

Andrew McCabe

McCabe began his career with the FBI in 1996 as a Special Agent in the New

York Field Office. McCabe has served in a variety of leadership positions in the FBI

during his career, including as the Assistant Director of the Counterterrorism

Division, the Executive Assistant Director of the National Security Branch, and the

Assistant Director in Charge of the FBIas Washington Field Office. On February 1,

2016, McCabe was appointed Deputy Director of the FBI, overseeing all FBI

domestic and international investigative and intelligence activities. McCabe became

Acting Director of the FBI on May 9, 2017, when FBI Director James Comey was

fired. McCabe served as Acting Director until August 1, 2017, when Christopher

Wray was confirmed by the Senate as the new FBI Director. At that time, McCabe

resumed his duties as Deputy Director, a position he held until January 29, 2018.

2.

The Clinton E-mail Investigation

The Clinton E-mail Investigation began as a referral from the Inspector

General of the Intelligence Community concerning Clintonas use of a personal e-mail

server during her time as Secretary of State. On July 5, 2016, Comey publicly

announced the FBIas recommendation to the Department that ano charges are

appropriate in this case.a On July 6, 2016, Attorney General Loretta Lynch

4

announced that no charges would be brought related to the investigation. On

October 28, 2016, two days before the online publication of the WSJ article at issue

in this report, Comey informed Congress that the FBI had discovered additional

Clinton-related e-mails in an unrelated investigation. On November 6, 2016,

Comey announced that the FBI had completed its review of the additional e-mails

and that awe have not changed our conclusions that we expressed in July with

respect to Secretary Clinton.a

3.

The Clinton Foundation Investigation

As detailed below, the disclosures by Special Counsel to the WSJ on October

27 and 28 included statements effectively confirming the existence of the CF

Investigation. Prior to October 27 and 28, the FBI had not publicly confirmed the

existence of the CF Investigation, or issued any statements to the media discussing

the details of that investigation.

B.

Events Leading to the October 30 Article and its Aftermath

1.

Comey Refuses To Confirm the Existence of the CF

Investigation (July 7) or Other Investigations

(September 28)

In testimony before the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee

on July 7, 2016, FBI Director Comey refused to answer questions about whether

the FBI was investigating the Clinton Foundation. Comey stated that he was anot

going to comment on the existence or nonexistencea of the CF Investigation.

Similarly, in testimony before the House Judiciary Committee on September 28,

2016, Comey refused to confirm or deny two different investigations during an FBI

oversight hearing. He stated: aour standard is we do not confirm or deny the

existence of investigations.a

2.

McCabeaPADAG Call on the CF Investigation (August 12)

McCabe told the OIG that on August 12, 2016, he received a telephone call

from PADAG regarding the FBIas handling of the CF Investigation (the aPADAG

calla). McCabe said that PADAG expressed concerns about FBI agents taking overt

steps in the CF Investigation during the presidential campaign. According to

McCabe, he pushed back, asking aare you telling me that I need to shut down a

validly predicated investigation?a McCabe told us that the conversation was avery

dramatica and he never had a similar confrontation like the PADAG call with a highlevel Department official in his entire FBI career.

3.

The October 23 WSJ Article and Aftermath

On October 23, 2016, the WSJ published online an article by reporter Devlin

Barrett stating that a political-action committee (PAC) run by Virginia Governor

Terry McAuliffe and the Virginia Democratic Party (over which the article reported

McAuliffe aexerts considerable controla) collectively donated nearly $675,000 to the

5

2015 unsuccessful state senate campaign of the wife of Andrew McCabe. 1 The

article described McAuliffe as aan influential Democrat with long-standing ties to Bill

and Hillary Clintona and noted that McCabe was an FBI official awho later helped

oversee the investigation into Mrs. Clintonas email use.a The article contained an

official FBI statement that McCabe aplayed no rolea in his wifeas 2015 state senate

campaign and was promoted to FBI Deputy Director months after his wifeas defeat

awhere, . . . he assumed for the first time, an oversight role in the investigation into

Secretary Clintonas emails.a According to the article, FBI officials stated that

McCabeas supervision of the Clinton E-mail case in 2016 did not present a conflict or

ethics issues because his wifeas campaign was over by then. The article went on to

note that when the Clinton E-mail Investigation was launched in July 2015, Mr.

McCabe was arunning the FBIas Washington, D.C., field office, which provided

personnel and resources to the Clinton email probe.a

Immediately following online publication of the article, there was substantial

public discussion as to whether McCabeas oversight of the Clinton E-mail

Investigation had been appropriate in light of the information in the article. 2

Additionally, on October 24, 2016, Barrett e-mailed the AD/OPA about a follow-on

story that he was working on. In that e-mail, Barrett asked AD/OPA a number of

questions about McCabeas involvement in certain matters, including the CF

Investigation. In particular, Barrettas e-mail said that he was told that:

in the summer, McCabe himself gave some instruction as to how to

proceed with the Clinton Foundation probe, given that it was the

height of election season and the FBI did not want to make a lot of

overt moves that could be seen as going after [Clinton] or drawing

attention to the probe.

Barrettas e-mail asked AD/OPA a[h]ow accurate are those descriptions? Anything

else I should know?a As detailed in Section 6 below, McCabe subsequently

instructed Special Counsel to provide information to Barrett for the follow-on story.

4.

The Attorney General Expresses Strong Concerns to

McCabe and other FBI Officials about Leaks, and McCabe

Discusses Recusing Himself from CF Investigation

(October 26)

McCabe told the OIG that during the October 2016 time frame, it was his

aperception that there was a lot of information coming out of likely the [FBIas] New

York Field Officea that was ending up in the news. McCabe told the OIG that he

ahad some heated back-and-forthsa with the New York Assistant Director in Charge

(aNY-ADICa) over the issue of media leaks.

1

A print version of the article was published in the WSJ on Monday, October 24, 2016.

In January 2017, the OIG announced it would conduct a review of allegations regarding

various actions by the Department and the FBI in advance of the 2016 election, including allegations

that McCabe should have been recused from participating in certain investigative matters.

2

6

On October 26, 2016, McCabe and NY-ADIC participated in what McCabe

described as aa hastily convened conference call with the Attorney General who

delivered the same message to usa about leaks, with specific focus being on leaks

regarding the high-profile investigation by FBIas New York Field Office into the death

of Eric Garner. McCabe told us that he anever heard her use more forceful

language.a NY-ADIC confirmed that the participants got aripped by the AG on

leaks.a

According to NY-ADICas testimony and an e-mail he sent to himself on

October 31, McCabe indicated to NY-ADIC and a then-FBI Executive Assistant

Director (aEADa) in a conversation after Attorney General Lynch disconnected from

the call that McCabe was recusing himself from the CF Investigation. According to

NY-ADICas e-mail, McCabe told them ahe may make a more formal decision at a

later time.a NY-ADIC stated during his OIG interview: aI think [McCabe] couched it

as like, hey, this is not final . . . I donat know, I think he says he still has to talk

about it.a NY-ADIC stated that he clarified with McCabe that unless McCabe told

him otherwise, NY-ADIC would begin reporting to EAD on the CF Investigation.

McCabe, however, told the OIG that he did not recall such a conversation.

He said, aI suppose it's possible that I may have referred to the concept if that was

being discussed generally at the time. But I would not have said to [NY-ADIC],

like, I'm thinking about recusing.a

5.

McCabe Is Excluded from a Meeting Regarding Clinton Emails Found on the Weiner Laptop (October 27)

On October 27, 2016 at 10:00 a.m., Comey held a meeting with the Clinton

E-mail Investigation team to discuss obtaining a search warrant for a set of Clintonrelated e-mails the FBI had discovered on a laptop belonging to Anthony Weiner,

and taking additional steps in the Clinton E-mail Investigation. Special Counsel

attended the meeting. McCabe was out of town, but joined the meeting via

conference call. Shortly after the meeting began, the then-FBI General Counsel

(aFBI-GCa) suggested, and Comey agreed, that McCabe should leave the call.

Comey told us that he asked McCabe to drop off the call, and McCabe was avery

unhappy about it.a Special Counsel also left the meeting. After discussions

between FBI and Department leadership, on October 28, 2016, Comey sent a letter,

over Department objections, informing Congress that the FBI was taking additional

steps in the Clinton E-mail Investigation.

Accounts differ about the reason for excluding McCabe from the October 27

call. McCabe told the OIG that the reason stated on the call for dropping him

related to the potential for discussion about classified information. However,

Comey,

, and and Special Counsel all told us that Comey asked McCabe to

leave the call out of an abundance of caution because of appearance issues

following revelations in the WSJ October 23 article about the campaign donations

from McAuliffe-associated PACs to McCabeas wife. McCabe discussed the issue of

his participation in the Clinton e-mail matter further with Comey and FBI-GC by

telephone later that day. After these conversations, McCabe sent a text message to

7

Special Counsel stating: aI spoke to both. Both understand that no decision on

recusal will be made until I return and weigh in.a

On November 1, 2016, McCabe sent e-mails to FBI executives and officials

overseeing the CF Investigation and the Clinton E-mail Investigation informing

them that he was recusing himself from those investigations.

6.

McCabe Authorizes Special Counsel and AD/OPA To Talk

to Barrett Regarding CF Investigation and To Disclose

August 12 McCabe-PADAG Call

a.

McCabeas Authorization

By October 25, 2016, McCabe had been notified that Barrett was working on

a follow-up story to the October 23 article that would cover McCabeas oversight of

the CF Investigation and potential connections with McAuliffe campaign

contributions to McCabeas wife. McCabe thereafter authorized Special Counsel and

AD/OPA to talk to Barrett about this follow-up story. Special Counsel told us that

the authorization from McCabe was done orally and it was apretty general.a Special

Counsel further stated that she understood from AD/OPA that the first call with

Barrett would be areceive modea to understand what Barrettas story would cover

and then they would develop a response.

b.

Calls with Barrett and Special Counselas

Communications with McCabe (October 27 and 28)

At approximately 12:06 p.m. on October 27, 2016, shortly before Special

Counsel was to speak with Barrett for the first time, McCabe texted Special Counsel

asking aAre you in with wsj nowa. 3 About 10 minutes later, at 12:19 p.m., Special

Counsel texted McCabe back stating that she was agoing there nowa and would call

him aimmediately after re call with devlin.a Special Counsel told the OIG that she

and AD/OPA then had their first call with Barrett in areceive modea regarding his

follow-up story. According to Special Counselas contemporaneous notes of the call

and testimony to the OIG, she and AD/OPA learned during the first call that Barrett

had sources who were adamant that McCabe gave a purported order to astand

downa on the CF Investigation before the 2016 presidential election, implying that

McCabe wanted to shut down the investigation for improper reasons.

Special Counsel texted McCabe at 1:25 p.m. and stated aCan you talk now?a

After some additional texts between them to arrange the call, telephone records

reflect that McCabe and Special Counsel spoke by telephone at 2:54 p.m. for 51

minutes. According to Special Counsel, she briefed McCabe on the conversation

with Barrett and the purported astand downa order. Special Counsel told the OIG

that McCabe responded by reminding her that the August 12 PADAG call was

completely inconsistent with that allegation. Special Counsel told us that she

understood McCabe wanted her to provide the account of this August 12 call as

By this time, McCabe had already left for

October 27 through 30, 2016.

3

8

and he remained out of town from

rebuttal to that astand downa allegation and made a large notation of aFri. Aug. 12

with [PADAG]a at the top of her notes to remind herself to discuss it in the next call

with Barrett.

When interviewed by the OIG on November 29, 2017, McCabeas recollection

of his call with Special Counsel was consistent with hers. Specifically, McCabe

stated that he authorized Special Counsel and AD/OPA to provide to Barrett the

account of his August 12 call with PADAG because McCabe thought it was the abest

examplea to counter the aincredibly damaginga narrative in Barrettas intended story.

McCabe said that he did not view the disclosure to the WSJ about the August 12

PADAG call as disclosing the existence of the CF Investigation because the purpose

was to demonstrate the FBIas independence, and athere really wasnat any discussion

of the case, of the merits of the case, the targets and subjects of the case.a

McCabe stated that this was the only time in his career where he had

authorized the disclosure to the media of a one-on-one discussion that he had with

a member of the Departmentas leadership.

FBI text message and phone records show that, immediately before Special

Counsel and AD/OPA spoke for the second time with Barrett, McCabe called Special

Counsel at 4:38 p.m. and the two spoke for 6 minutes. E-mail and text message

records show that, approximately 1 minute after the call between McCabe and

Special Counsel ended, Special Counsel and AD/OPA began their second call with

Barrett, which lasted from approximately 4:45 p.m. to 5:21 p.m. According to

Special Counselas contemporaneous notes and testimony to the OIG, in this followup call with Barrett she responded to the claims regarding FBI leadershipas handling

of the CF Investigation and provided the account of the August 12 McCabe-PADAG

call as the abest evidencea to counter Barrettas narrative.

Two minutes after the call ended, Special Counsel texted McCabe at 5:23

p.m. stating: aWeare done. Heas going to look at his story again and will circle back

with him in the morning.a According to telephone records, McCabe thereafter called

Special Counsel twice, once at 6:47 p.m., when they spoke for about 5 minutes,

and again at 7:06 p.m., when they spoke for about 6 minutes.

During the early afternoon of October 28, 2016, Special Counsel and AD/OPA

had an additional call with Barrett that lasted at least 15 minutes. According to

Special Counselas contemporaneous notes and testimony to the OIG, Barrett

provided them a preview of the revised story, which now incorporated aspects of

the McCabe-PADAG call on August 12 to rebut the astand-downa allegation.

After this call ended, Special Counsel texted McCabe at 1:33 p.m. stating:

aJust got off with barrett. Give me a call here.a According to telephone records, at

1:38 p.m., McCabe and Special Counsel spoke for 23 minutes.

7.

The October 30 WSJ Article

On October 30, 2016, prior to the articleas online publication, Special Counsel

exchanged text messages with a then-FBI Deputy Assistant Director (aDADa)

9

regarding the forthcoming article. DAD forwarded to Special Counsel a Washington

Post article from the day before (October 29), entitled aJustice Officials Warned FBI

that Comeyas Decision to Update Congress Was Not Consistent With Department

Policy.a The article stated that Department officials told Comey that his decision to

update Congress about the discovery of additional Clinton e-mails prior to the

election was inconsistent with Department policy, and DAD observed in his text

message that aThis is all [PADAG].a Special Counsel responded aYeah. I saw it.

Makes me feel WAY less bad about throwing him under the bus in the forthcoming

CF article.a Special Counsel told us that she was referring in this text to her

disclosure to Barrett about the August 12 conversation between McCabe and

PADAG, and what she meant by athrowing [PADAG] under the busa was that it was

an aunfortunate sort of fact or consequencea but it was anecessary to rebut the

notion that [Andy] was trying to kill the Clinton Foundation case for inappropriate

or improper reasons.a

Barrettas follow-up article was published online on Sunday, October 30, 2016,

at about 3:34 p.m., and appeared in the WSJ print edition the next day under the

title aFBI, Justice Feud in Clinton Probe.a The article described how Comeyas

disclosure that FBI agents were taking another look at the Clinton e-mails alays

bare, just days before the election, tensions inside the bureau and the Justice

Department over how to investigate the Democratic presidential nominee.a The

article discussed not only the FBIas handling of the Clinton E-mail Investigation, but

ainternal disagreements within the bureau and the Justice Department surrounding

the Clintonsa family philanthropy.a It stated that aMcCabe in particular was caught .

. . [in] an increasingly acrimonious fight for control between the Justice Department

and FBI agents pursuing the Clinton Foundation case.a Thereafter, the article

highlighted the campaign donations to McCabeas wife by PACs associated with

McAuliffe, who was described as aa longtime ally of the Clintons and . . . a Clinton

Foundation Board member.a The article identified McCabe as the FBI official who

asought to refocus the Clinton Foundation probe,a and reported that agents afurther

down the FBI chain of commanda had been told to a[s]tand downa on the Clinton

Foundation investigation with the understanding that athe order had come from the

deputy director a Mr. McCabe.a The article stated that a[o]thers familiar with the

matter deny Mr. McCabe or any other senior FBI official gave such a stand-down

instruction.a The article recounted the August 12 conversation between McCabe

and PADAG (identified as an unnamed asenior Justice Department Officiala). It

stated:

According to a person familiar with the probes, on Aug. 12, a

senior Justice Department official called Mr. McCabe to voice his

displeasure at finding that New York FBI agents were still openly

pursuing the Clinton Foundation probe during the election season. Mr.

McCabe said agents still had the authority to pursue the issue as long

as they didnat use overt methods requiring Justice Department

approvals.

The Justice Department official was avery pissed off,a according

to one person close to McCabe, and pressed him to explain why the

FBI was still chasing a matter the department considered dormant. . . .

10

aAre you telling me that I need to shut down a validly predicated

investigation?a Mr. McCabe asked, according to people familiar with

the conversation. After a pause, the official replied aOf course not,a

these people said. 4

8.

McCabe Admonishes Two FBI Executives for Leaks in the

October 30 WSJ Article Regarding the CF Investigation

Two FBI Executives, NY-ADIC and the then-Assistant Director in Charge of

the Washington Field Division (aW-ADICa), told us that they each received calls

from McCabe admonishing them for leaks contained in the October 30 WSJ article

about the CF Investigation. At no time did McCabe disclose to either of them that

McCabe had authorized Special Counsel to disclose information about the CF

Investigation to the WSJ reporter.

According to NY-ADICas contemporaneous October 30 calendar notes and

testimony to the OIG, McCabe called NY-ADIC on Sunday, October 30, at 5:11

p.m., to express concerns over leaks from the FBIas New York Field Office in the

October 30 WSJ article. NY-ADIC told the OIG that McCabe was aticked about

leaksa in the article on the CF Investigation, but NY-ADIC apushed backa a little to

note that New York agents were not privy to some of the information in the article.

Also according to NY-ADICas calendar notes, as well as his testimony to the OIG,

NY-ADIC spoke to EAD and other FBI managers after his call with McCabe to voice

concerns aabout getting yelled at about this stuffa when he was supposed to be

dealing with EAD on Clinton Foundation issues because of his understanding that

McCabe had recused himself from the matter.

W-ADIC told the OIG that he received a call from McCabe regarding the

October 30 WSJ article and that McCabe admonished him regarding leaks in the

article. According to W-ADIC, McCabe told him to aget his house in order.a

McCabe told us that he did not recall calling either NY-ADIC or W-ADIC to

reprimand them for leaks in the October 30 WSJ article.

9.

Comey Expresses Concern About Leaks at his Staff

Meeting and Discusses the October 30 WSJ Article with

McCabe (October 31)

On Monday morning, October 31, 2016, Comey held a staff meeting, which

Special Counsel attended. According to Special Counselas contemporaneous notes,

during the meeting Comey said aNeed to figure out how to get our folks to

understand why leaks hurt our organization.a That same day McCabe and Comey

had a face-to-face conversation about the October 30 WSJ article. The accounts

they provided to the OIG of this discussion contradicted one another.

4 Both McCabe and PADAG told the OIG that the account of the August 12, 2016 telephone

call given in the October 30, 2016 WSJ article was an accurate description of their discussion.

However, PADAG told the OIG that he thought that athe Bureau was trying to spin this conversation as

some evidence of political interference, which was totally unfair.a

11

a.

McCabeas Account

According to McCabeas testimony to the OIG on November 29, 2017, he and

Comey discussed the October 30 WSJ article in person on October 31, 2016, when

McCabe returned to the office from a trip

. McCabe said that he told

Comey that he had aauthorized AD/OPA and Special Counsel to disclose the account

of the August 12th calla and did not say anything to suggest in any way that it was

unauthorized. McCabe told us that Comey adid not react negatively, just kind of

accepted it.a McCabe also told us Comey thought it was a agooda idea that they

presented this information to rebut the inaccurate and one-sided narrative that the

FBI was not doing its job and was subject to DOJ political pressure, but the

Department and PADAG were likely to be angry that athis information made its way

into the paper.a

McCabe told us that he did not recall telling Comey prior to publication of the

October 30 article that he intended to authorize or had authorized Special Counsel

and AD/OPA to recount his August 12 call with PADAG to the WSJ, although he said

it was possible he did. When asked why he did not discuss it with the Director in

advance, McCabe said the Director was avery, very occupieda at the time with the

Weiner laptop issue. McCabe told us that if he had not been out of town, he would

have talked to Comey about the disclosure in advance because it involved a

significant issue. When questioned by the OIG as to whether, as Deputy Director,

he had the capability to reach Comey wherever he was and whenever he needed,

McCabe acknowledged that he did but added it was challenging to do so between

October 27 and 28, given the Weiner laptop issue and the fact that Comey told him

he did not want to discuss that issue with him.

b.

Comeyas Account

We questioned Comey specifically about the portion of the October 30 WSJ

article that pertained to the PADAG call. Comey told us that he recalled seeing this

article but did not know how the disclosure about the PADAG call in the October 30

article happened. He said that he was avery concerneda about that part of the

article because he felt it would further poison the FBIas relationship with

Department and it aexplicitly confirms the existence of a criminal investigationa of

the Clinton Foundation. Comey told us he considered the disclosure about the

PADAG call aproblematica because it related to asensitive FBI informationa and was

unauthorized, unless either he or McCabe authorized it and Comey knew that he did

not authorize it.

Comey told us that, prior to the articleas publication, he did not have any

discussions with McCabe regarding disclosure of the August 12 PADAG call.

According to Comey, he discussed the issue with McCabe after the article was

published, and at that time McCabe adefinitely did not tell me that he authorizeda

the disclosure of the PADAG call. Comey said that McCabe gave him the exact

opposite impression:

I donat remember exactly how, but I remember some form or fashion

and it could have been like acan you believe this crap? How does this

12

stuff get outa kind of thing? But I took from whatever communication

we had that he wasnat involved in it.

...

I have a strong impression he conveyed to me ait wasnat me boss.a

And I donat think that was by saying those words, I think it was most

likely by saying aI donat know how this shit gets in the media or why

would people talk about this kind of thing,a words that I would fairly

take as aI, Andy, didnat do it.a And I actually didnat suspect Andy,

after conversations with [my chief of staff], my worry was, was his

aide [Special Counsel] doing it.

When asked by the OIG about whether he would have approved the

disclosure about the PADAG call to the WSJ, Comey stated: a[S]o just to make

sure there's no fuzz on it, I did not authorize this. I would not have authorized this.

If someone says that I did, then we ought to have another conversation because I,

it doesn't make a lot of sense to me.a

Comey said he believed that McCabe would have known from experience to

discuss any disclosures regarding pending FBI investigations with Comey before

releasing such information to the media. Comey told us that McCabe would have

known that the disclosure of the existence of a specific investigation was a

significant event athat he should discuss with me firsta given Comeyas responsibility

as FBI Director for how the FBI interacts with the world. Comey told us that the

disclosure of the existence of a specific investigation would require much internal

discussion on the form and wording, and would not be done through aanonymous[]

source[s] in a newspaper.a Comey further told us that he would not have

authorized the disclosure of the account of the McCabe-PADAG August 12 call, even

if an argument had been made that it was in the best interest of the FBI. Comey

said that such an argument would not have been persuasive for him in light of the

following circumstances: (1) the disclosure involved publicly confirming the

existence of the CF Investigation, which Comey had declined to do 3 months earlier

during testimony before Congress; (2) the disclosure risked harming FBIDepartment relations; and (3) the disclosure occurred 2 days after the firestorm

surrounding the October 28 letter to Congress re-opening the Clinton E-mail

Investigation.

10.

Knowledge of Other FBI Executives

McCabe told us that among FBI executive managers apeople knew that

generallya he had authorized the disclosure to the Wall Street Journal, abecause it

was my conversationa and athe fact that [AD/OPA] and [Special Counsel] were

engaging with Devlin Barrett over the article was not a secret.a McCabe identified

several FBI managers who he believed likely or possibly would have known, based

on his interactions with them, that he authorized Special Counsel and AD/OPA to

talk to the WSJ and disclose the account of his August 12 call with PADAG.

However, none of the potential witnesses identified by McCabe (FBI-GC,

Comeyas Chief of Staff, The Counterintelligence Assistant Director (aAD-CIa), and

13

McCabeas then-Chief of Staff ) corroborated this or recalled knowing at the time, or

even now, that McCabe had authorized the disclosure. 5 FBI-GC told us that, had

McCabe discussed the matter with him, he would have counseled McCabe to avoid

anything related to the CF Investigation, including authorizing disclosures to the

press, given FBI-GCas and Comeyas pending concerns about McCabeas potential

appearance issues on Clinton-related matters. Comeyas Chief of Staff, AD-CI, and

McCabeas Chief of Staff told us that had they heard about such an authorization

they would have remembered it because it would have been significant and spurred

conversation among other senior executive managers. These witnesses also told us

that because the disclosure detailed a private conversation between two highranking officials at the FBI and the Department on a high-profile investigation, they

did not believe that it was an authorized disclosure. McCabeas Chief of Staff told us

that:

I just can't imagine that the Deputy would have authorized the leak.

It just doesn't seem to serve, I mean, I guess it serves, it serves the

purpose of the Deputy by saying, hey look, do you want us to shut this

thing down? I guess it serves Andy in that way, but it really, it really

highlights a dysfunction between the FBI and the, and DOJ. And to

that end, it doesn't really serve the greater good.

11.

McCabe Admonishes NY-ADIC for CF Investigation Leaks

Following November 3 WSJ Article (November 4)

On November 3, 2016, the WSJ published another story by Barrett on the CF

Investigation and it repeated parts of the account of the McCabe-PADAG call. That

evening, McCabe e-mailed NY-ADIC and stated: aThis is the latest WSJ article. Call

me tomorrow.a According to NY-ADICas calendar notes on November 4 and

testimony to the OIG, NY-ADIC and McCabe spoke for approximately 10 minutes

around 7 a.m., regarding aleaks and WSJ articlea and that McCabe was aangry.a

NY-ADICas calendar notes also reflect that McCabe expressed to him: awill be

consequence[s] and get to bottom of it post elect[ion]. Need leaks to stop.

Damaging to org.a

McCabe told the OIG that he did not recall the details of his conversation with

NY-ADIC on November 4, but it was aprobably about leaksa to the media.

12.

INSD Opens an Investigation of the WSJ Leak (May 2017)

In May 2017, the FBI Inspection Division (INSD) expanded a pre-existing

investigation of media leaks to include determining the source of the information in

the October 30 WSJ article regarding the August 12 McCabe-PADAG call. INSD

added the October 30 article to their pre-existing matter because it appeared to

FBI-GC told us that McCabe had told him recently in discussions on attending OIG interviews

that the OIG was looking at the October 30 article and that he, McCabe, had authorized the disclosure

of some unspecified information that appeared in that article.

5

14

involve an instance of someone at the FBI leaking the Deputy Directoras private

conversations to the media.

13.

INSD Interviews McCabe under Oath on May 9

INSD interviewed McCabe under oath regarding the October 30 WSJ article

on May 9, 2017. 6 The INSD investigators documented the May 9 interview in

contemporaneous notes and in a draft Signed Sworn Statement prepared shortly

after the interview, and later provided testimony to the OIG regarding their

recollections of McCabeas testimony. In his interview with the OIG on November

29, 2017, McCabe provided a starkly different account of what he believes he said

and what occurred during this interview. Because these conflicting accounts are

central to the issues addressed in this report, we address the INSD accounts and

McCabeas account in detail in separate subsections below.

a.

INSD Written Record of the Interview and

Testimony by Interviewing Agents

Two INSD agents, a Supervisory Special Agent (aINSD-SSA1a), and the thenChief of the INSD Internal Investigations Section (aINSD Section Chiefa),

interviewed McCabe under oath in his office on the afternoon of May 9 concerning

the leak matters they were investigating. 7 During the interview, after discussing

with McCabe an unrelated media leak allegation, the INSD agents provided McCabe

with a copy of the October 30 article to review, and which McCabe initialed.

According to INSD SSA 1as contemporaneous notes and both agentsa testimony to

the OIG, INSD drew McCabeas attention specifically to the portion of the October 30

WSJ article regarding McCabeas August 12 call with the PADAG.

INSD-Section Chief told us that the entire interview, including the discussion

on the October 30 article, was conducted in the privacy of McCabeas personal office

with just McCabe,

and INSD-SSA1 in attendance, while they were sitting at

a table in McCabeas office, where McCabe initialed the copy of the WSJ article.

INSD-Section Chief told us that all of the INSD interviews with McCabe were

conducted in the privacy of his office at his table afrom beginning to end.a INSDSection Chief said that INSDas standard practice is to conduct an interview in a

private setting solely with INSD agents and the particular witness involved in the

matter.

INSD-SSA1 took two and half pages of contemporaneous notes during the

interview, almost all of which concerned the October 30 article and the August 12

call between McCabe and PADAG. According to INSD-SSA1as notes and testimony

to the OIG, McCabe was given an opportunity to review the article and he then told

Later in the day, after the interview, President Trump fired FBI Director Comey, and McCabe

became Acting FBI Director, a position he remained in until Director Wrayas confirmation on August 1,

2017.

6

7

INSD-Section Chief has since been promoted

15

the agents that he remembered the article and said that the account in the article

of his August 12 call with PADAG was accurate. Also according to INSD-SSA1as

contemporaneous notes and testimony to the OIG, McCabe told them that he had

ano idea where it came from,a that was awho the source wasa who disclosed the

account of his August 12 call with PADAG to the WSJ. INSD-SSA1 further told the

OIG that McCabe stated during the interview that he had related the account of the

August 12 call to others numerous times, leaving INSD-SSA1 with the impression

that INSD-SSA1 would anot get anywhere by askinga McCabe how many people

could have known about what appeared to be a private conversation between him

and PADAG. INSD-SSA1 told us that he didnat need to take many notes during the

interview because, at that point, he viewed McCabe as athe victima of the leak and

McCabe had told the INSD agents that he did not know how this happened. INSDSSA1 also told us that the whole interaction was short, maybe 5 to 7 minutes, and

flowing because McCabe was seemingly the victim and claimed he did not know

who did it. INSD-SSA1 said that McCabeas information could be summarized in one

paragraph in his draft statement.

Similarly, INSD-Section Chief told us that the aoverarchinga take-aways from

their interview with McCabe were that McCabe did not grant anyone permission to

divulge the account of his August 12 call with PADAG to the media, he had not

personally shared that information with the media, and he considered it a leak.

INSD-Section Chief also told us that McCabe acknowledged that he had expressed

the sentiment reflected in the quote aare you telling me that I need to shut down a

validly predicated investigation,a to PADAG, and was disappointed that it had

appeared in the article. INSD-Section Chief further told us that their discussion

with McCabe about the October 30 article was not rushed and that none of their

discussions with McCabe on media leaks ended abruptly.

b.

INSD Prepares a Draft Statement for McCabe To

Sign, Which McCabe Fails To Do (May 12 and June

23)

Three days later, on May 12, 2017, INSD e-mailed McCabe a draft Signed

Sworn Statement (SSS) for his review and signature that initially concerned an

unrelated leak matter but that had been revised to include his comments at the

May 9 interview about the October 30 WSJ article. The e-mail highlighted that a

new paragraph had been added, starting on page 10, regarding statements made

by McCabe about the October 30 article. This paragraph stated:

On 05/09/2017, [INSD-Section Chief] and [INSD-SSA1] provided me

with a photocopy of a Wall Street Journal article, dated 10/30/2016,

and requested I evaluate and assess the content of the first three

paragraphs appearing on the last page for accuracy. My assessment

of the referenced portion of the article is that it is basically an accurate

depiction of an actual telephonic interaction I had with a Department

of Justice (DOJ) executive. I do not know the identity of the source of

the information contained in the article. Since this event, I have

shared the circumstances of this interaction with numerous FBI senior

executives and other FBI personnel. I gave no one authority to share

16

any information relative to my interaction with the DOJ executive with

any member of the media. I initialed a photocopy of the article, which

is attached to my statement as Exhibit Number 5.

This draft SSS paragraph is consistent with INSDas contemporaneous notes of

the May 9 interview and the sworn recollections of both INSD agents who

interviewed McCabe, as they described to the OIG.

As of approximately 1 month later, McCabe had failed to execute and return

the draft SSS. Accordingly, on June 23, INSD again e-mailed it to him and again

requested that he review and sign it. However, INSD accidentally sent it to a

different FBI employee rather than to then-Acting Director Andrew G. McCabe. The

unintended recipient forwarded the INSD e-mail to then-Acting Director McCabe.

That same date, McCabe e-mailed INSD to note the error in the address. McCabe

did not sign the draft SSS and did not communicate with INSD regarding the draft

SSS until August 18, as described below.

c.

McCabeas November 29, 2017 Account of the May 9

INSD Interview and His Response to Draft

Statement

During his OIG interview on November 29, 2017, McCabe provided a very

different account of his interactions with INSD on May 9. Specifically, McCabe told

the OIG that the INSD agents amust havea gotten it wrong when they wrote in the

draft SSS that he told them on May 9 that he did not authorize the conversation

and that he did not know who the source was. McCabe said that he did not believe

he told INSD that he did not authorize the disclosure, but added aI don't remember

what I said to them.a He added aI don't remember discussing authorization of that

articlea with INSD and that athe INSD folks and I walked away from that, from that

exchange with a difference in understanding.a However, he acknowledged to the

OIG that his initials appeared on the copy of the WSJ article that INSD presented to

him for review during the interview. McCabe told the OIG that he did not know and

could not explain how INSD got the impression that he thought it was an

unauthorized leak because he said he does not believe he told INSD that.

McCabe also asserted that the May 9 meeting concerned an unrelated leak

matter and that the discussion about the October 30 article occurred near the end

of the meeting when aone of the people on that team pulled me aside and asked

me a question about the Wall Street Journal article.a He elaborated by stating that

as the INSD agents were awalking out of my office into the hallway, and [INSDSection Chief] kind of grabbed me by the arm and said, hey, let me ask you about

something else.a McCabe said that he and INSD-Section Chief were still in his

office, he thought standing, during the conversation but that the other two INSD

agents (McCabe recalled there being three INSD agents present that day, not two)

were outside his office. He said INSD-Section Chief showed him the October 30

WSJ article at that time and asked him aa question or two about it. And that was it.

It was a very quick exchange.a McCabe said he was confused as to why this article

was even being raised because it did not relate to a different media leak matter

that McCabe asserted was the main focus of their meeting on May 9.

17

McCabe told the OIG that he did not remember when he first reviewed the

revised draft SSS addressing the October 30 WSJ article, but that ait could have

been months latera after he received it. He said: aI don't remember reviewing the

statement while I was Acting Director. It's possible, but I don't remember when I

actually, I think it's possible I just put the entire thing aside and said I'll deal with

that some other time. The other time ended up being when I was back as Deputy

Director.a McCabe returned to his position as Deputy Director after Director Wray

was confirmed, on August 1, 2017.

14.

McCabeas Initial Account under Oath to the OIG on July

28, 2017

On Friday, July 28, 2017, the OIG interviewed McCabe under oath in

connection with its ongoing review of various FBI and Department actions in

advance of the 2016 Election. The primary focus of the interview was to determine

McCabeas awareness of the existence of certain text messages between Special

Counsel and DAD that the OIG had recently discovered. During the course of the

interview, the OIG showed McCabe text messages dated October 27, 28, and 30

from Special Counsel to DAD, indicating that Special Counsel had been in contact

with WSJ reporter Barrett and appeared to have been a source for the October 30

WSJ article. At the time of the interview, the OIG was not aware of INSDas May 9

interview of McCabe.

The OIG showed McCabe a text exchange on October 30 in which DAD

forwarded an article from the Washington Post to Special Counsel, entitled "Justice

officials warned FBI that Comey's decision to update Congress was not consistent

with department policy." DAD texted aThis is all [PADAG].a Special Counsel

responded "Yeah I saw it. Makes me feel WAY less bad about throwing him under

the bus in the forthcoming CF article." These texts suggested that Special Counsel

may have provided the information to Barrett concerning McCabeas August 12 call

that eventually appeared in the October 30 WSJ article. After the OIG showed

these text messages to McCabe, the following exchange took place:

OIG: . . . Which we're not sure what [CF] relates to, perhaps Clinton

Foundation. Do you happen to know?

MR. MCCABE: I don't know what she's referring to.

OIG: Or perhaps a code name?

MR. MCCABE: Not one that I recall, but this thing is like right in the

middle of the allegations about me, and so I don't really want to get

into discussing this article with you.

OIG: Okay.

MR. MCCABE: Because it just seems like we're kind of crossing the

strings a little bit there.

OIG: Was she ever authorized to speak to reporters in this time

period, was [Special Counsel]?

MR. MCCABE: Not that I'm aware of.

18

Later in the interview, the OIG directed McCabeas attention to other texts

from October 27 and 28 indicating that Special Counsel was talking to Barrett.

McCabe stated aI was not even in town during those days. So I can't tell you where

she was or what she was doing.a

15.

McCabe Calls the OIG on August 1 To Correct his

Testimony

On Tuesday, August 1, 2017, McCabe placed a telephone call to an OIG

Assistant Inspector General (aAIGa) to correct the statement he gave on July 28.

In an e-mail prepared the same day, AIG summarized the call, in relevant part, as

follows:

McCabe stated that he believes that [Special Counsel] may have been

authorized by him to work with [AD/OPA] and to speak with the WSJ

for the late October article. He said he had worked with [Special

Counsel] on a previous WSJ article earlier in the month when they

spent the day trying to correct inaccuracies. At the time the second

article was being prepared, McCabe was out of town

He believes he may have authorized [Special Counsel] to work

with [AD/OPA] and speak to Devlin Barrett (the WSJ reporter) because

she had previously worked with McCabe on the issues raised by his

wifeas political campaign and was very familiar with those issues . . . .

He said [AD/OPA] would be familiar with Special Counselas role and

authority to speak.

The OIG questioned McCabe about his August 1 call during his OIG interview,

on November 29. McCabe told the OIG that he called AIG on August 1 after

spending aa lot of time thinking about ita over the weekend, and that aon further

recollection, yeah, I remember authorizing [Special Counsel] and [AD/OPA] to talk

to the Wall Street Journal.a He said ait was important to me that [AIG] and you all

did not have the misimpression about the authorization that I had given to, to

[AD/OPA] and [Special Counsel] to interact with Devlin Barrett on that article.a He

further stated that it was important to him that the OIG not astart heading off in a

direction on [AD/OPA] and [Special Counsel] that's not, that would not have been

accurate.a

When the OIG pointed out that McCabeas statement on July 28 that he didnat

know where Special Counsel was or what she was doing on October 27 or 28 was

inaccurate, he stated:

Yeah, and as I've said before, and she made clear, I, I was very concerned,

as I think I said at that time, uncomfortable about discussing things that I

thought were outside the scope that [AIG] had identified for me that day . . .

. And I felt like that's the direction that the questions were coming from. I

didn't feel comfortable saying, you know, vouching for what was in [DAD]

and [Special Counsel]'s texts and saying what they meant. I had not

thought about the Wall Street Journal article and the conversations we had

around it in quite a long time. And so, I misspoke.

19

McCabe denied that being shown the text messages on July 28 that indicated

Special Counsel had spoken to Barrett caused him to change his account in order to

protect Special Counsel. McCabe told the OIG that this athinking processa was done

aon my owna without talking to any FBI employees or reviewing past e-mails or text

messages. He stated that he did not discuss the Devlin texts with Special Counsel

after the July 28 interview. While Special Counsel told the OIG that following

McCabeas July 28 OIG interview, she and McCabe discussed her text messages, she

said that McCabe did not discuss his OIG testimony about the WSJ article, or the

WSJ article itself, at that time. Special Counsel stated that she and McCabe did not

discuss agetting their stories straighta with respect to the WSJ article. Special

Counsel told the OIG that the last time she spoke with McCabe about the WSJ

article was in approximately October 2016 (when the article was published).

16.

INSD and the OIG Interview Special Counsel under Oath

Regarding the October 30 Article (August 7, September 7,

October 26)

On August 7, 2017, INSD interviewed Special Counsel concerning the

October 30 article. At that time, INSD investigators were not aware of Special

Counselas texts on October 27, 28, and 30 concerning her contacts with Barrett and

they had not made progress uncovering who may have been the source of the

account of the August 12 McCabe-PADAG call provided to the WSJ. During the

interview, Special Counsel told INSD agents under oath that she was a source for

the disclosure of the account of the August 12 McCabe-PADAG call, the disclosure

was fully authorized by McCabe, and Special Counsel and AD/OPA provided the

information to Barrett in a telephone call from the FBI OPA office. Special Counsel

signed an SSS to this effect on August 15, 2017, which included as an exhibit her

contemporaneous notes of the discussions with Barrett on October 27 and 28,

2016. Special Counsel gave the same account to the OIG in two subsequent

interviews on September 7 and October 26, 2017.

17.

INSD Interviews McCabe Again (August 18)

On August 18, 2017, INSD-SSA1 and a second SSA (aINSD-SSA2a) reinterviewed McCabe after being told by Special Counsel that it was McCabe who had

authorized the conversation with Barrett in advance of the October 30 WSJ article.

In light of Special Counselas testimony, INSD-SSA1 told us that, during the

re-interview, he affirmatively showed McCabe the WSJ article again and asked him

again if he authorized the disclosure regarding the PADAG call because INSD had

received conflicting information. INSD-SSA1 said McCabe alooked at it, and he read

it. And as nice as could be, he said yep. Yep, I did,a although he said he did not

recall specifically doing it. INSD-SSA1 stated that McCabe said he did not recall

authorizing the description of the PADAG call, but that McCabe atook responsibility,

or he took ownership of it,a and that he was aokay with it.a According to INSDSSA1as testimony:

I remember saying to him, at, I said, sir, you understand that we put a

lot of work into this based on what you've told us. I mean, and I even

20

said, long nights and weekends working on this, trying to find out who

amongst your ranks of trusted people would, would do something like

that. And he kind of just looked down, kind of nodded, and said, yeah,

I'm sorry.

INSD-SSA1as contemporaneous notes also reflected that he said to McCabe

that INSD would have ataken a different approacha if McCabe ahad told me and

[INSD-Section Chief] that he authorized the article in WSJ.a McCabe responded,

according to INSD-SSA1as notes, aaI knowa but there was a lot going on at the

time.a

According to INSD-SSA2, and consistent with

contemporaneous notes,

McCabe stated that he did authorize Special Counsel and AD/OPA to speak aon

backgrounda to Barrett for the article. INSD-SSA2 said that McCabe told them that

he did not specifically recall authorizing the disclosure of the PADAG call to the

WSJ, but assumes he did.

McCabe told us that he convened the August 18 meeting with INSD afor the

purpose of telling them that I would not sign the signed sworn statementa because,

among other things, it inaccurately reflected that he had not authorized the

disclosure to the WSJ. McCabe told us that the August 18 meeting was the first

time he told INSD that the signed sworn statement was inaccurate.

18.

The OIG Assumes Responsibility for the Investigation

(August 31)

Following the INSD interviews of Special Counsel and McCabe in August

2017, INSD officials became concerned that there was a significant question of

whether Deputy Director McCabe had testified truthfully to INSD on May 9. INSDSection Chief told us that she recommended turning the matter over to the OIG

because it was no longer appropriate for GS-14 agents in the Internal

Investigations Section to continue the investigation of their Deputy Director, and

that INSD aneeded to turn this over to an independent authority to review and

investigate.a The Assistant Director for INSD agreed, and referred the matter to

the OIG. The OIG formally accepted the referral on August 31, 2017.

19.

The OIG Interviews McCabe under Oath on November 29

On November 29, 2017, the OIG interviewed McCabe under oath again, this

time addressing the WSJ leak issue in detail. McCabe was represented by counsel

during the interview, and, consistent with OIG practice, the interview was audio

recorded. Among other things, and as detailed in prior sections, McCabe told the

OIG:

aC/

that he authorized Special Counsel and AD/OPA to disclose his August

12, 2016 conversation with PADAG to the WSJ and he had frequent

contact and communication with Special Counsel about the WSJ

article, before it was published, while he was out of town on October

27 and 28;

21

IV.

aC/

that he did not recall discussing the disclosure with Comey in advance

of authorizing it, although it was possible that he did;

aC/

that after publication of the October 30 WSJ article he told Comey that

he (McCabe) had authorized the disclosure, and that Comey adid not

react negatively, just kind of accepted ita and thought it was agooda

that they presented this information to rebut the inaccurate and onesided narrative that the FBI was not doing its job;

aC/

that other FBI executive managers knew generally that he had

authorized the disclosure;

aC/

that, notwithstanding the accounts of the INSD agents, contemporary

notes, or the draft SSS, he did not tell INSD on May 9 that he had not

authorized the disclosure to the WSJ about the PADAG call;

aC/

that at the end of the May 9 meeting with the INSD agents on an

unrelated leak matter he was pulled aside by INSD-Section Chief alone

and asked a question or two about the October 30 WSJ article;

aC/

that, despite being asked to sign the SSS on multiple occasions, he

probably did not review the language in the draft SSS until after

Director Wray was confirmed (which was on August 1, 2017);

aC/

that the explanation for his inaccurate July 28 testimony to the OIG

was that he was surprised to be asked about the WSJ matter during

that interview;

aC/

that between May 9 and August 18 he did not affirmatively tell INSD

he had authorized the disclosure; and

aC/

that he convened the August 18 meeting with INSD to tell them he

would not sign the SSS because, among other things, the statement in

it denying he had authorized the disclosure was not accurate.

OIG Analysis

A.

Lack of Candor

We concluded that McCabe lacked candor on four separate occasions in

connection with the disclosure to the WSJ. Three of those occasions involved his

testimony under oath.

1.

Lack of Candor with Then-Director Comey on or around

October 31, 2016

We concluded that McCabe lacked candor during his conversation with thenDirector Comey on or about October 31, 2016, when they discussed the October 30

WSJ article. As detailed above, Comey and McCabe gave starkly conflicting

accounts of this conversation. Comey said that McCabe adefinitelya did not tell

Comey that he had authorized the disclosure about the PADAG call. To the

contrary, Comey told the OIG that, on or about October 31, McCabe led him to

22

believe ain form or fashiona that McCabe did not authorize the disclosure about the

PADAG call to the WSJ. Comey described how McCabe gave Comey the impression

that McCabe had not authorized the disclosure about the PADAG call, was not

involved in the disclosure, and did not know how it happened. By contrast, McCabe

asserted that he explicitly told Comey during that conversation that he authorized

the disclosure and that Comey agreed it was a agooda idea.

While the only direct evidence regarding this McCabe-Comey conversation

were the recollections of the two participants, there is considerable circumstantial

evidence and we concluded that the overwhelming weight of that evidence

supported Comeyas version of the conversation. Indeed, none of the circumstantial

evidence provided support for McCabeas account of the discussion; rather, we found

that much of the available evidence undercut McCabeas claim. 8

First, Comey had pointedly refused to confirm the existence of the CF

Investigation in testimony to Congress just 3 months earlier. Additionally, 1 month

before McCabe authorized the disclosure, Comey also refused to confirm or deny

two different investigations during an FBI oversight hearing before the House

Judiciary Committee. Comey stated during the hearing: aour standard is we do not

confirm or deny the existence of investigations.a Comey noted that there is a

public interest exception, but aour overwhelming rule is we do not comment except

in certain exceptional circumstances.a Comey told us that when the FBI made

disclosures of this type during his tenure, such as occurred in connection with the

Clinton E-mail and Russia investigations, it did so only after careful deliberations as

to form and wording; he also noted that such a disclosure would not be made

through an anonymously sourced quote given to a single reporter. We found it

highly improbable that Comey would have been approving of a decision by McCabe

to disclose to a reporter, on background, information essentially confirming the

existence of an FBI investigation that Comey himself had refused to confirm when

testifying before Congress.

Second, on the morning after the article appeared online (and the same day

it appeared in print), Comey expressed concerns at his staff meeting about the

volume of leaks, as evidenced by Special Counselas contemporaneous notes of the

meeting. We found it highly unlikely that Comey, in a discussion with McCabe that

same day, would have been accepting of a disclosure authorized by McCabe that

looked exactly like the type of leak that he was condemning to his staff.

In comments submitted by his counsel in response to a draft of this report, McCabe stated

athere is no indication that any of Director Comeyas comments were referring to the PADAG call.a To

the contrary, as detailed in this report and made clear in the draft that was made available for

McCabeas and his counselas review, the OIG questioned Comey with specific reference to the portion of

the WSJ article that related to McCabeas call on August 12 with PADAG. There is no ambiguity.

Comey told us that, at the time, he was avery concerneda about the disclosure for a number of

reasons, including the impact of this disclosure on FBI-DOJ relations. And Comey told us that that

McCabe led him to believe that McCabe had nothing to do with the disclosure, amost likelya by stating

that McCabe didnat know where the disclosure came from, and adefinitelya did not state to Comey that

he, McCabe, authorized the disclosure.

8

23

Third, the disclosure occurred less than 10 days before the presidential

election and just 2 days after the firestorm surrounding Comeyas letter to Congress

about taking additional steps in the Clinton E-mail Investigation. Disclosure of the

PADAG call risked subjecting the FBI to even more criticism about potentially

affecting the imminent presidential election, by confirming the existence of a

previously unconfirmed criminal investigation involving candidate Clinton. We

highly doubt that Comey, who himself expressed concern to us that the WSJ

disclosure occurred 2 days after his October 28 letter, would have countenanced

such a disclosure by McCabe within days of the election if he had been told about it.

Fourth, publishing the account of the PADAG call risked further apoisoninga

the FBIas relationship with DOJ leadership at a time it was already under great

strain because of, among other things, Comeyas decision to notify Congress on

October 28 that the FBI was taking additional steps in the Clinton E-mail

Investigation and the Department leadershipas concern about leaks emanating from

the FBI. 9

Fifth, on October 27, Comey and FBI-GC expressed concerns to McCabe

about whether McCabe should participate further in the Clinton E-mail Investigation

because of the appearance created by the campaign contributions to his wifeas

campaign. The same logic applied to the CF Investigation. On that same date,

McCabe authorized Special Counsel to discuss the August 12 PADAG call with the

WSJ reporter, thereby confirming the FBIas criminal investigation. McCabeas text

message to Special Counsel late on October 27 (ano decision on recusal will be

made until I return and weigh ina) shows that he knew the issue of recusal was

clearly on the table; indeed, McCabe announced his recusal from both Clintonrelated matters on November 1. Under these circumstances, McCabe had a strong

reason not to tell Comey on October 31 that he had authorized the disclosure to the

WSJ about the CF Investigation: it would have been an admission that McCabe had

taken action relating to that investigation at exactly the time that McCabeas recusal

from Clinton-related matters was under consideration by Comey. Further, we found

it extremely unlikely, as McCabe now claims, that he not only told Comey about his

decision to authorize the disclosure, but that Comey thought it was a agooda idea

for McCabe to have taken that action.

Sixth, no other senior FBI official corroborated McCabeas testimony that,

among FBI executive leadership, apeople knew that generallya he had authorized

the disclosure. Rather, multiple witnesses identified by McCabe told us that

because of the information contained in the WSJ report, they did not believe it was

an authorized disclosure. They also said that had they heard about such an

authorization they would have recalled it because it would have been so unusual.

Other than Special Counsel, no witness we interviewed told us that they knew that

this disclosure had been authorized at the time. We think it likely that at least

Just a few days earlier, McCabe had participated in a conference call with then-Attorney

General Lynch regarding leaks during which McCabe aheard her use more forceful languagea than she

had ever used at any other time.

9

24

some FBI executives would have been aware of McCabeas authorization if he had

told Comey what he had done.

Finally, Comeyas testimony that McCabe did not tell him that McCabe had

authorized the disclosure to the WSJ is entirely consistent with McCabeas statement

to INSD on May 9 that he had ano idea where [the disclosure] came froma or awho

the source was,a as well as his claim to the OIG on July 28 that he was not aware

that Special Counsel had disclosed the information to the WSJ. Conversely,

McCabeas claim that he told Comey is not only inconsistent with his May 9 and July

28 statements to the INSD and OIG, respectively, but there would be no reason for

McCabe to not tell INSD and OIG about his actions on those dates if he had already

admitted them to Comey. Indeed, McCabe contacted the OIG on August 1 to

attempt to correct his July 28 testimony only after he was made aware on July 28

that the OIG had text messages from Special Counsel that would likely enable the

OIG to soon learn the truth about who authorized Special Counselas actions. 10

Taking all of these factors into account, we concluded that McCabe did not

tell Comey on or around October 31 (or at any other time) that he (McCabe) had

authorized the disclosure of information about the CF Investigation to the WSJ.

Had McCabe done so, we believe that Comey would have objected to the disclosure.

McCabeas disclosure was an attempt to make himself look good by making senior

department leadership, specifically the Principal Associate Deputy Attorney General,

look bad. While the disclosure may have served McCabeas personal interests in

In a letter submitted by McCabeas counsel after reviewing a draft of this report, McCabe

argues that athe OIG should credit Mr. McCabeas account over Director Comeyasa and complains that

the report apaints Director Comey as a white knight carefully guarding FBI information, while

overlooking that Mr. McCabeas account is more credible for at least three key reasons. . . .a The first

reason cited by McCabe as to why he should be believed over Comey is because he claims to have a

aconcrete recollectiona of the conversation between the two of them on October 31, while he argues

Comey does not. It is noteworthy that McCabe did not articulate such a aconcrete recollectiona during

any of four prior interviews. That is, he did not mention it during his May 9 INSD interview, his July

28 OIG interview, his August 1 OIG call, or his August 18 INSD interview. It was not until his

November 29 OIG interview a McCabeas fifth contact with INSD and the OIG about the WSJ article a

that he first provided this aconcrete recollectiona of his conversation with Comey, which if true would

have been critical for INSD and the OIG to know as soon as possible and in McCabeas interest to share

as soon as possible. As we note in the report, none of the circumstantial evidence supports McCabeas

claim, while the overwhelming weight of the circumstantial evidence supportas Comeyas recollection.

In his submission, McCabe presented no evidence to corroborate his version of events. Instead,

McCabe focuses entirely on attacking the credibility of Comeyas recollection. We found his aconcrete

recollectiona argument without merit. The second reason cited by McCabe as to why he should be

believed over Comey is because Comey was distracted at the time because of his need on October 31

to deal with the Weiner laptop and Clinton E-mail Investigation issues. Given the significance of

McCabeas disclosure, and the potential impact it had on FBI/DOJ relations, we have little doubt that,

no matter how focused Comey was on the Clinton E-mail Investigation or Weiner laptop issues or

other matters, Comey would have recalled McCabe telling him that he had been the source of the

disclosure, if in fact McCabe had told Comey the truth. Finally, McCabe argues that Comey awould

have every incentive to distance himself from this disclosurea due to McCabeas belief that the OIG is

reviewing Comeyas disclosure of other information to the media. However, McCabe provides no factual

basis for this claim and fails to address the corroborating circumstances described in the report that

support Comeyas recollection. In the absence of any evidence supporting McCabeas claim, we do not

credit it.

10

25

seeking to rebut the WSJ article on October 23 and to avoid another personally

damaging WSJ story on October 30, it did so at the expense of undermining public

confidence in the Department as a whole. We do not believe that Comey would

have been approving of such a disclosure by McCabe if he had been told about it.

For the same reasons, we reject the suggestion that Comey simply forgot or

misremembered what McCabe told him. If McCabe had told Comey that he had

authorized this significant disclosure, we believe it would have surprised Comey and

that Comey would have remembered it when the OIG interviewed him

approximately 1 year later. Similarly, we believe the other FBI executives would

have remembered it too had they been told about it.

Comey did not testify that McCabe affirmatively and explicitly denied having

authorized the disclosure, but rather that McCabe ain form or fashiona led him to

believe that McCabe did not know how the WSJ got the account of the PADAG call,

and adefinitely didnat tell [Comey] he authorized it.a The FBI Offense code 2.5

(Lack of Candor a No Oath) does not require an explicit false statement to establish

lack of candor. It applies to athe failure to be fully forthright, or the concealment or

omission of a material fact/information.a We concluded that McCabe lacked candor

in concealing from Comey his role in authorizing the disclosure to the WSJ. 11

In response to his review of a draft of this report, counsel for McCabe argued that the OIG

failed to satisfy the elements of FBI Offense Code 2.5, because McCabeas statements to then-Director

Comey were part of a acasual interactiona and not as the result of aan interaction in which a supervisor

was formally questioning an employee regarding his conduct.a We disagree. Comeyas testimony was

that McCabe conveyed to Comey, in some form or fashion, that it was not McCabe who had disclosed

to the WSJ the August 12 PADAG call confirming the existence of the previously unconfirmed CF

Investigation. The OIG does not accept that the FBIas Offense Code tolerates its Deputy Directoras

deceptive statements to the Director on an issue of importance to the Director and the FBI because

the Deputy Directoras lack of candor occurred in the context of a work conversation with the Director

as opposed to aformal questioning.a In addition, although Offense Code 2.5 (Lack of Candor a No

Oath) subjects employees to discipline for a[k]nowingly providing false information when making a

verbal or written statement, not under oath, to a supervisor, . . . when the employee is questioned

about his conduct or the conduct of another person,a the FBIas Office of Professional Responsibility has

previously taken the position in litigation that, alack of candor is the generic term which has

historically been used in FBI discipline which in its literal meaning means lack of forthrightness[.] . . .

It can mean . . . lying to a supervisor, not under oath, about work performance.a See Ludlum v.

Department of Justice, 278 F.3d 1280, 1284 (Fed. Cir. 2002). Compare FBI Offense Codes 2.10, 2.11

(identifying misconduct relating to employee behavior in a formal aadministrative matter,a defined to

include ainternal disciplinary investigations, OIG investigations, OPR adjudications, or EEO Matters,a as

distinguished from the broader aquestion[ing] about his conduct or the conduct of another persona in

Offense Code 2.5). Moreover, the Preamble to the FBIas Offense Codes and Penalty Guidelines

Governing FBIas Internal Disciplinary Process (Preamble) indicates that the Offense Codes and Penalty

Guidelines aprovide general categories of misconduct for which employees may be disciplineda and,

further, stresses the aheightened behavioral and managerial expectations associated with SES

personnel.a Preamble at 2, 4. Accordingly, the OIG stands by its finding that McCabe lacked candor

with the Director under Offense Code 2.5 and is subject to disciplinary action for such misconduct.

11

26

2.

Lack of Candor in Interview under Oath with INSD Agents

on May 9, 2017

We concluded that McCabe lacked candor during an INSD interview under

oath on May 9, 2017, when he falsely told the agents that he had not authorized

the disclosure to the WSJ and did not know who did.

Two INSD investigators

testified to the OIG

that they clearly recalled McCabe telling them under oath on May 9 that he did not

know who authorized the disclosure of the PADAG call to the WSJ. The agents said

that they provided McCabe with a copy of the article and had him initial it, gave him

an opportunity to read it, and then discussed it with him. According to the agents,

McCabe told them he recalled the article, yet claimed he had ano idea where [the

account of the PADAG call] came froma or awho the source wasa for it. Moreover,

McCabe told the agents that he had previously told others about the August 12 call

with PADAG, leaving INSD SSA1 with the impression that INSD would anot [] get

anywhere by askinga McCabe how many people could have known about what

appeared to be a private conversation between him and PADAG. The agentsa

recollections are corroborated by contemporaneous notes of the May 9 interview

taken by one of the agents and by the draft SSS that INSD prepared for McCabeas

signature within a few days of the interview (which McCabe never signed, despite

INSDas repeated efforts to get him to do so). Moreover, McCabeas denial to the

INSD agents was consistent with his responses to the OIG during his audiorecorded July 28 interview. We found that these FBI employees a who had nothing

to gain and everything to lose if they did anything but tell the truth regarding the

interview of the then-FBI Deputy Director a accurately and truthfully recounted the

details of what occurred during McCabeas May 9 interview.

By contrast, McCabeas account of this May 9 interview, which he provided to

the OIG during his November 29 interview, was wholly unpersuasive. McCabe

claimed that the INSD agents amust havea gotten it wrong when they wrote that he

told them on May 9 that he did not authorize the conversation and that he did not

know who the source was. Although McCabe said he did not believe that he denied

authorizing the disclosure of the PADAG call during the interview, he could not

provide any alternative account about what he actually said. Rather, McCabe

stated that he could not remember what he told the INSD investigators. McCabe

did not question the competence or good faith of the INSD interviewers, and also

admitted that he could not explain why the investigators got the impression that

McCabe had told them the WSJ article was an unauthorized leak. 12

In a letter submitted by his counsel after reviewing a draft of this report, McCabe offers as

an explanation for the inconsistent accounts of McCabe and the INSD agents that he was confused

about what portion of the October 30 article he was being asked about, citing numerous other facts

and quotes from anonymous FBI sources regarding the CF Investigation in the October 30 WSJ article.

The investigative record is clear as to the portion of the WSJ article about which the INSD agents were

questioning McCabe. According to INSD SSA 1as contemporaneous notes and testimony to the OIG,

INSD specifically drew McCabeas attention to the portion of the October 30 WSJ article regarding the

12

27

However, in an apparent effort to provide an excuse for his untruthful

responses to INSD, McCabe sought to portray the discussion about the October 30

article as essentially an afterthought by the agents. We found his description of the

circumstances surrounding the interview to be demonstrably false. First, INSDSection Chief flatly contradicted McCabeas claim that, at the end of an unrelated

meeting, as the agents were walking out of his office, one of them (INSD-Section

Chief) pulled McCabe aside and asked him a question or two about the October 30

article. Second, INSD-SSA1as two and half pages of notes of the meeting reflected

that a significant portion of the interview related specifically to the account of the

PADAG call that appeared in the October 30 article. Third, the agent that took the

notes (INSD-SSA1) was not the agent (INSD-Section Chief) that McCabe claimed

pulled him aside. Indeed, McCabe said that INSD-SSA1 and INSD-SSA2 (who did

not attend the May 9 interview) were in the hallway outside of his office when he

contends that INSD-Section Chief asked him about the disclosure of the PADAG call

in the October 30 article, circumstances that INSD-Section Chief denied. Fourth,

McCabe acknowledged that his initials were on a copy of the October 30 article that

the agents gave him to review, as reflected in INSD-SSA1as notes. 13

We also considered whether McCabe simply forgot that he had authorized the

WSJ disclosure at the time of his May 9 INSD interview, and therefore made an

honest mistake in telling INSD he did not know who did it. In three interviews

under oath, including one with outside counsel, McCabe has never made this claim

of a failed memory, and in any event we did not find this to be a persuasive

explanation for his inaccurate statement given McCabeas other admissions.

First, McCabe acknowledged that the PADAG call was a very memorable

event in McCabeas career. It involved a dramatic confrontation between McCabe

and the Principal Associate Deputy Attorney General, one of the highest ranking

officials in the Department. McCabe told the OIG that, despite his long career in

the FBI, he had never had a conversation alike this onea with a high level

Department of Justice official before or since August 12, 2016.

Second, McCabe told us this was the one and only time in his career that he

authorized a disclosure to the media of an internal discussion with such a high level

Department official.

Third, McCabe was deeply involved in the disclosure by Special Counsel to

Barrett; this was not a fleeting event but rather one that McCabe was involved in

for the entire week. McCabe learned by October 25 about Barrettas intention to

write about the CF Investigation. By October 27, McCabe had authorized Special

August 12 PADAG call. SSA 1as testimony was further corroborated by INSD Section Chief who also

noted that McCabe said he was disappointed that his conversation with the PADAG had appeared in

the October 30 WSJ article. In addition, the draft SSS that the INSD agents sent to McCabe on May

12 stated that McCabe was arequested to evaluate and assess the content and accuracy of the first

three paragraphs appearing on the last pagea of the copy that McCabe acknowledged contained his

initials, which was the portion of the article addressing the August 12 PADAG call.

13

was not.

McCabe erroneously testified that INSD-SSA2 was present at the May 9 interview, but

28

Counsel and AD/OPA to discuss the investigation with Barrett. McCabe then closely

followed the progress of their discussions, including having a 51 minute call with

Special Counsel on October 27 between Special Counselas first and second calls that

day with Barrett. McCabe also had conversations with Special Counsel on October

28 close in time to her call with Barrett that day. Then, on October 30, the day the

article appeared, McCabe called both NY-ADIC and W-ADIC to admonish them for

the leaks that appeared in the article. The next day, October 31, McCabe had a

conversation with Comey about the article. Finally, on November 4, the day after

another WSJ article concerning the CF Investigation, which again included

information about the McCabe-PADAG call, McCabe again admonished NY-ADIC for

leaks in that article.

Fourth, McCabe viewed the allegations that the WSJ reporter had told Special

Counsel and AD/OPA that he would be writing about in the October 30 article as

aincredibly damaginga to the credibility of the FBI, as well as an attack on his own

integrity. The October 30 WSJ article challenged McCabeas leadership of the FBI

directly and personally, specifically his oversight of the CF Investigation. We do not

believe McCabe would have forgotten his own actions taken in connection with the

publication of an article that was as memorable and personal as this one.

Fifth, McCabe acknowledged that INSD showed him the October 30 WSJ

article at the outset of the discussion and gave him an opportunity to read it, and

that he initialed the article and told the agents that he remembered it.

In light of the above circumstances, it seems highly implausible that McCabe

forgot in May what he recalled in detail during his November OIG testimony: that

he made an active choice to authorize Special Counsel and AD/OPA to disclose the

PADAG call as the abest evidencea to rebut the assertion that McCabe and the FBI

ordered the termination of a criminal investigation due to Department of Justice

pressure. We therefore concluded that when McCabe told INSD in May that he did

not know who authorized the disclosure to the WSJ, it was not due to a lack of

memory. In our view, the evidence is substantial that it was done knowingly and

intentionally.

For these reasons, we concluded that McCabe violated FBI Offense Code 2.6

(Lack of Candor a Under Oath) when he falsely told INSD agents on May 9, 2017,

that he did not know who authorized the disclosure of the PADAG call to the WSJ.

3.

Lack of Candor in Interview under Oath with OIG

Investigators on July 28, 2017

We concluded that McCabe lacked candor during his OIG audio-recorded

interview under oath on July 28, 2017, when he falsely stated that: (a) he was not

aware of Special Counsel being authorized to speak to reporters around October 30

and (b) he did not know, because he was out of town, awhere [Special Counsel]

was or what she was doinga during the relevant time period.

First, with regard to McCabeas claim that he was not aware of Special Counsel

being authorized to speak to reporters around October 30, that claim was

29

essentially the same false denial that McCabe made to the two INSD agents on May

9, except this time the false denial was made in an audio-recorded interview. Thus,

McCabe cannot deny that he made the statement, as he has attempted to do with

regard to his May 9 response to INSD agents. Instead, McCabe asserted in his

November 29 OIG interview that he amisspokea during the July 28 interview

because he was surprised by the topic being raised during that interview and had

not thought about the October 30 article in aquite a long time.a However, McCabe

was shown the article and asked questions about it less than 3 months earlier in the

May 9 INSD interview. Moreover, in neither the OIG July interview nor the May 9

INSD interview did McCabe indicate that he lacked recollection or needed more time

to think about the matter. As Deputy Director, McCabe well knew the significance

of OIG and INSD investigations, and of the importance of being truthful when

questioned under oath by agents from those Offices. Moreover, McCabe was a

trained law enforcement officer with roughly 20 years of law enforcement

experience. On this record, we do not credit his claim that his unequivocal denials

under oath, on two occasions within 3 months of one another, were the result of

being surprised by the questions.

Second, with regard to McCabeas claim that he did not know where Special

Counsel was or what she was doing during the relevant time period, FBI records

show that McCabe was in frequent telephone and text communication with Special

Counsel during that time period and had several communications with her regarding

her calls with Barrett, including a 51 minute call after her first call with Barrett and

a 23 minute call after her final call with Barrett. McCabeas own text messages

reflect that McCabe was keenly interested to learn about the results of Special

Counselas calls with Barrett. We therefore found that McCabeas claimed ignorance

regarding Special Counselas activities on those days was demonstrably false.

For these reasons, we concluded that McCabe violated FBI Offense Code 2.6

(Lack of Candor a Under Oath) when he falsely told the OIG on July 28, 2017, that:

(a) he was not aware of Special Counsel being authorized to talk to reporters and

(b) he did not know what Special Counsel was doing at the relevant time because

he was out of town. 14 In reaching this conclusion, we took note of the fact that

14 In response to review a draft of this report, counsel for McCabe argued that, in asking

McCabe about the October 27-30 texts between Special Counsel and DAD regarding the WSJ article,

the OIG engaged in improper and unethical conduct, and violated an allegedly explicit agreement with

McCabe that when he was interviewed by the OIG on July 28 he would not be questioned outside the

presence of counsel with respect to matters for which he was being investigated. McCabe provides no

evidence in support of his claim, and based on the OIGas review of the available evidence, including

the transcript of McCabeas recorded OIG interview on July 28 and the OIGas contemporaneous notes,

as described below, McCabeas claim is contradicted by the investigative record.

As an initial matter, at the time of the July 28 interview, McCabe was not a subject of an OIG

investigation of disclosures in the October 30 WSJ article, nor did the OIG suspect him of having been

the source of an unauthorized disclosure of non-public information related to that article. The OIG did

not open its investigation of McCabe concerning the WSJ article until August 31, after being informed

by INSD that McCabe had provided INSD agents with information on August 18, 2017, that

contradicted the information that he had provided to INSD agents on May 9.

Second, the OIG has no record that McCabe stated in advance of the July 28 interview that he

was represented by counsel. Moreover, the recording of the July 28 interview shows that at no time

30

McCabe called the OIG 4 days later, on August 1, and indicated that he had been

thinking about the questions he had been asked and believed that he may have

authorized Special Counsel to work with AD/OPA and Barrett on the follow-up WSJ

article. McCabeas call to the OIG on August 1 to attempt to correct his prior false

testimony to the OIG was the appr