Blue Shield of Calif. won't cancel policies
California’s insurance commissioner announced an agreement Tuesday with Blue Shield of California to temporarily delay the cancellation of more than 115,000 individual policies under the new federal health care law.

Commissioner Dave Jones will let policyholders keep their lower-priced policies through the first three months of 2014. The news comes amid outrage, as an estimated 2 million Americans — including 900,000 in California — learn that their policies are being canceled at the end of the year because they were not granted protected status by federal health reform.

Meanwhile, Covered California, the state’s new health insurance exchange, announced it received 47,440 applications for coverage in its fifth week of operation. That number tracks with the average weekly rate of applications seen on the exchange since it opened on Oct. 1.

It also sets a pace that some experts say would have Covered California meeting its goal of insuring between 500,000 and 700,000 Californians by March 31.

Many of the Californians expected to apply for exchange policies recently found out that they will lose their individual coverage at the end of the year because their insurance company is no longer offering their policy.

The reprieve for Blue Shield customers came, Jones said, because the insurer was supposed to have given its customers a six-month notice of cancellation but instead provided only a 90-day warning.

The agreement requires Blue Shield to send new notices to its customers starting today, letting them know they can keep their individual policies if they wish, at the existing price and with the existing medical provider network.

He said policyholders who are eligible for federal premium subsidies through Covered California, which runs the state’s health insurance exchange, will likely want to choose new policies by Dec. 15 so they can begin receiving the subsidies starting Jan. 1.

Jones criticized health insurers and Covered California for jointly agreeing that all existing policies should be canceled at the end of this year. Small businesses were allowed to renew their policies past the end of the year, and Jones said in a statement that individuals and families should be given the same leeway.

Neither state nor federal law requires such cancellations, Jones said, and existing policies offer benefits that include a broader network of medical providers and lower costs for consumers whose incomes are too high to be eligible for premium subsidies.

New policies must meet the requirements of the federal health care law, but Janice Rocco, deputy commissioner of health care reform and policy, said that old policies can continue into 2014 even if they fall short.

Covered California spokesman Santiago Lucero did not return a telephone message. But Blue Shield spokesman Steve Shivinsky said the exchange and insurers made the right choice in attempting to cancel all individual policies at year’s end.

“We need the largest number of individuals, healthy or otherwise, to be in the risk pool as early as possible to balance the risk ... across all ages and health status,” Shivinsky said.

He said the company agreed to the delay when Jones threatened a lawsuit. He disputed Jones’ contention that the company was required to provide a lengthier notice.

The delayed deadline could cause confusion for policyholders, Shivinsky said. It might force consumers to start their annual deductible over again on April 1, and eligible consumers could miss out on tax credits and cost-sharing subsidies if they wait.

No agreements with other insurers are in the works because regulators know of no other company that did not provide proper notice, Jones said.

While Blue Shield customers are getting an extra three months, many across the state are stuck trying to find new coverage by the end of the year. Those thousands include Edie Littlefield Sundby of La Jolla, a seven-year survivor of stage-4 gallbladder cancer who received a letter from United Healthcare that her policy will end on the last day of 2013. Unlike Blue Shield, United is pulling out of the individual health insurance market in California entirely.

Stage 4 gallbladder cancer has a 2 percent five-year survival rate, according to the American Cancer Society, and Sundby attributes her survival to the care provided by a Stanford oncologist who works with the Moores Cancer Center at UC San Diego.

The United policy covers treatment by both Stanford and UC San Diego doctors, but Sundby said no similar plan exists in the Covered California exchange.

UC San Diego is participating in only one plan on the new exchange. Offered by Anthem Blue Cross, it includes an “exclusive provider network” not accepted at Stanford. Stanford takes a different Blue Cross plan, one that uses a broader preferred provider network of doctors, but that plan is not available in San Diego.

She said that buying a new policy outside the exchange would cost 40 percent to 50 percent more than she pays now.

Sundby outlined her situation in a Sunday guest opinion piece published by The Wall Street Journal.

The final lines of Sundby’s piece: “Take away people’s ability to control their medical coverage choices and they may die. I guess that’s a highly effective way to control medical costs. Perhaps that’s the point,” resonated across the Internet.

White House adviser Dan Pfeiffer tweeted a link to a story written by the website Think Progress that said Sundby shouldn’t be angry at health reform. United Healthcare, it noted, pulled out of California’s individual market voluntarily when faced with competition from larger providers like Blue Cross and Blue Shield.

That tweet spawned plenty of angry replies from conservatives who took the White House to task for costing the La Jolla resident her coverage.

Becoming the center of a social media maelstrom did not seem to bother Sundby, who said she does not envy the 115,000 California Blue Shield customers who will get a three-month reprieve from the insurance commissioner.

“It’s sort of meaningless, to tell you the truth,” she said. “It just allows people to enjoy the holidays without having to spend all their time online looking for a new plan, but they’re still going to have to switch,” she said.

The Associated Press contributed to this report.