The Prasanthi Reporter: A Prasanthi Pilgrimage from Middle East and Gulf
Monday, July 9th, 2012

A pilgrimage by the Region 94 of the Sai Organisation comprising the countries from Middle East and Gulf has enveloped Prasanthi Nilayam with Islamic Fervor. Devotees from Bahrain, Iran, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Turkey and United Arab Emirates, provided an Arabic flavour in Prasanthi Nilayam.The Sai Kulwant hall in front of the stage is decorated with flags from all the participating nations. A crescent smiles atop the Sanctum Sanctorum.A large contingent of devotees in green scarves representing the colour of peace have been very active in Prasanthi Nilayam. Members of the group have joined the students for Morning Bhajans since July 7th.

The green scarved army with the message of peace from the heartland of Islam performed a concert entitled ‘Sarva Dharma Swaroopa Sai‘ on the 10th of July 2012 ,exalting the five cardinal human values – Sathya (Truth), Dharma (Righteousness), Shanti (Peace), Prema (Love), and Ahimsa (Non-Violence) which Bhagawan Sri Sathya Sai Baba embodied.

The programme consisted of 6 Arabic songs followed by Bhajans. All the participants were blessed with clothes. Special prasadam consisting of dry fruits and nuts along with a photograph of the Sanctum Sanctorum and pamphlets with the Teachings of Islam gleaned from Bhagawan’s discourses was distributed to the assembly.

Helping the Ashram to ease the rush in the canteens, this contingent have taken up the responsibility of their food arrangements for both lunch and dinner. A temporary shamiana erected at the western end, next to the culvert gate serves as the canteen and a meeting place for the pilgrims. Volunteers from the group would organize themselves, collecting food items from the North Indian and Western canteens to serve independently by the group without taxing the sevadal force. Utensils etc. would be washed and deposited back in the canteens by these dedicated group members. This unique exercise by the “Region 94” in serving the ashram force while serving themselves has been a practice by them during their pilgrimage over the years.

Tags: Concert, Photos, Pilgrimage

Posted in Reports |