It's official: Canada's in a recession
It's official. We're in a recession.

Statistics Canada confirmed yesterday the economy contracted at an annualized rate of 5.4 per cent in the first quarter. That follows a 3.7 per cent drop in the fourth quarter of 2008 – meeting the definition of a recession with two successive quarters of declining real gross domestic product.

Still, most Canadians have known it intuitively for months.

With that declaration finally on the books, some economists are suggesting the worst of the recession could be over.

Diana Petramala of TD Economics is forecasting more "moderate" GDP declines of 2.1 per cent and 0.6 per cent during the second and third quarters, respectively.

That suggests a turning point could be reached late this year.

"We have seen some signs of hope that a recovery may be near – due to an easing in credit conditions, a possible bottom in the U.S. downturn, and a nice rally in stock markets since March," she said.

"We continue to look for a recovery in the last quarter of 2009."

While a 5.4 per cent annualized drop is still nasty, the first-quarter decline was less disastrous than the 6.4 per cent drop many economists had forecast.

Also, the downturn appears on par with the last major recession in 1991, cooling conjecture about a second Great Depression.

Douglas Porter, deputy chief economist at BMO Capital Markets, is forecasting a 2.4 per cent decline in second-quarter GDP and suggests the third-quarter will be a close call.

"I think it is entirely possible that the end of the recession may well be dated at some point in the middle of the third quarter – which means July, August."

The global backdrop remains the wild card. Interest rates are at record lows, while countries have earmarked billions for fiscal stimulus. Some have even embarked on "quantitative easing" to jump-start growth. Canada's revival, however, could face a new stumbling block because of the recent surge in the loonie. The dollar closed yesterday at 91.66 cents (U.S.), up 0.06 of a cent.

Economists are hoping the Bank of Canada will discuss the dollar in conjunction with Thursday's rate announcement because a stronger loonie could hurt demand for exports.

Exports of goods and services fell 8.7 per cent in the first quarter.

Statistics Canada said the main reason was falling demand for machinery and equipment.

Real GDP was also hurt by weakness in personal spending, corporate profits and personal income. Adjusted for inflation, GDP dropped by 1.4 per cent in the first quarter.

Even if there is a recovery of GDP, there still could be years of high unemployment, said Erin Weir, an economist with the United Steelworkers.

"Employers initially start ramping up output again by getting their existing employees to work more hours and by taking advantage of whatever productivity improvements are available.

And you need enough economic growth to exhaust both of those avenues before employers return to a state of wanting to hire more workers."