Trudeau firm on ending Canadian combat role against Islamic State
Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau says he will stick to his pledge to withdraw jets from bombing missions against Islamic State, despite last Friday's attacks by the Islamist group on Paris

However, Trudeau was keen to dispel the optic that Canada was offside in the terror fight compared to the hardening tone of other leaders that has emerged in recent days.

But as the two-day summit wrapped up Monday, Trudeau was firm that the year-long bombing campaign by CF-18 fighters was in its final stages and would end before the current March deadline.

Indeed, as the leaders of the world’s largest economies huddled here in discussions, fighters from France, the United States and Canada were hitting ISIS targets in Iraq and Syria.

ANTALYA, TURKEY—Prime Minister Justin Trudeau is unbowed in his determination to halt Canada’s combat mission against Islamic State extremists, even as fellow world leaders ended a summit here resolved to step up their military actions to halt terror threats.

“Canadians expect their government to stay engaged,” he said.

“The discussions we’re having both internally and with our allies is around how best Canada can help,” Trudeau told reporters.

The prime minister said he told fellow leaders that Canada will boost its training of local fighters in Iraq, likely adding to the 69 Canadian troops already on the ground there.

“We have made the commitment to step up the training of local troops and that’s something that, by all accounts, is an important part of the military efforts against ISIL,” he said. ISIL and ISIS are alternative names of the Islamic State.

The terror attacks in Paris Friday night that left at least 129 dead — an assault French President François Hollande has branded an “act of war” — has galvanized leaders, producing calls for a united fight.

In a joint statement, the G20 leaders declared that the terror fight was a “major priority.” “We reiterate our resolve to work together to prevent and suppress terrorist acts through increased international solidarity and cooperation,” said the statement issued Monday.

Against that backdrop, Trudeau insisted that Canada would do its part. He praised the “extraordinary capabilities” of Canadian fighter pilots and said they have done “very well.”

But he said Canada can contribute more effectively by stepping up its training of local forces, a skill honed by the military during its lengthy Afghanistan mission.

“Our capacity to offer training and help concretely in the fight against ISIL in that way is something that not all countries have to offer,” he said.

Pressed for the rationale for ending the air mission, Trudeau replied that it was a commitment made by the Liberals during the campaign and said that Canadians themselves want the combat role to end.

“We have a mandate to do that,” Trudeau said.

“One of the things that Canadians have expressed certainly over the past months and within the election that they wanted to see a ceasing of the bombing mission,” he said.

He said in his discussions with other leaders over the weekend, he was not asked to reconsider the Canadian position.

The Paris attack and leaders’ responses overshadowed much of the summit activities.

But G20 leaders discussed other issues such as the economy, voicing concern about the unsteady growth, climate change, inequality, poverty and youth unemployment.

“Global economic growth is uneven and continues to fall short of our expectations, despite the positive outlook in some major economies,” read the communiqué.

The communiqué cited the need for “inclusive” growth, spurred in part by government investments. That echoes themes that Trudeau brought to the summit as he talked up the Liberals’ plan to invest heavily in infrastructure to boost economic growth in Canada.

Trudeau said the communiqué contained strong language on climate change, committing nations to a deal at the upcoming United Nations summit in Paris.

“We have seen from all nations a desire to engage robustly on climate change,” he said.

“I’m very optimistic that in all cases we’re going to see concessions made and strong leadership on an issue that touches every single country.”