Man of Your Dreams Justin Trudeau Casually Drops Quantum Computing Lecture in Press Conference
With our own ruggedly handsome President now preparing to hand over the reins of power to one of a handful of possible successors a good-looking-politician vacuum threatened to form. Fortunately, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau was appointed just in time to provide political observers with a new name to dreamily doodle in the margins of their marble composition notebooks. He’s the complete package: handsome but approachable-looking, an avowed feminist, skilled in yoga and boxing, and most importantly, he’s never sexually violated the carcass of a pig. And America’s new dream man from our neighbor to the north just got even better, as he revealed yesterday during a press conference that he’s also a major whiz when it comes to quantum computing. Yesterday, Trudeau visited the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo, Ontario to attend a conference designed to encourage young women to pursue careers in traditionally male-dominated STEM fields. Science fan he may be, Trudeau had come with a specific purpose yesterday — to announce a new $50 million infusion of federal funding for STEM programs, because Canada sounds like a lovely place to live. He took the microphone to say his piece and field a few questions when one reporter posed a facetious challenge to Trudeau’s computing know-how, joking, “I was gonna ask you to explain quantum computing, but...” before launching into his policy query.

Trudeau, however, was ready to throw down at a moment’s notice, jumping right in with “Okay, very simply, normal computers work by...” before laughter from the crowd interrupted him. He couldn’t help but push forward and insist on sharing his passion for computing with the assembled press, saying, “No, no, no don’t interrupt me. When you walk out of here, you will know more!”

Like the kinda-hot-in-a-dad-way high school physics teacher that all the students wanted to impress, he delivered an easily processed explanation of what, exactly, quantum computing is:

Normal computers work, either there’s one power going through a wire or not. It’s one or a zero, they’re binary systems. What quantum states allow for is much more complex information to be encoded into a single bit. Regular computer bit is either a one or a zero, on or off. A quantum state could be much more complex than that, because, as we know, things could be both particle and wave at the same time, and the uncertainty around quantum states allows us to encode more information into a much smaller computer. So that’s what’s exciting about quantum computing.

Trudeau then did the thing everyone does after geeking out about an obscure topic, and lightly self-effaced by joking, “Don’t get me going on this, we’ll be here all day.” Powerful, good to bring home to Mom and Dad, and he has a functional knowledge of how computers work? Is America completely sure that we can’t elect this guy, too?