signification, définition dans le dictionnaire Anglais de Cambridge
However, retaliation against implicit environmental subsidies is not permitted under these rules. De Cambridge English Corpus

If the project generates financial revenues, but they are lower than for purely commercial investments, then perhaps an interest rate subsidy would be most appropriate. De Cambridge English Corpus

The politically popular fertilizer subsidies are generally disappointing and should be replaced by market-smart grants or by institutional reforms. De Cambridge English Corpus

In success cases, government expenditure on subsidies, social transfers and wages remain relatively constant and revenues increase. De Cambridge English Corpus

For these reasons, technology policies are preferred as long as improved stoves save wood as expected, are acceptable to villagers, and subsidy costs are reasonable. De Cambridge English Corpus

The true extend of cross subsidies is often difficult to measure. De Cambridge English Corpus

Moreover, some solutions involved redistributive elements, either because they were not fiscally neutral or because they introduced subsidies for renewable energy sources. De Cambridge English Corpus

By the end of the 1980s, the total sum of subsidies for music had reached a new high. De Cambridge English Corpus

The negative incremental net gain indicates the minimum external support (subsidy) that may be needed to make the new technologies economically attractive to farmers. De Cambridge English Corpus

The sharp decline in cereal production following the elimination of the fertilizer subsidy was due to the high intensity of fertilizer use on these crops. De Cambridge English Corpus

Had the commissioners exercised their powers it is likely that the subsidy yield could have been sustained. De Cambridge English Corpus

The yearly subsidies from the central treasury (excluding loan and assistance) keep afloat the administrative machinery of the regional governments. De Cambridge English Corpus

But the "manufacture," privileged by the state institutions, need not be afraid of competition, for it relies on royal subsidies, import restrictions, and monopolistic privileges. De Cambridge English Corpus

This latter measure includes adjustments for earmarked government subsidies and other real financial investment activities on the part of households. De Cambridge English Corpus