Glass Breaking, Strategy Making, and Value Creating: Meta-Analytic Outcomes of Women as CEOs and TMT members
We conduct a comprehensive synthesis of the research on how female representation in the upper echelons (i.e., top management teams and chief executive officer positions) might affect firm performance. To help resolve longstanding theoretical, empirical, and substantive debates, we present an integrative conceptual framework based on the overarching concepts of unique resource portfolios , team decision-processes , and role incongruence perceptions . We test predictions from this framework using meta-analytic techniques on a sample of 146 primary studies conducted in 33 different countries. We find that female representation in the upper echelons in general is positively and weakly related to forms of long-term financial performance, but negatively and weakly related to short-term stock market returns. We observe that reduced strategic risk-taking is a mediating mechanism that explains why financial performance is improved. We also show that financial performance improvements are accentuated in environmental and organizational contexts that provide greater decision latitude to executives. Finally, we discuss and provide preliminary tests for extending these effects to other stakeholders (corporate social performance) and different time intervals for performance.

By virtually any account, there are few women in top corporate management positions. A 2014 study found that women held 12.9% of top management team (TMT) seats globally and 14.8% of such positions in the U.S. (Credit Suisse, 2014). Even in the country with the highest female participation, Thailand, the reported estimate was 26.5%. Another global survey found that only 18.7% of responding companies had at least a single woman in their senior executive team (The World Bank, 2014). Percentages are considerably lower for chief executive positions (Daily, Certo, & Dalton, 1999). In a study of incoming chief executive officers (CEOs) during 2013–2014, the proportion of women was 2.8% worldwide and 3.2% in the U.S. (Favaro, Karlsson, & Neilson, 2014). Indeed, the appointment of a female CEO is still such a rare event that it invites a frenzy of media attention, as evidenced by the coverage received by Mary Barra of GM, Marissa Mayer of Yahoo, and Ursula Burns of Xerox.

There is a growing sense in business and public policy communities that this situation should change. Advocates of increased female representation frequently evoke the “business case” to convince managers and investors to support their cause due to bottom line benefits to the firm (Deloitte, 2011; OECD, 2012; Temin, 2010). Indeed, extrapolating from theories of workplace demographics and diversity (Joshi, Liao, & Roh, 2011), female representation could enhance the exchange and integration of unique information, improve the quality of strategic decisions, and create value for the firm (Carpenter & Fredrickson, 2001; Hülsheger, Anderson, & Salgado, 2009; Joshi & Roh, 2009; van Knippenberg, De Dreu, & Homan, 2004). Researchers have found support for this notion in some contexts and these studies have often been cited as supporting the bottom-line argument (Jurkus, Park, & Woodard, 2011; Krishnan & Park, 2005).

However, the evidence has not been consistent; the notion of performance benefits—of value creation—when females break through the “glass ceiling” (The Economist, 2005) to reach a firm’s upper echelons has been challenged theoretically and empirically. One prominent counterargument, based on human capital theory (Becker, 1975), is that women can lag behind men in building the skills and experience necessary to serve as effective corporate leaders (Burke, 2000; Metz & Tharenou, 2001). Another counterargument based on role incongruity theory (Eagly & Karau, 2002) is that observers perceive women as lacking in the human capital necessary to serve as effective leaders, which would lead to more negative responses from stakeholders (Brenner, Tomkiewicz, & Schein, 1989). Consistent with these ideas, several studies report deleterious firm performance effects of female leadership (e.g., Adhikari, 2012; Lee & James, 2007; Shrader, Blackburn, & Iles, 1997). To complicate matters further, tokenism theory suggests appointments of women could be merely symbolic and thus inconsequential (Kanter, 1977) and research on intergroup biases suggests female executives’ influence could be marginalized due to their out-group status as minorities (Westphal & Milton, 2000). In line with these latter formulations, null findings have been reported as well (Francoeur, Labelle, & Sinclair-Desgagne, 2008; Rose, 2007).

Is there really a demonstrable performance advantage—or disadvantage—for firms with female representation in strategy making roles on TMTs and in CEO positions? And, if there is a demonstrable effect, why does it occur? Despite decades of organizational scholarship, the answers to these fundamental questions remain uncertain. Indeed, narrative reviews of the literature have concluded that clear answers are elusive, as the evidence is “mixed” (Eagly, 2007, 2013).

Our paper aims to resolve that uncertainty by conducting a comprehensive theoretical and empirical synthesis of accumulated paradigms and findings. In doing so, we answer the overarching question: what are the firm performance consequences of female representation in a firm’s upper echelons (TMTs and CEO positions)? We do so specifically by conducting a meta-analysis of 146 studies spanning a period of four decades. To answer this rich, important, and timely question, we take into consideration not only (long-term) financial performance, but also short-term abnormal stock returns. We offer predictions based on the overarching concepts of females bringing unique resource portfolios, changing team (TMT) decision process, and triggering perceptions of role incongruity by stakeholders whose responses help to determine a firm’s value. By investigating different performance dimensions and theoretical paradigms, we help make sense of a burgeoning but ostensibly confusing domain of research.

We also extend theory by going deeper into the processes underlying possible effects in answering our second question: what is the intervening mechanism that might underlie the connection between female representation in the upper echelons and firm performance? A missing piece of prior theoretical models is the set of strategic choices that would explain why this linkage exists (Priem & Harrison, 1994). We address this gap about the process of gender effects at the executive level by examining the mediating role of strategy making. Drawing from studies on gender differences in risk propensities or risk-related individual differences (Byrnes, Miller, & Schafer, 1999; Croson & Gneezy, 2009; Eckel & Grossman, 2008), we propose and test the hypothesis that strategic risk-taking (Bromiley, 1991; Shapira, 1995) is an unobserved link between female representation in the upper echelons and firm performance.

Finally, we seek answers to our third question: under what conditions does female representation in the upper echelons create systematically varying—accentuated or attenuated—impacts on firm performance? Recent studies have called for more research on the influence of context (Eagly, 2016), by noting that the influence of female representation in top management positions on firm outcomes is “no doubt contingent on multiple factors” (Eagly, 2013: 6) and “may vary in other places and settings” (Dezsö & Ross, 2012: 1086). In response to these calls, we extend existing theory and explicitly account for current fragmentation by investigating the moderating impact of decision latitude at the country and organizational level. Exploring the impact of national context is challenging for primary investigations due to data collection constraints. Using meta-analytic techniques, we are able to take advantage of evidence from 33 countries spanning four decades (1983–2014) captured in our compilation.

THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND SPECIFIC HYPOTHESES

Construct Definitions and Theoretical Overview

We draw several of our ideas about females leading firms from the upper echelons perspective, which views organizations as a reflection of top executives who occupy strategy-making roles (Hambrick, 2007; Hambrick & Mason, 1984). Research following this tradition has adopted two different approaches to units of analysis. The first approach emphasizes the firm’s TMT, which has been defined as “the relatively small group of influential executives at the apex of an organization—usually the CEO (or general manager) and those who report directly to him or her” (Finkelstein, Hambrick, & Cannella, 2009: 10). A large body of research suggests that characteristics of the TMT, through its influence on group decision-making processes and preferences, can predict firm behavior and outcomes (e.g., Carpenter & Fredrickson, 2001; Wiersema & Bantel, 1992). The second approach is to focus on the CEO, the most influential position in such teams. Studies have also found that CEO characteristics such as demographics, personality, and experiences can predict strategic actions and outcomes (e.g., Chatterjee & Hambrick, 2007; Crossland, Zyung, Hiller, & Hambrick, 2014).

Instead of choosing one approach over the other, we embrace both the entire TMT and the individual CEO as units of analysis, as the former allows investigation of group-level mechanisms whereas the latter is suitable for individual difference-based theorizing. Our focal construct, female representation in the upper echelons, accordingly consists of the dual components of (1) female membership in TMTs and (2) presence of a female CEO. The former is a group-level compositional attribute concerning the presence of females as members in the TMT (as noted in the introduction, the base rate of female representation in TMTs is low, and females are minorities in TMTs). The latter is an individual demographic attribute of the CEO.

Our focal dependent construct is firm performance. We treat it multidimensionally. It consists of the theoretically distinct categories of long-term financial performance and short-term stock market returns (McWilliams & Siegel, 2000). These categories partition performance in terms of relevant stakeholders and time, that is, to whom and when value creation occurs (Richard, Devinney, Yip, & Johnson, 2009). The first category of performance assesses the extent to which firms create economic value—from the perspective of customers, shareholders, and managers—relative to its competitors in the industry over the course of a considerable period, generally a year or more (Barney, 2002; King, Dalton, Daily, & Covin, 2004). The second category, short-term stock market returns, is more narrowly focused on value creation in terms of stock price movements in immediate reaction to corporate events, such as appointments of female executives (McWilliams & Siegel, 1997).

Our full theoretical model considers mediating mechanisms that connect these outcomes, as well as contextual moderators. Consistent with the upper echelons perspective, we posit that long-term value-creation effects are realized through the strategy-making influences of females as CEOs and as members of TMTs (Carpenter, Geletkanycz, & Sanders, 2004). We also test how much female representation matters to firm performance, depending on the degree to which the environmental and organizational context provides executives with latitude in their decision-making roles as opposed to placing stringent constraints (Hambrick & Finkelstein, 1987; Li & Tang, 2010). Figure 1 displays our summary framework for these predicted effects.

FIGURE 1 Theoretical Model Linking Female Representation in the Upper Echelons to Firm Performance

Although we draw from macro organizational theories for the overall structure of our predictions, the specific mechanisms that explain the linkages between these sets of constructs are informed by theories at both the individual and group level (Joshi et al., 2011). As a way to integrate this multi-level theoretical landscape, we bring forward three overarching sets of conceptual principles.

The first principle, operating at the individual level, is that females can bring a unique resource portfolio to upper echelons roles. That portfolio includes distinct risk-taking attitudes and unique caches of knowledge that would influence firm strategic decisions to be less risky and allow performance advantages (Daily et al., 1999; Huang & Kisgen, 2013). The second principle, operating at a group level, is that the representation of females in TMTs would influence group decision-making. We argue that the representation of females—as minority members in such groups—would encourage information elaboration processes, namely more active information exchange and integration, that also helps to cut against a group polarization tendency toward risk-seeking in more male-dominated TMTs (Isenberg, 1986; van Knippenberg et al., 2004). Both group-level influences would potentially lead to lower risk-taking and better firm performance. The third and final principle is that external stakeholders (investors) hold perceptions of role incongruence about female capabilities and ostensible requirements of women in TMTs and CEO positions (Eagly & Karau, 2002). Such perceptions will impact short-term stock market returns.

Value Creation Through Strategy Making: Female Representation in the Upper Echelons and (Long-Term) Financial Performance

The most frequently studied outcome in the literature on females in the upper echelons is long-term financial performance. In theorizing about the sequence of relationships that explains the linkage between those two, we continue to evoke the upper echelons perspective and its emphasis on how individual characteristics of executives in top management positions guide a firm’s strategic choices (Crossland et al., 2014; Hambrick, 2007; Li & Tang, 2010). Through this lens, we bring more specificity and throughput logic to the literature (Nadkarni & Herrmann, 2010; Priem & Harrison, 1994), which thus far has focused on explaining eventual firm performance effects with less explicit consideration of intervening processes (Dezsö & Ross, 2012; Krishnan & Park, 2005; Peni, 2014).

Our theory centers on strategic risk-taking as the key mediating mechanism. Risk-taking is elemental to all decision-making paradigms, with demonstrable consequences for firm survival and performance (Bromiley & Rau, 2010; Shapira, 1995). Risk is a rich concept which has been defined in various ways based on different theoretical perspectives and contexts (March & Shapira, 1987; Rothschild & Stiglitz, 1970; Sanders & Hambrick, 2007). In the domain of executive decision-making, the most relevant aspects of risk are the variability of returns and the threat of incurring losses (Bromiley, Miller, & Rau, 2001). Therefore, in this paper we define strategic risk-taking as the degree to which strategic decisions are associated with unpredictability of outcomes involving harm or loss. Adopting this view, it is perhaps not surprising that studies examining the influence of risky strategic choices on firm profitability have observed negative effects (Bowman, 1980; Bromiley, 1991; McNamara & Bromiley, 1999; Miller & Bromiley, 1990; Veliyath & Ferris, 1997), despite some of the positive connotations of risk-taking, especially from a financial economics perspective (Sharpe, 1964).

Our theory posits that the relative success of firms with females in the upper echelons is realized mainly through reduction in strategic risk-taking facilitated by women’s unique resource portfolio and their influences on group decision-making processes. We first consider the proposed impact of female representation in the CEO position, followed second by the TMT.

Female presence in CEO positions.

Occupants of CEO positions have the greatest potential to influence the long-term financial profitability of firms (Hambrick & Quigley, 2014; Mackey, 2008). Recently, studies have found that such potential can be traced back to the CEO’s individual resources (i.e., psychological and behavioral attributes; Nadkarni & Herrmann, 2010; Peterson, Galvin, & Lange, 2012). We build on this foundation by arguing that females (relative to their male counterparts) can bring a unique behavioral tendency of more cautious decision-making to this position, which ultimately would influence the long-term financial performance of firms through its impact on strategic risk-taking.

The literature on gender differences has found robust support for the notion that women are more risk-averse (i.e., less risk-seeking) than men. This evidence stems from multiple disciplines, gathered in a broad range of contexts and tasks, using experimental and observational designs (Eckel & Grossman, 2008). A meta-analysis of 150 studies in the psychology literature (Byrnes et al., 1999) as well as a narrative review of economic experiments converge on the same conclusion (Croson & Gneezy, 2009). A related body of literature has focused on overconfidence, which is a cognitive bias through which these risk-taking differences manifest (Li & Tang, 2010). Considerable evidence shows females are less overconfident than men with regard to how likely it is that their decision will produce successful outcomes, which is one explanation for why women make less risky decisions (Barber & Odean, 2001; Deaux & Farris, 1977; Lundeberg, Fox, & Punćcohaŕ, 1994). While several studies report evidence that existing patterns of gender differences in risk-taking might not apply to some managerial contexts (Adams & Funk, 2012; Johnson & Powell, 1994), such evidence is outweighed by the larger and broader body of robust evidence which has established that females in general (Bertrand, 2011), and in their roles as CEOs (Faccio, Marchica, & Mura, 2016; Huang & Kisgen, 2013), are risk-averse compared to males.

Applying these robust findings to corporate executives, we conjecture that somewhat more risk-aversion constitutes part of the unique resource portfolio that female CEOs will bring to strategic decision-making situations. The consequence of having a more risk-averse, female CEO would be decreased tendencies to engage in strategies with greater variability and more potential loss compared to firms with male CEOs (Faccio et al., 2016; Huang & Kisgen, 2013). In turn, such influence on strategic risk-taking (first-stage effect) could explain an eventual improvement in long-term financial performance (second-stage effect). Several firm strategies have been characterized as increasing risk. These include maintaining high levels of financial leverage, which spurs a greater possibility of bankruptcy (Bathala, Moon, & Rao, 1994), and high levels of capital expenditures, which increase the possibility that environmental change will make capital investments obsolete (Miller & Bromiley, 1990). Meta-analytic evidence from a large body of research further suggests that the pursuit of such risky strategies is negatively associated with financial performance (Capon, Farley, & Hoenig, 1990; Carney, Gedajlovic, Heugens, Van Essen, & Van Oosterhout, 2011). Consequently, we expect lesser amounts of strategic risk-taking to be the main reason why there would be a positive link between female presence in CEO positions and long-term financial performance. More formally, we propose the following:

Hypothesis 1a. Female presence in CEO positions has a positive relationship with long-term financial performance.

Hypothesis 1b. The beneficial effect of female presence in CEO positions on long-term financial performance is mediated by strategic risk-taking.

Female membership in TMTs.

Although there is a trend toward increasing female representation, TMTs are disproportionately composed of males (Catalyst, 2013; Dezsö & Ross, 2012). Given that males tend to be more risk-taking (compared to females), male-dominated TMTs would generally be inclined to pursue riskier firm strategies, and this tendency would be further reinforced and intensified due to group polarization processes (Isenberg, 1986). The addition of female members, who are salient minorities in TMTs, would help change group decision-making from an automated, category-reinforcing process that leads to greater risk-taking over time to a process of deeper, elaborated information processing (Joshi et al., 2011; van Knippenberg et al., 2004). The subsequently more controlled and elaborated processing of decisions by the TMT should reduce strategic risk-taking, as well as generally improve decision quality (Olson, Parayitam, & Bao, 2007), which in turn improves long-term firm performance.

The tendency for male-dominated TMTs to move toward more, potentially excessive, risk-taking can be explained by theories of group polarization, which refers to the tendency for groups to reach more extreme decisions following deliberations, than the initial predisposition of members (Myers & Lamm, 1976; Sunstein, 2002). These extreme decisions move toward greater caution if the initial inclination of its members is to be cautious, and toward greater risk should it be the case that members are initially inclined toward taking risks (Zhu, 2013). Given that TMTs are generally dominated by males (who are risk-seeking compared to females; Croson & Gneezy, 2009), TMTs are likely to be initially predisposed toward taking risks. One of the mechanisms through which this phenomenon occurs is an expectation that other TMT (group) members who are overtly similar will share one’s social category, and therefore think similarly (Friedkin, 1999). Shared or category-reinforcing information is brought forward, confirming initial expectations, and moving the group even further in the direction assumed to validate (similar) group members’ leanings (McGarty, Turner, Hogg, David, & Wetherell, 1992).

When an overtly different, unique, and distinct group member such as a female is present in the TMT, the dynamic changes. Members would expect new information, more thoroughly examine the reasoning behind their own positions, and switch from an automated, self-verifying processing of decision content to one that is more controlled (Loyd, Wang, Phillips, & Lount Jr, 2013; Westphal & Milton, 2000). Thus, female representation in TMTs would challenge the status quo of decision process through triggering information elaboration: enhanced exchange, discussion, and integration of different sources of information and distinct perspectives (Homan, Van Knippenberg, Van Kleef, & De Dreu, 2007; Joshi & Roh, 2009). Studies have shown that the mere presence of demographic minorities such as females in a group could create the expectation that different information and opinions are likely, which fosters the expression of divergent views among group members (Crano & Chen, 1998; Nemeth, 1986; Phillips, Liljenquist, & Neale, 2009; Phillips & Loyd, 2006). Further evidence suggests that introduction of surface-level (demographic) differences such as gender allows groups to better capitalize on deep-level (psychological) differences such as risk-taking propensities in their decision-making (Harrison, Price, & Bell, 1998; Harrison, Price, Gavin, & Florey, 2002; Harvey, 2014).

This processing of divergent information among group members would unearth different risk-taking preferences and foster more debate; eventually it would temper the automated and category-reinforcing information processing that moves groups toward a risky pole (Nieboer, 2013; Yaniv, 2011). This reduction of strategic risk-taking, through elaborated information processing in the TMT (first-stage effect) should result in an improvement of long-term fiscal outcomes for the firm (second-stage effect). As discussed above, managerial risk-taking is generally associated with reduced profitability (Bromiley, 1991; Capon et al., 1990). For instance, firm risk-taking as indicated by the volatility of stock returns is negatively associated with financial performance (Veliyath & Ferris, 1997). Furthermore, bolstering information elaboration processes in TMTs would bring about improvement in the general quality of group decisions (Hülsheger et al., 2009; Nadolska & Barkema, 2013), which could also explain advantages in firm financial performance. Observable differences within groups bring cognitive friction, which prompts effective deliberation and reduces mistakes, even about financial matters (Levine, Apfelbaum, Bernard, Bartelt, Zajac, & Stark, 2014). From these arguments, we predict the following:

Hypothesis 2a. Female membership in TMTs has a positive relationship with long-term financial performance.

Hypothesis 2b. The beneficial effect of female membership in TMTs on long-term financial performance is mediated by strategic risk-taking.

Moderating Effects of Environmental and Organizational Context

In the previous hypotheses, we argued that female executives bring unique behavioral resources to CEO positions and generate changes in TMT decision-making processes, both of which lead to reduced strategic risk-taking. In turn, we hypothesized that reduced strategic risk-taking is the main mediating mechanism through which long-term financial performance effects are realized. An assumption underlying these arguments is that executives actually matter and are given considerable room to maneuver firm strategy (Child, 1972). However, prior research shows that might not always be the case (Bertrand & Schoar, 2003; Salanick & Pfeffer, 1977), as constraints are imposed by the environmental and organizational context (Hannan & Freeman, 1977). Under what condition is there an accentuation or attenuation of the effects of female representation in the upper echelons—of glass breaking—on strategy making and value creating?

The condition we focus on is deliberately broad: decision latitude as the overarching mechanism moderating long-term financial performance effects. We characterize it as the extent to which executives are allowed to choose an expansive (rather than constraining) set of strategic actions (Hambrick & Finkelstein, 1987; Lieberson & O’Connor, 1972; Thompson, 1967). Female executives would be better positioned to influence firm strategy and performance, through unique behavioral resources and changes to group decision-making processes, when they are placed in environmental and organizational contexts that afford decision latitude (Finkelstein & Hambrick, 1990; Haleblian & Finkelstein, 1993; Li & Tang, 2010).

Country-level managerial discretion.

The notion that a firm’s environment can constrain as well as expand the “strategic degrees of freedom” (Hambrick & Finkelstein, 1987: 381) provided to executives is well-established in the management literature (Dess & Beard, 1984; Hambrick & Abrahamson, 1995). Recent studies have expanded the scope of investigation to the country level (Crossland & Hambrick, 2007, 2011). Executive and TMT characteristics matter less or more in countries characterized by low or high discretion, which reflects informal institutions such as individualistic versus collectivistic culture and uncertainty tolerance versus avoidance, as well as formal institutions such as legal systems and labor markets (Crossland & Hambrick, 2011). For instance, executives are given less discretion in collectivist societies where decision-making tends to be consensus-based and compromise is the norm (Ali, Taqi, & Krishnan, 1997; Gelfand, Bhawuk, Nishii, & Bechtold, 2004). Country-level managerial discretion is also greater in common law countries where executives deal with a simpler stakeholder structure than in civil law countries, where more complex interests of stakeholder groups are at play (Kwee, Van Den Bosch, & Volberda, 2011; Schneper & Guillén, 2004).

Drawing from this prior work, we expect the expression of theorized outcomes of female representation on firm strategy and performance to be stronger in national contexts that provide greater managerial discretion. In the case of female CEOs, the individual behavioral resource of risk-aversion would have a more potent influence in higher discretion nations (Li & Tang, 2010). Furthermore, managerial discretion should enhance the influence of TMT-level decision processes (Finkelstein & Hambrick, 1990). TMTs with female representation would be more motivated to engage in elaborate information processing in high-discretion national contexts where their efforts are more likely to influence firm outcomes (van Knippenberg et al., 2004). These activated decision processes, in turn, would matter more for firm strategy and performance in less-constraining national contexts, noted below.

Hypothesis 3. Country-level managerial discretion accentuates the negative relationship between (a) female presence in CEO positions and strategic risk-taking, and (b) female membership in TMTs and strategic risk-taking (i.e., it is a negative moderator).

Hypothesis 4. Country-level managerial discretion accentuates the positive relationship between (a) female presence in CEO positions and long-term financial performance, and (b) female membership in TMTs and long-term financial performance (i.e., it is a positive moderator).

Autonomous organizational structure.

In addition to environmental factors, organizational structure is another determinant of the range of strategic options open to top executives (Campbell, Campbell, Sirmon, Bierman, & Tuggle, 2012; Roth & O’Donnell, 1996). Among several aspects of organizational structure, we focus on the contrast between small private firms—characterized by autonomous structure and governance—as opposed to large publicly traded firms, which are more limited by their ownership and size.

Executives’ strategic autonomy declines as the number of powerful inside and outside groups influencing firm decisions rises (Hambrick & Finkelstein, 1987). Small private firms, compared to large publicly traded firms, provide executives with more decision latitude based on several structural features. By virtue of their private status, such firms have fewer and less complex sets of stakeholders (Ling, Simsek, Lubatkin, & Veiga, 2008). Executives in private firms can make strategic choices relatively free from the oversight of boards of directors or short-term pressures from capital markets (Fiegener, Brown, Dreux, & Dennis Jr, 2000; Laverty, 1996). In addition, small private firms can pivot or change strategies more nimbly, as larger firms have hierarchical structures and established routines (Nelson & Winter, 1982) that are sources of strategic inertia and continuation of the status quo (Aldrich, 1979; Tushman & Romanelli, 1985). These inertial forces tend to cut against CEO or TMT autonomy in managing critical domains, and thus reduce upper echelon influence on strategy making and firm outcomes (Li & Tang, 2010; Miller & Toulouse, 1986).

Consequently, the impact of female representation in the upper echelons will be greater in small private firms than in large public firms (Ling et al., 2008). In the former contexts, the unique behavioral resources that females bring to CEO positions will matter more, and will have a greater influence on firm outcomes. Likewise, in small private firms, female membership in TMTs may trigger beneficial information elaboration to a greater extent than in larger firms, as members will be motivated by their potential influence on eventual outcomes (Price, Harrison, & Gavin, 2006; van Knippenberg et al., 2004). These changes to group decision-making processes triggered by female membership in TMTs (Cooper, Patel, & Thatcher, 2014) will have a more potent impact on strategic risk-reduction and subsequent long-term financial performance in organizations characterized by an autonomous structure. On the basis of these arguments, we predict:

Hypothesis 5. Autonomous organizational structure accentuates the negative relationship between (a) female presence in CEO positions and strategic risk-taking, and (b) female membership in TMTs and strategic risk-taking (i.e., it is a negative moderator).

Hypothesis 6. Autonomous organizational structure accentuates the positive relationship between (a) female presence in CEO positions and long-term financial performance, and (b) female membership in TMTs and long-term financial performance (i.e., it is a positive moderator).

Value-Creation Potential: Role Incongruity Perceptions and Short-Term Stock Market Returns

To build a more comprehensive and integrative theory about the effects of female representation in the upper echelons, we augment the arguments above with predictions about the reactions of important external audiences. Namely, we propose that stock market investors often see female appointments to top executive positions as value threatening rather than value creating. We turn now to the theoretical mechanism of role incongruity perceptions (Eagly, 2003; Eagly & Karau, 2002) that underlie such reactions.

Despite evidence for potentially positive performance impacts of female representation in CEO positions and in TMTs, some stakeholders may hold implicit theories about negative impacts of women assuming such a strategically vital role. According to Eagly and Karau’s (2002) role incongruity theory, females taking executive positions can be viewed as risky by external observers because stereotypical views about females can clash with observers’ preconceived notions about what qualities the occupants of such positions should have (Koenig, Eagly, Mitchell, & Ristikari, 2011; Lee & James, 2007). Underlying this role mismatch perception is a contradiction between the primarily agentic qualities (e.g., competitive, self-confident, and assertive) ascribed to a prototypical organizational leader versus the predominantly communal traits (e.g., caring, kind, affectionate) associated with females (Broverman, Vogel, Broverman, Clarkson, & Rosenkrantz, 1972; Carli & Eagly, 1999). A large corpus of evidence from a broad range of national and organizational contexts (Koenig et al., 2011) shows that people in general, and males especially, believe management and leadership roles are associated with masculine qualities (e.g., Gupta, Turban, Wasti, & Sikdar, 2009; Schein, 2001; Schein & Mueller, 1992). Research based on role incongruity theory has consistently found this perception of role mismatch to bring down subjective evaluations of females’ leadership abilities (Eagly, Makhijani, & Klonsky, 1992) and their leadership effectiveness (Eagly, Karau, & Makhijani, 1995). As construal of leadership is progressively more agentic for progressively higher status managerial positions (Koenig et al., 2011; Martell, Parker, Emrich, & Crawford, 1998), women in the upper echelons may receive particularly prejudicial evaluations because the perceived incongruence might be even more salient.

Because role incongruity theory is based on external perceptions, it should explain the influence of female representation in the upper echelons on performance dimensions that are arguably driven by perceptual processes (Lee & James, 2007). In that regard, negative stakeholder evaluations toward female executives would likely be captured in short-term stock market returns, which largely reflect investor beliefs and cognitions about future share prices (Lamin & Zaheer, 2012; Schijven & Hitt, 2012), rather than longer-term financial returns to business operations. Given prior research on role incongruity perceptions (Eagly et al., 1992, 1995), we predict that stock market investors are likely to hold negative views about the value-creation potential of female CEOs or TMT members. Such negative evaluations should present themselves as stock price dips immediately following announcements of female appointments to the upper echelons. More formally, we predict the following:

Hypothesis 7a. The appointment of females to CEO positions leads to negative short-term stock market returns.

Hypothesis 7b. The appointment of females to TMTs leads to negative short-term stock market returns.

METHODS

Sample of Original Studies

To identify relevant studies for meta-analytic testing of the hypotheses in our framework, we used several techniques. First, we searched various databases including ABI/Inform, EBSCO, Web of Knowledge, and JSTOR. Search terms were generated by combining words indicating gender such as female, women, and gender with words that indicated upper echelons positions of interest such as chief executive/CEO, top manager, top management team/TMT, executive, executive team, and upper echelons. To further identify possible unpublished working papers and conference papers, we used the same terms in Google, Google Scholar, and SSRN. Second, to ensure that key publications were not omitted, we conducted a targeted search in several journals including the Academy of Management Journal, Strategic Management Journal, Administrative Science Quarterly, Organization Science, Journal of Management, and Journal of Management Studies. Third, we also searched through the reference lists of existing articles. Finally, we posted messages on academic listservs (e.g., those of the Academy of Management Business Policy and Strategy [BPS] and Gender and Diversity in Organizations [GDO] divisions), and sent emails to authors of prior works in this area to further identify and obtain unpublished and in-press studies.

The empirical papers obtained through these search efforts had to meet several inclusion criteria to be retained for meta-analysis. The primary study needed to report findings for the relationship between female representation in the upper echelons and firm performance, or any one of the strategic risk-taking indicators we identified (see below: financial leverage, capital expenditures, and stock volatility). Because our independent construct includes CEO positions and TMTs (Finkelstein et al., 2009), we excluded studies relying on gender composition in middle management only, or in the entire workforce. In addition, an effect size (e.g., r, t, F), or enough data to compute one, had to be reported. We contacted authors of several dozen papers regarding missing effect sizes or omitted information that would allow such computation. Also, to mitigate issues of inflated effects from self-report criteria, we only included studies that relied on archival sources of data for dependent variables. Finally, we retained unpublished studies (not appearing in peer reviewed journals) such as working papers, book chapters, dissertations, conference papers, and government and corporate reports, to reduce the threat of publication bias or the “file drawer problem”— a potential systematic bias toward stronger findings in published studies (Harrison, Banks, Pollack, O’Boyle, & Short, 2017; Rosenthal, 1979).

A total of 146 primary studies (90 published, 56 unpublished) met our inclusion criteria and were used in at least one of our analyses. This meta-analytic sample captures data from 33 countries. Years of primary data collection ranged from 1983 through 2014.

Variables in Primary Studies

Female presence in CEO positions.

This variable was dichotomous in primary studies. For consistency, we coded all investigations of this measure to take the value of 1 for a female CEO and 0 for a male CEO. Because CEOs are also members of TMTs (see definition below) there is a small, but inevitable, overlap between the variables of female presence in CEOs and female membership in TMTs. Specifically, our meta-analytic estimates indicate that these two variables share less than 2% of their variance ( = .019). To account for this overlap, we examine the effects of female representation in CEO positions and TMTs separately and jointly, with the latter involving simultaneously controlling for the effects of each (see below in the Methods for details on how this is possible using meta-analytic path analysis).

Female membership in TMTs.

The most common operationalizations in primary studies of what constituted a TMT were: (a) the top five highest-paid executives; and (b) those with the title of senior vice president and higher. Primary studies measured female membership in TMTs using three different types of indicators: dichotomous (i.e., presence of at least one female), proportion (i.e., relative number or percentage of females), or heterogeneity (i.e., Blau or Herfindahl index). The most common labels in original studies for these measures were “gender diversity” and “female representation.” When studies reported measures of male composition (e.g., percentage of male TMT members), effect sizes were given a reverse sign.

We conducted a test of heterogeneity to determine whether there was a difference in effects based on operationalization of the independent variable. Little substantive variance across the three types of measures occurred because of the persistently low numbers of females present in TMTs (Harrison & Sin, 2006). Results showed different measures of this TMT-based independent variable did not create systematically varying results for strategic risk-taking effects (= .318, df = 2, p = .85) or financial performance effects (= .0.69, df = 2, p = .97). Therefore, in our tests for main effects of female representation in TMTs, estimates derived from these three types of measures were treated as equivalent. In our meta-regression (moderator) models, we controlled for these different types of measures using dummy variables.

Strategic risk-taking.

Prior studies have used a variety of strategic risk-taking proxies (Bromiley et al., 2001). Based on methodological feasibility and theoretical relevance, we used three different but widely employed indicators. Financial leverage indicates the extent to which firms rely on debt to fund their operations; it is commonly expressed as a ratio of total debt to total assets (Miller, Le Breton-Miller, & Lester, 2013; Miller & Bromiley, 1990). Capital expenditures represent a form of corporate spending associated with uncertain returns; it is most often measured as a ratio divided by assets (Chatterjee & Hambrick, 2011; Sanders & Hambrick, 2007). Stock return volatility is the variability (standard deviation) in a firm’s stock price over time, and it is an indirect indicator that reflects the equity market’s overall assessment of executives’ risk-taking (Bargeron, Lehn, & Zutter, 2010; Chakraborty, Sheikh, & Subramanian, 2007; Wright, Kroll, Krug, & Pettus, 2006). It complements the other two measures by capturing aspects of risk-taking omitted by only relying on direct, input-based measures.

(Long-term) financial performance.

Primary studies measured financial performance using various indicators. Following prior meta-analyses in strategic management (Carney et al., 2011; Orlitzky, Schmidt, & Rynes, 2003), we categorized these into two types: accounting-based and market-based. Accounting-based measures of financial performance included return on assets (ROA), return on equity (ROE), and return on sales (ROS). Market-based measures included Tobin’s Q, market-to-book ratio, and total shareholder returns (note these are all still long-term, and not day-to-day price changes). In our collection of studies, 14% of the effect sizes had a predictive lag structure in which long-term financial performance was measured in a period after the measurement of the independent variable (one year separation in most cases). We considered an effect size to have a predictive lag structure only when a primary article clearly identified it as such (e.g., the firm performance variable in the correlation table has a “t+1” subscript).

(Short-term) stock market returns.

Another set of primary studies examined the short-term impact of female executive appointments on stock prices. Such financial event studies are based on the assumption that stock markets are largely efficient in their ability to absorb information relevant to the event, and that such information will immediately be reflected in valuations (Fama, 1991). The length of the event windows used to measure cumulative abnormal returns (CAR) in primary studies averaged 7.6 days—the day that female executive appointments were announced was always included in this window. Because stock investors are limited in their ability to understand the extent to which these events will influence returns in the future, event study results are indicative of the perceptions held by those investors regarding how the appointment event will influence future stock performance (Harrison & Freeman, 1999; Lamin & Zaheer, 2012; Schijven & Hitt, 2012).

Coding of Moderators

Country-level managerial discretion.

Measurement of this variable was based on the method developed and validated by Crossland and Hambrick (2011). Specifically, we constructed a composite index of country-level managerial discretion based on the formal and informal national institutions of individualism, uncertainty tolerance, common law orientation, ownership dispersion, and employee/labor flexibility. We used the following sources for our coding. Individualism and uncertainty tolerance (reverse of uncertainty avoidance), as national cultural dimensions, were taken from scores provided by Hofstede (2001). Using data from La Porta, López de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998), legal orientation was assigned a binary indicator of 1 if the country followed common law tradition and 0 if it followed civil law tradition. Ownership dispersion followed country-level indices provided by La Porta, López de Silanes, and Shleifer (1999). National level employer flexibility followed the employment laws index in Botero, Simeon, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2004). After coding these variables at the study-level, we standardized them and took the average to create a composite managerial discretion score, per country. For primary studies using a multinational sample, an overall value was calculated by a weighted average of the scores of the (proportions of the) countries represented in the primary data.

Autonomous organizational structure.

We coded this variable as a binary indicator. It takes the value of 1 if the primary study used a sample of small private firms (e.g., small and medium-sized enterprises [SMEs], entrepreneurial firms, new ventures, family firms) and 0 otherwise. The latter category was comprised mostly of samples from national stock exchanges (e.g., Shanghai and Shenzhen stock exchanges) or market indices (e.g., S&P 500 or FTSE 100).

Control variables.

Several study-level control variables were used in our meta-analytic regression models that tested for moderators. We included country-level gender parity, following prior research that has examined firm performance effects of females in board of director roles (Post & Byron, 2015). We operationalized gender parity as a composite measure of the z-scores of the World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index (Hausmann, Tyson, & Zahidi, 2012) and the Economist Intelligence Unit’s (2012) Women’s Economic Opportunity Index. To control for the high proportion of U.S. data in our primary studies, we also included a binary indicator if the effect size was based on a U.S. sample (1 versus 0). The effect of economic recession periods was accounted for by including a binary indicator coded 1 if the sample period of the primary study fell within a global economic downturn—we relied on the International Monetary Fund’s (IMF, 2014; Lall, 2008) definition.

Because these regressions followed our parsing of the performance outcomes, we also included a dummy code for operationalization of long-term financial performance. Long-term, accounting-based financial performance was the base or comparison form. We controlled for operationalization of strategic-risk taking when relevant by including binary indicators for financial leverage and capital expenditures, with stock volatility as the base category.

Meta-Analytic Procedures

Cumulative effect size estimation (using random-effects models).

To test our main effect hypotheses, we used methods described by Hedges and Olkin (1985) to calculate estimates of meta-analytic effect sizes and confidence intervals (CIs). Inputs for these calculations were product-moment correlations (rs). When effect sizes other than r (e.g., Cohen’s d or a t-statistic) were reported, we converted them via known formulae (e.g., Lipsey & Wilson, 2001). To adjust for non-independence of effect sizes, an average was taken if a study reported multiple correlations based on the same outcome variable. For example, if a study reported correlations for both ROA and ROE (both of which are measures of accounting-based financial performance), we averaged the two effect sizes in our analyses. The effect sizes were converted into a standard normal metric using Fisher’s r-to-Z transformations (Fisher, 1934), to correct for potential skewness in the effect size distribution (Hedges & Olkin, 1985).

Random effects models—which assume that there is a distribution of true effects in a population—were used throughout this study because they are generally considered more appropriate than fixed effects models, which assume a single true effect common to all studies (Borenstein, Hedges, Higgins, & Rothstein, 2009; Dalton & Dalton, 2005; Ostroff & Harrison, 1999). To adjust for sampling error, each study was weighted by its inverse variance and 95% CIs were calculated around the sample-weighted effect sizes (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001). Note that these CIs, because they surround random effects estimates, are akin to what have been referred to as “credibility intervals” (Whitener, 1990).

Meta-analytic regression tests of moderators.

We also used random effects meta-regression to test the moderator hypotheses. This approach allows for simultaneous tests of multiple moderator variables that can be either continuous or categorical (Kepes, McDaniel, Brannick, & Banks, 2013). To account for differences in the precision of effect sizes, the inverse variance value for r was used as a weighting factor. Random effects meta-regression analyses were performed in STATA 12 using the metareg command from Harbord and Higgins (2008).

Structural path-analytic tests of mediators.

We used meta-analytic path analysis to test Hypotheses 1b and 2b about the mediating role of strategic risk-taking (M) between female representation in the upper echelons (X) and long-term financial performance (Y). A major advantage of using this methodology is that not all relationships suggested by a theory need to be included in each primary study (Bergh et al., 2016; Harrison, Newman, & Roth, 2006; Viswesvaran & Ones, 1995). We were able to use our own meta-analytic estimates to fill in the cells for the relationships between female representation in the upper echelons and long-term financial performance (X→Y; see Table 1), as well as for female representation in the upper echelons and strategic risk-taking (X→M; see Table 2). For the M→Y connection, we primarily relied on published meta-analyses that broadly sampled primary studies containing estimates of this relationship. When multiple, prior meta-analyses reported estimates for a given relationship, we chose the one that used the largest number of samples for their estimation.

TABLE 1 Main Effects: Female Representation in the Upper Echelons and Firm Performancea Correlates k N Mean r SE 95% CIb Q Antecedent: Female representation in CEO positions H1a: Long-term financial performance 89 953,330 .007* .003 .001/.013 376.443** Accounting-based measures 58 795,260 .004 .004 –.004/.012 294.171** Market-based measures 31 158,070 .012* .005 .002/.022 81.024** H7a: Short-term market returns 7 1,389 –.126* .059 –.241/–.011 23.014** Antecedent: Female representation in TMTs H2a: Long-term financial performance 76 381,144 .028** .005 .019/.037 337.742** Accounting-based measures 50 225,709 .020** .005 .010/.031 149.222** Market-based measures 26 155,435 .038** .008 .023/.054 130.555** H7b: Short-term market returns 3 1,529 –.010 .067 –.142/.122 8.884*

TABLE 2 Mediating Mechanism: Female Representation in the Upper Echelons and Strategic Risk-Takinga Correlates k N Mean r SE 95% CIb Q Antecedent: Female presence in CEO positions H1b: Strategic risk-taking 45 807,894 –.025** .008 –.041/–.010 1390.508** Financial leverage 33 641,522 –.027** .010 –.046/–.008 954.974** Capital expenditures 5 114,838 –.041* .021 –.082/–.0002 186.809** Stock volatility 7 51,534 –.004 .018 –.040/.032 63.434** Antecedent: Female membership in TMTs H2b: Strategic risk-taking 32 278,941 –.028** .005 –.038/–.017 131.719** Financial leverage 22 184,204 –.030** .007 –.043/–.017 84.101** Capital expenditures 5 73,783 –.025** .009 –.042/–.008 12.953* Stock volatility 5 20,954 –.019 .025 –.067/.030 23.885**

For the effect of capital expenditures on long-term financial performance, we used the meta-analytic estimate of Doucouliagos and Laroche (2009). For effects of financial leverage and stock volatility on the same outcome, we drew meta-analytic estimates from Carney et al. (2011). Connections between the financial leverage and stock volatility mediators also came from the latter source. To fill the remaining empty cells for which published meta-analytic estimates were unavailable, we conducted our own “mini” meta-analyses of these relationships (Landis, 2013); these new effect size estimates are given in Table 3.

TABLE 3 Additional Meta-Analytic Effect Sizesa Antecedent Correlate k N Effect size SE Female presence in CEO positions Female membership in TMTs 8 27,299 .14 .07 Financial leverage Financial performance 65 192,874 –.14b .02 Capital expenditures Financial performance 73 11,883 –.05c .03 Stock volatility Financial performance 21 49,860 –.14b .04 Financial leverage Stock volatility 13 18,828 .18b .03 Financial leverage Capital expenditures 7 117,962 .02 .02 Capital expenditures Stock volatility 5 55,477 .02 .06

Because the numbers of observations were unequal across the different cells in the meta-analytic correlation matrix for these mediation tests, we used the harmonic mean sample size of all included effects (n = 46,056) to calculate conservative significant test statistics (Viswesvaran & Ones, 1995). The often-used Sobel test of mediation relies on the problematic assumption that sampling distributions of indirect effects are normally distributed. Therefore, we used the Monte Carlo method for assessing mediation (Selig & Preacher, 2008), which is a useful alternative to bootstrapping methods if raw data are unavailable (Hayes, 2009)—as is true for meta-analysis.

Test of reverse causality.

Prior to testing our explicit hypotheses, we addressed the potential concern that reverse causality could explain our predictions regarding long-term financial performance (e.g., Hypothesis 1a, Hypothesis 2a). Two notable arguments in the literature assert this possibility. The first is the “glass cliff” hypothesis (Ryan & Haslam, 2005, 2007). It proposes that women are systematically appointed to executive leadership positions under conditions of crisis or poor financial performance, when the chance of failure is high. The second is the “window-dressing” hypothesis which views female appointments as a symbolic rather than a substantive gesture (O’Reilly & Main, 2012). This view predicts that females are appointed to leadership positions under conditions of positive firm performance, because such times are when firms have the excess resources (or organizational slack) to concern themselves with socially desirable initiatives such as promoting gender equality in the workplace.

We tested the possibility of these alternative explanations using primary studies reporting effect sizes on the relationship between prior period firm financial performance (one or two year lags) and female representation in the upper echelons. This relationship trends negative but is statistically insignificant for female presence in CEO positions (k = 15, r = −.006, 95% CI = −.022 to .010, p = .46) and for female membership in TMTs (k = 11, r = −.027, 95% CI = −.072 to .018, p = .24). There is no accumulated support for the window dressing argument. Although statistically insignificant, the results are closer to supporting the “glass cliff” hypothesis. Therefore, we can mitigate, to some degree, concerns about reverse causality affecting our predictions about a positive influence of female representation on long-term financial performance (as suggested by Hypothesis 1a and Hypothesis 2a). If the predicted effect is found, it would be despite the potential tendency for women to take upper echelons positions under more precarious financial conditions.

RESULTS

Long-Term Financial Performance Effects: Hypotheses 1a and 2a

Table 1 reports findings from the sampling error-corrected, random-effects meta-analyses testing our hypotheses about long-term financial performance effects. In Hypothesis 1a, we predicted that female presence in CEO positions would be beneficial for long-term financial performance. The effect size for overall long-term financial performance is small but significant, as the 95% CI does not include zero ( = .007, 95% CI = .001 to .013). We further distinguished between the types of financial performance indicators and found that this overall effect is driven mainly by the effects of female presence in CEO positions on market-based measures (significant; = .012, 95% CI = .002 to .022) than accounting-based measures (not significant; = .004, 95% CI = −.004 to .012). Overall, we find support for Hypothesis 1a.

Hypothesis 2a argued that there likewise would be a positive, long-term financial performance effect of female membership in TMTs. The cumulative data bear out this idea as well ( = .028, 95% CI = .019 to .037), including when accounting-based ( = .020, 95% CI = .010 to .031) and market-based measures ( = .038, 95% CI = .023 to .054) are separated. Therefore, Hypothesis 2a is supported. Over years, countries, and many dozens of studies, when there is female representation in the upper echelons, a firm tends to perform better financially.

Mediation of Performance Effects Via Strategic Risk-taking: Hypotheses 1b and 2b

We predicted in Hypotheses 1b and 2b that long-term financial performance effects are mediated by reduced strategic risk-taking. For these assertions to hold, there should be a negative influence of female representation in the upper echelons on strategic risk-taking. Table 2 reports findings from the random-effects meta-analyses testing this prerequisite link. The results indicate that the overall strategic risk-taking effect of female CEO presence is negative and significant, as the confidence interval does not include zero ( = −.025, 95% CI = −.041 to −.010). We also find a similar strategic risk reduction effect for female membership in TMTs. Evidence in accumulated data thus shows that female representation in this upper echelons group (the TMT) is significantly negatively associated with overall strategic risk-taking (= −.028, 95% CI = −.038 to −.017). With these pre-conditions (X→M) established, we were able to proceed to a formal test of the mediating mechanism based on strategic risk reduction.

Figure 2 presents the standardized path estimates for the mediated model, estimated through meta-analytic, structural path analysis techniques (Bergh et al., 2016; Viswesvaran & Ones, 1995). The meta-analytic correlation matrix used as input for this model was constructed by combining the effects already reported in Table 1 (X→Y), Table 2 (X→M), and additional meta-analytic estimates reported in Table 3 (including M→Y). To allow for investigation of separate CEO and TMT influences, we estimated the covariance between presence in the former and membership in the latter. We also allowed the unexplained variance in the mediators to overlap by estimating the covariances among the strategic risk-taking indicators, which were all positive and significant (p < .01 for all connections). This proposed mediated model showed good fit with the data (comparative fit index [CFI] = .99, Tucker-Lewis index [TLI] = .96, root mean square error of approximation [RMSEA] = .02, standardized root mean square residual [SRMR] = .01).

FIGURE 2 Structural Path-Analytic Tests of Mediating Effects of Strategic Risk Takinga a Standardized coefficients reported; harmonic mean sample size (n = 46,056) used for significance tests. b Estimated in a model without direct path from female TMT membership to long-term financial performance. c Estimated in a model without the direct path from female CEO to long-term financial performance. ** p < .01

In Hypothesis 1b, we argued that strategic risk-taking would mediate the positive relationship between female presence in CEO positions and long-term financial performance. To test this proposed indirect (mediation) effect, we estimated confidence intervals using Selig and Preacher’s (2008) Monte Carlo method with 50,000 repetitions. The indirect effects of female presence in CEO positions on financial performance through the risk-taking markers of financial leverage (95% CI = .002 to .004) and capital expenditures (95% CI = .001 to .002) were significant, while the indirect path through stock volatility was not (95% CI = −.001 to .001). In general, evidence supports Hypothesis 1b.

To better understand the nature of the mediating effects, we included the direct path from female presence in CEO positions to long-term financial performance in a model without the direct path from female membership in TMTs (if we had introduced both direct effects at the same time, the model would be completely saturated and, therefore, inestimable). This model reveals that the direct path from female CEO presence to long-term financial performance (circumventing the mediator) is insignificant, indicating that strategic risk-taking fully mediates the influence of female CEO presence on long-term financial performance.

Hypothesis 2b makes a similar prediction about mediation, but for the influence of female membership in TMTs on long-term financial performance. Our Monte Carlo mediation tests support that prediction; the indirect influence of female membership in TMTs on financial performance through financial leverage (95% CI = .002 to .004), capital expenditures (95% CI = .0004 to .001), and stock volatility (95% CI = .001 to .003) are all significant. Furthermore, we estimated the direct path from female TMT membership to long-term financial performance (in a model without the direct path from female CEOs) and this was positive and significant (b = .021, p < .01). This finding indicates that strategic risk-taking partially mediates the relationship between female TMT membership and long-term financial performance.

Moderating Effects of Environmental and Organizational Context: Hypotheses 3–6

As their Q statistics reveal in Tables 1 and 2, the firm performance and risk-taking effects of females in a firm’s upper echelons vary significantly across studies. This variability satisfies a pre-condition for testing Hypotheses 3–6 about the moderating influences of decision latitude at the environmental and organizational level. Table 4 reports the meta-analytic regression models that tested specific moderator hypotheses. The observations in these models are the effect sizes (the rs) between female representation in the upper echelons (CEO positions or TMTs) and firm outcomes (strategic risk-taking or long-term financial performance).

TABLE 4 Environmental and Organizational Moderators: Meta-Analytic Regression Models Predicting Firm Outcomes of Female Representation in the Upper Echelonsa Outcome: Strategic risk-taking Long-term financial performance Antecedent: CEOb TMTc CEOb TMTc Variables Model 1 Model 2 Model 3 Model 4 Constant 0.027 0.001 0.010 0.011 (0.048) (0.019) (0.008) (0.018) Control variables Gender parity −0.006 0.030* −0.028** 0.005 (0.015) (0.011) (0.009) (0.012) U.S. sample −0.028 0.033 −0.028* 0.005 (0.057) (0.023) (0.012) (0.019) Economic recession period −0.046* −0.036* 0.004 0.008 (0.019) (0.015) (0.007) (0.013) Operationalization of risk-taking Financial leverage −0.024 −0.025 (0.025) (0.016) Capital expenditures −0.050 −0.025 (0.033) (0.017) Dimensions of long-term financial performance Market-based financial perf. 0.010 0.016 (0.007) (0.011) Operationalization of female membership in TMT Proportion measure −0.019 0.002 (0.012) (0.013) Diversity measure 0.036 −0.001 (0.038) (0.020) Hypothesized moderators Country-level managerial discretion 0.035 −0.055** 0.045** −0.006 (0.030) (0.015) (0.016) (0.012) Autonomous organizational structure −0.018 −0.077** 0.038* 0.058* (0.030) (0.019) (0.018) (0.024) Observations 45 32 89 76

Our first moderator (Hypothesis 3) involved country-level managerial discretion, which we believed would negatively moderate (strengthen an existing negative relationship) the link between female representation and strategic risk-taking. Discretion’s moderating effect was insignificant in Model 1 for CEOs (B = .035, n.s.); whereas it is significantly negative in Model 2 for female TMT membership (B = −.055, p < .01). Hypothesis 3 is partially supported. Hypothesis 4 made the same moderating prediction about firm performance vis-a-vis female representation in the upper echelons. Model 3 for female CEOs presents a significantly positive moderating effect of managerial discretion (B = .045, p < .01); whereas Model 4 for female TMT membership finds no impact (B = −.006, n.s.). Thus, we find mixed support for Hypothesis 4.

Hypothesis 5 predicted that an autonomous organizational structure would negatively moderate (strengthen) the relationship between female representation in the upper echelons and strategic risk-taking. This hypothesis also gets mixed support: autonomous organizational structure is a negative and significant predictor of effect sizes in Model 2 concerning TMT membership (B = −.077, p < .01); but it is not so in Model 1 concerning female presence in CEO positions (B = −.018, n.s.). Hypothesis 6 predicted that autonomous organizational structure would positively moderate (also strengthen) the long-term financial performance effects of female representation in the upper echelons. We find strong support for this prediction. Autonomous organizational structure is a significantly positive moderator in both Model 3 involving CEOs (B = .038, p < .05) and Model 4 involving TMTs (B = .058, p < .05).

Meta-Analytic Estimates of Role Incongruity Effects: Hypotheses 7a and 7b

In Hypothesis 7a, we predicted that, because of investor perceptions of a mismatch between the CEO role and its holder, female appointment to the chief executive position would have a negative impact on short-term market yields. Table 1 reports meta-analytic tests of this relationship. We find that the appointment of female CEOs does have a negative and significant influence on short-term stock market returns ( = −.126, 95% CI = −.241 to −.011). Thus, Hypothesis 7a is supported. Hypothesis 7b made a parallel prediction for short-term stock market returns regarding female appointments to TMT positions. Findings show that this relationship is not significant ( = −.010, 95% CI = −.142 to .122); and therefore Hypothesis 7b is not supported.

DISCUSSION

Undoubtedly, breaking the glass ceiling matters. It signals an end, or at least the beginning of an end, to gender exclusivity in firm leadership. Are there further consequences for firm performance if females join a firm’s upper echelons? If so, how and when? An immense investigative effort has been devoted to these questions: over 140 studies in the past several decades, conducted in dozens of countries, and published in journals from many different disciplines and theoretical traditions. Yet, the answers have not been clear or consistent.

Using meta-analytic techniques, we have uncovered findings that help to settle some of those answers. Our foremost conclusion is that there is no cumulative, zero-order evidence of long-term performance declines for firms that have more females in their upper echelons (as CEOs or TMT members). By and large the obverse is true: breaking glass helps firms—slightly. There are small but dependably positive associations of female representation in CEO positions and TMTs with long-term value creation for a firm’s fiscal outcomes. The modest size of the positive effects helps explain ambiguity and inconsistency in prior scholarship (past research has been triangulating on a weak signal in a noisy field), and they caution against overclaiming about strong or causally dependable financial benefits (Eagly, 2016).

Still, benefits are the main outcome. The only instance of a negative impact of female representation is found in a short-term drop in stock market returns following the announcement of female CEO appointments. The fact that the observation windows from these event studies typically end several months before women take a firm’s reigns is instructive. Combined with the long-term and positive financial performance effects noted above, investor perceptions are at odds with eventual financial rewards, in accounting or market terms.

Our integrative theoretical framework helps to explain why. The short-term stock decline can be explained by persistent perceptions about role incongruity of a CEO’s responsibilities with what are assumed to be female features (Eagly & Karau, 2002). Our other explanatory principles deal with the benefits of unique behavioral resources and decision-process changes that stem from women joining a firm’s upper echelons. We find cumulative evidence that female representation in both CEO positions and in TMT membership has a risk-reducing influence on firm strategy. Strategy-making is an intervening mechanism for explaining this long-term, value-creating outcome. Finally, some of these strategic risk-taking and performance effects are accentuated (versus attenuated) in environmental and organizational contexts that expand (versus restrict) the range of strategic options provided to executives. Below we discuss the theoretical and practical implications of these findings, as well as possible future directions.

Strategic Risk-Reduction as Intervening Mechanism

Our study contributes to the literature by digging deeper into why female representation in strategy-making roles might result in long-term financial performance benefits. Consistent with longstanding evidence on gender differences in attitudes (Byrnes et al., 1999; Eckel & Grossman, 2008), we find that female CEOs are less likely to engage in strategic choices that involve potentially harmful risk-taking. We also find that women’s membership in TMTs also reduces strategic risk, which is consistent with the idea that females shift group decision-making dynamics. Their presence cuts against risk-seeking tendencies in overwhelmingly male groups (DiBerardinis, Ramage, & Levitt, 1984), and promotes thoughtful decision-making that leads to more careful plans (Phillips, Duguid, Thomas-Hunt, & Uparna, 2013). Our meta-analytic path analysis shows this reduction in strategic risk-taking—empirically captured through financial leverage, capital expenditures, and stock volatility—is one reason why female representation is linked to improved financial performance in the long run. Specifically, five out of the six mediating linkages are significant in the predicted direction, and the evidence for this mediating mechanism was generally consistent between the CEO position and TMT.

Although we did not formally hypothesize about the strength (partial versus full) of mediation effects, we conducted a test for this information. Interestingly, we find that the direct link from female TMT membership to long-term financial performance is significant, while the direct path from female CEO presence to this outcome variable is not. This finding leaves an opening for other possible mediating mechanisms such as improved decision accuracy, greater variety of information resources or effective (rather than unnecessarily risky) innovation that has been observed in some forms of diverse teams (Hülsheger et al., 2009; Levine et al., 2014; Nadolska & Barkema, 2013). We encourage future research to investigate such mediating impacts in the TMT context, which would likely require fine-grained primary data.

Among the variables available in primary studies, we selected a set of strategic risk-taking indicators that we determined to be most theoretically appropriate, and that had a reasonable number of effect sizes. However, these are by no means the only indicators (or mediators) that could be studied. Other theoretical perspectives may warrant the inclusion of different sets of risk-related strategic choice variables, such as mergers and acquisitions (Credit Suisse, 2014; Hayward & Hambrick, 1997), diversification (Tihanyi, Ellstrand, Daily, & Dalton, 2000), innovation intensity (Dezsö & Ross, 2012; Miller & Triana, 2009), internationalization (Carpenter, Pollock, & Leary, 2003), or strategic dynamism (Zhang & Rajagopalan, 2010).

Decision Latitude as Contextual Moderator

In addition, we established some boundary conditions on the strategy-making mechanism. Using meta-analytic regression analyses, we found that the strategic risk-taking effects—and concomitant long-term financial performance effects—were more potent in environmental and organizational contexts that provide women in the upper echelons with greater decision latitude. Countries with formal and informal institutions that exert less constraint on executives’ decision-making and small private firms characterized by autonomous organizational structure strengthened the strategy-making and value-creating effects. However, despite our findings of such patterns, support for our moderator hypotheses was mixed compared to other parts of our conceptual framework. As such, further investigation into these and other boundary conditions is clearly needed. The population of effects for females in the upper echelons varies considerably (see the Q tests in Tables 1 and 2). Indeed, this appears to us to be the most important and richest direction for future study. Our contextual moderators—cultural and structural variation that is difficult to examine in a single investigation—lent themselves particularly well to meta-analysis. Primary studies offer greater power for revealing other moderators, and as the number of females matriculating into top positions increases, the yield from studying them will also be greater. In what industries or competitive environments are the beneficial effects of female top executives most pronounced? Where and when are they stifled or even reversed: do particular configurations of existing strategy, structure, environment, and decision latitude lend themselves poorly to performance advantages (Priem & Harrison, 1994)?

Time- and Stakeholder-Based Differences in Value Creation

Another contribution of this paper is parsing of the criterion: joint consideration of long-term and short-term firm performance effects. Long-term performance effects, we argue, are driven by actual changes to strategy that occur as a result of female representation in TMTs and CEO positions. The short-term stock return effects, in contrast, are driven to a great extent by what investors perceive as the dominant implication regarding the effectiveness of female corporate leaders (Harrison & Freeman, 1999). By incorporating both (temporal) dimensions of firm performance, our quantitative summary uncovers time-based differences in value creation for different sets of stakeholders (McWilliams & Siegel, 2000; Richard et al., 2009).

Our findings reveal a substantive inconsistency. Despite the long-term financial benefits of female representation in the upper echelons, investors are pessimistic about future firm prospects when women become CEOs. Such a finding cannot be fully explained by a traditional economics perspective, which assumes that short-term stock returns reflect all information available to investors who jointly make rational decisions (Fama, 1970, 1991; Surowiecki, 2005). If this were the case, we would not be able to find a systematic pattern of significant reduction in stock prices following female executive appointments, given evidence about their contribution to long-run performance. We posit that the revealed pattern of findings is better understood through a behavioral lens, which contends that stock price reactions are driven to some extent by the biases and beliefs held by investors (Lamin & Zaheer, 2012; Schijven & Hitt, 2012). More specifically, drawing from role incongruity theory (Eagly & Karau, 2002), we infer that such findings stem from investors’ belief that men are better suited than women to serve in executive roles that are associated with agentic and masculine qualities.

A closer look at the short-term stock market return effects provided further evidence of role incongruity perceptions underlying these findings. While we find negative effects for female CEO appointments, as we had predicted, we unexpectedly find null effects for female appointments to TMTs (= −.010, n.s.). One explanation could be that role incongruity perceptions are more salient for female CEOs compared to women in other TMT positions, because of the greater power, influence, and agentic qualities associated with the chief executive role rather than a team role (Hambrick & Quigley, 2014; Koenig et al., 2011). This finding further highlights the differences between the role of CEOs versus other TMT members, and provides an indirect test of moderation by—in this case—perceived decision latitude. While the CEO is included in the TMT by definition, the distinct role of the CEO clearly merited separate treatment theoretically and empirically, and investors reacted more negatively to female appointments in the position that has topmost decision latitude.

We also broke down the long-term performance effects, to determine how sustainable those influences were over time. Specifically, we compared the magnitude of effect sizes when the lag structure was predictive (i.e., firm performance was measured during a period after the independent variable) versus cross-sectional. When the independent variable was female CEO presence, the effect sizes were larger for the predictive ( = .026) than cross-sectional time structures ( = .006), although this difference was not significant statistically (χ2 = 1.98, p = .159). For female membership in TMTs, the effects were larger for the predictive ( = .056) than cross-sectional structure ( = .023), and this difference was statistically significant (χ2= 5.95, p < .05). Taken together, the evidence generally suggests that beneficial long-term financial performance effects of female leadership are sustained or even increasing over time. This finding further substantiates our claim of an inconsistency between short-term stock market reactions and realized firm performance benefits.

Based on these results, a promising direction for future research would be to investigate the cognitions of a broader range of stakeholder groups and audiences. To better understand how women leaders are perceived in the financial community, it would be interesting to explore how securities analysts’ thinking is affected by female appointments and their strategic actions (Wiersema & Zhang, 2011; Zhu & Westphal, 2011), which might even take the form of vignette-driven scenarios randomly ascribed to men versus women as CEOs. The beliefs and cognitions of other stakeholders could also be captured through investigations of how (announcements about and decisions of) female corporate leadership is covered by traditional and social media outlets (Dixon-Fowler, Ellstrand, & Johnson, 2013; Lee & James, 2007; Park & Berger, 2004).

Another interesting avenue for expanding the scope of the outcome space would be to broaden the realm of stakeholders, and investigate corporate social performance (CSP) effects of female representation in the upper echelons (Kimball, Palmer, & Marquis, 2012). Although the numbers are small, we identified several CSP related studies during our own article search, to provide preliminary analyses of this relationship. Our meta-analytic estimates indicate that female presence in CEO positions is positively and significantly linked to CSP (k = 9, = .085, 95% CI = .049 to .122). Similarly, we find that female TMT membership also has a significantly positive relationship with CSP (k = 5, = .083, 95% CI = .063 to .103). These initial results suggest a female corporate leadership to CSP link would indeed be a fruitful research area.

Bringing Clarity to a Varied Theoretical Landscape

Our findings help to appraise the various and sometimes conflicting theoretical arguments in this research domain. We demonstrate that theoretical arguments for a negative long-term financial performance impact of female representation in the upper echelons do not hold when evaluating the sum of prior evidence. For either the CEO position or the TMT, we do not find downturns or lowered effectiveness when women occupy upper echelons roles (see Table 1). Hence, the notion that female leaders lack requisite human capital (i.e., experience and skills) to function effectively in strategy-making roles (Burke, 2000; Metz & Tharenou, 2001), which would lead to a competitive disadvantage, has no support in accumulated evidence across decades, countries, and types of upper echelon positions. We can also (barely) rule out tokenism as an explanatory mechanism for female membership in TMTs (Kanter, 1977), as it predicts that the presence of female executives—as symbols of minority inclusion rather than as unique individuals—would either be poor substitutes for more qualified males or, at best, have no impact on a firm’s financial outcomes.

In addition to the negative stock market reactions supporting role incongruity theory (Eagly & Karau, 2002), our other findings support several different theoretical mechanisms. The data are consistent with the idea that female representation in TMTs leads to greater information elaboration and controlled (as opposed to automated and uncritical) processing of information in that strategy-making group (Joshi & Roh, 2009; Phillips et al., 2009; van Knippenberg et al., 2004). This mechanism underlies the findings of consistent strategic risk-reducing effects, as well as the link of female TMT representation to financial performance even after accounting for the mediating path (see Figure 2). These meta-analytic results also undergird the idea that female CEOs bring a unique portfolio of resources to the strategy-making role. Specifically, we find consistent support for a unique behavioral resource, a risk-reduction tendency, among female executives (Croson & Gneezy, 2009): female CEO presence is linked to reduced overall strategic risk-taking, which in turn enhances long-term financial performance.

Finally, there are theories that we cannot confirm or rule out completely with this meta-analytic summary. For instance, we are unable to directly test the idea that females’ influence in TMTs would be tempered—as they could be subject to marginalizing, out-group biases by majority male members (Shropshire, 2010; Westphal & Milton, 2000). Theory suggests that such dysfunctional group dynamics based on social categorization are more likely to occur if females in the TMT are perceived as a threat (van Knippenberg et al., 2004). Given that female members still occupy small percentages of TMT positions (Credit Suisse, 2014), it is unlikely that incumbent, male members would see females as challenging the existing TMT social hierarchy. Nevertheless, it is possible that would be a counterweight to our proposed information elaboration effects. The two opposing processes might account for small observed effect sizes.

Limitations and Research Directions

We have offered a higher-level integration and tests of predicted performance effects of female representation in strategy-making roles. We did so by identifying, synthesizing, and quantitatively summarizing the most salient themes in prior research: information elaboration, role incongruity theory, and gender differences in behavioral resource portfolios. However, such a meta-analysis of firm level data allows only indirect inferences (Boyd, Gove, & Hitt, 2005), and is inherently limited in testing highly-elaborated behavioral processes from each theory in detail. For instance, although our assertion is that female executives have a strategic risk-reducing influence, some recent studies have reported evidence to the contrary (e.g., Adams & Funk, 2012). One possibility is that such non-conforming findings are simply due to sampling-error, as they are at odds with our meta-analytic evidence. Another possibility, however, is that these findings are driven by competing mechanisms operating at a finer-grained level. Meta-analyses are limited in investigating such highly-elaborated processes with precision.

As a way forward, we encourage future primary studies to scrutinize the detailed mechanisms and nuanced arguments that underlie our integrative framework. Female executives’ unique resource portfolios, such as risk-taking tendencies, could be investigated by taking advantage of the increasing fidelity of techniques such as social media scraping and computerized coding of self-expression by top executives (Nadkarni & Chen, 2014; Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010). Highly-elaborated TMT decision-making processes could be examined through techniques such as direct observations by researchers (Eisenhardt & Bourgeois III, 1988; Nicholson & Kiel, 2007), decision-making scenarios (Flannery & May, 2000), or business simulations (Hough & White, 2003). Due to the low base-rate of women executives in leadership positions, such an investigation may require a multinational sample. Even then, further multi-year investigations would be needed to causally link CEO and TMT-level changes with subsequent strategic choices, which in turn would have to be linked to subsequent firm performance. Such a comprehensive, large-scale, multi-year, and multi-cultural investigation would perhaps go beyond the scope of any single study, but it would be a worthy pursuit.

Although micro-level research has moved toward more nuanced conceptualizations of the distribution of females in groups as a variety or dissimilarity attribute (Harrison & Klein, 2007; Joshi et al., 2011), we propose and adopt the construct of female membership in TMTs, which is a less-nuanced compositional attribute that captures the (strength of) minority presence of females in TMTs. The fundamental reason for an ostensibly less precise conceptualization is that there simply is not enough variation in the distribution of women in upper echelons roles (Credit Suisse, 2014; Dezsö & Ross, 2012). This reality is also evident in our robustness checks, which show no difference in effect sizes comparing female TMT membership measured using a dichotomous (0/1), proportion (%), or heterogeneity (Blau or Herfindahl index) index (see Methods for details). Diversity measures such as heterogeneity start to differ from the other types of measures (i.e., dichotomous and proportion) when the proportion of females approaches and exceeds 50%, which is not the case in these meta-analytic data (Harrison & Sin, 2006). This finding is also somewhat consistent with the idea of an implicit quota on the number of females in TMTs (Dezső, Ross, & Uribe, 2016), which could arise due to the threat felt by slim male majorities (Beaton, Tougas, & Joly, 1996) or the value threat experienced by existing women executives (Duguid, Loyd, & Tolbert, 2012).

Because we relied on summary data, we were not able to delimit the empirical boundaries of the focal group (in our case, the TMT) with great precision. Instead, we relied on the operationalization of the TMT in primary studies, which varied depending on organizational context, nature of the decision-making task, and data availability (Carpenter et al., 2004; Roberto, 2003). Furthermore, our measurement of strategic risk-taking was also constrained by data in primary studies. Indeed, risk-taking takes multiple forms, and risk-return relationships could also vary depending on the type of risk examined (Nickel & Rodriguez, 2002; Sanders & Hambrick, 2007). Drawing from other meta-analytic estimates (Carney et al., 2011; Doucouliagos & Laroche, 2009), our own assertion is that strategic risk-taking has a negative influence on firm performance. To test the boundaries of our theory, further investigations should examine whether our findings generalize to other types of conceptualizations and measurements of risk-taking.

Effect sizes revealed in our findings are small by conventional standards (Cohen, 1992), and this may raise questions about the practical significance of our findings. Nevertheless, one must also take into account that very small correlations with the financial performance of firms can represent gains or losses of many millions, or even billions, of dollars (Dalton, Daily, Certo, & Roengpitya, 2003). Moreover, findings from meta-analyses in strategic management over the past few decades reveal that small effect sizes are the norm rather than the exception (Carney et al., 2011; Dalton, Daily, Ellstrand, & Johnson, 1998; Heugens & Lander, 2009). At the least, our findings suggest there is no zero-order basis for a business case against female representation in the upper echelons of firms (Pande & Ford, 2011).

Finally, as in any meta-analysis, our study is limited in dealing with omitted variables and alternative explanations. We have nonetheless taken several steps to account for some possibilities within the confines of our meta-analytic approach that aggregates effects (this cumulative technique can only deal with full rather than partial covariances or regression coefficients in primary studies, with, perhaps, fixed effects of firms accounted for). We have addressed concerns of reverse causation by examining the relationship between prior-period financial performance and female representation in the upper echelons. The effects are negative and small, but not statistically significant. This finding helps mitigate against one alternative (reverse causation) explanation for our positive findings (see Methods for details). We address omitted variables concerns in our meta-analytic regression models and structural path analyses by accounting for potential third variables. Despite such efforts, we cannot completely alleviate endogeneity concerns. Meta-analyses are inherently limited in pinpointing causality, unless data come from primary studies that allow for such inferences (Bobko & Stone-Romero, 1998).

Practical Implications

Our findings contribute to the broader societal discussion about the glass ceiling, the subtle but strong barrier to women’s career advancement in the management hierarchy (Morrison & von Glinow, 1990; The Economist, 2005), as well as the business case for breaking it. One apparent implication is that there is no basis for refraining from hiring female executives on the basis of anticipated financial performance. Our findings show that firms do slightly better with females at the helm or in the officer’s chairs. Glass ceilings are not a performance cap.

Another implication for relevant decision-makers is that caution should be exercised in making inferences about the effectiveness of female leadership based on initial stakeholder reactions. As indicated by our findings, a short-term backlash by the financial market should be expected for female CEO appointments. This immediate adverse reaction could reinforce the idea in the minds of shareholders and board directors that hiring a woman to assume the CEO position is a risky move. However, such reactions are unfounded because, in the longer-term, female CEOs contribute to creating value for firms, ironically and to a considerable extent, from less risky strategy-making.

Conclusion

Despite an initial drop in stock prices, “breaking glass” by females, through the ceilings of upper-middle management into strategy-making roles in the highest echelons, has a net benefit for firms in the long run. That benefit occurs through the mechanisms of strategic actions that mitigate risks, and it is larger in environmental and organizational contexts where executives are given more latitude over their decisions. Through these findings, we have made significant progress in resolving the debate surrounding the bottom-line influences of female strategic leadership. At the same time, we believe this study raises new questions that would help advance the literature to the next level of understanding and practice.

We are grateful to Craig Crossland, Philip Roundy, Suho Han, Christina Kyprianou, and seminar participants at the University of Texas at Austin for their helpful feedback on earlier versions of this paper. We would also like to thank Aparna Joshi and three anonymous reviewers for their support and invaluable feedback throughout the review process.