Boy trapped in a wall for three days while people ignored him crying
He had no food or water (Picture: Exclusivepix Media)

A boy was trapped in a breeze block wall for three days without water before somebody decided to smash the bricks and let him escape.

Aduragbemi Saka, 12, had been crying out for somebody to help him, but people ignored his shouts, even though the ‘strange voice in the wall’ became a talking point among neighbours.

Melania Trump 'happier at a funeral with Obama' in picture without husband Donald

He became trapped after slipping down into a tiny gap of less than a foot between the wall and a house, while playing alone near a cafe.

It took three days of him crying and singing to himself to try and gain attention before police took a pick-axe to the wall and rescued him.

Incredible photos show him crouched inside the wall with one arm raised as there wasn’t enough room to bend it, covered in grey dust and without food and water.

Neighbours heard ‘a strange voice inside the wall’ (Picture: Exclusivepix Media)

MORE: Darcy the spaniel wins survivor of the year after falling 60ft down dam

Advertisement

Advertisement

Felicia Olaniyi, who lives nearby, described how the boy was finally given help: ”I asked my neighbours if they were aware of the strange voice inside the wall and they were also confused about what was going on there.’

Another neighbour, Charity Adebayo, said: ”We heard a voice speaking that ‘I am Judas Iscariot. The following day we asked for a ladder and found him. We discovered the poor boy.’

It happened in the Oduduwa Area of Ondo state in Nigeria.

People washed the dust off him after the rescue (Picture: Exclusivepix Media)

Felicia, who was the first to raise the alarm, said the boy had run away from his grandmother who had been looking for him at the time.

‘We got a ladder to trace where the voice was coming from and found the young boy where he was stuck,’ she said. ‘A policeman had to break the wall to rescue him.’

The boy has now been reunited with his grandmother and was miraculously unhurt by his ordeal.