Story behind Mar Roxas' Meme as Boy Tasa and Gripo
Facebook page “Bring back the glory of our nation. Ferdinand Marcos JR for President” claimed that the Philippines is one of the richest countries in the world and shared an article sharing a “shocking fact” about the late dictator Ferdinand Marcos’ gold reserves.

The link that was shared led us to a blog site, sangkayrealnews, which told what it claimed to be the real story about the Marcos gold – that it is not ill-gotten wealth. Marcos allegedly earned it because as a young lawyer.

Prince Julian Macleod Tallano, a member of the Filipino royal family, allegedly lent 640,000 metric tons of gold to Pope Pius XII in 1934. It was then returned to the Philippines after World War II and Marcos allegedly helped in the transaction, earning him a 30% commission worth 192,000 tons of gold, estimated to be $4 trillion in 2006. The gold was deposited to the newly founded Central Bank with a lease that would expire on December 31, 2005. The Tallano clan said to have entrusted their gold to a certain Fr. Jose Antonio Diaz, who hired Marcos.

Upon the gold’s return to the Philippines from the Vatican, it was even said to have been received by then Congressman Manuel Acuna Roxas, Bishop Enrique Sobrepena, and Atty. Lorenzo Tañada.

To cut the story short, it claimed that after Diaz died in 1974, all 30% of the commission became the Marcos gold. But on top of that, the story also claimed that the Philippine government has failed to acknowledge the existence of the gold and have kept it a secret from the Filipino people.

We also found another story about the Marcos gold, this time, it was shared by another Marcos fan page, “Kilusang Bagong Lipunan.”

The link contained a short YouTube video entitled “MUST WATCH: Shocking Fact About the Gold Reserves of Ferdinand Marcos Revealed!”

The video is merely a narration about how Marcos has tons of gold from the Tallano stash, how the Philippines would become one of the richest countries in the world if the gold currency is revived. A certain Karen Hudes was also mentioned and how former US President George W. Bush said that the Philippines is the richest country in the world, “with a clear smile on his face.”

We looked for other videos about Hudes and Marcos gold and stumbled upon one that is almost an hour and a half long.

Based on the introduction made about her by a Nexus Magazine editor, Hudes claimed to have worked for the World Bank as a legal counsel from 1996 to 2007, but was fired from her job after she reported about the takeover in the national bank in the Philippines.

It should be noted that Nexus Magazine, an Australian based bi-monthly magazine that covers alternative news, something that the “mainstream media choose to ignore.”

According to Hudes, the world has 1,750,000 metric tons.

advertisement

Where is it now? This is what Hudes had to say during a glimpse of the first five minutes of the video:

“It’s in a special trust account that was setup by Ferdinand Marcos. He was doing this as a young lawyer for Jose Rizal, who had been in the Vatican for many years. Jose Rizal was the son of Prince Tallano, who was a twin of Queen Victoria. The royals have kept the world’s gold for themselves and then it was stolen from them by the banks. And what happened is Prince, uh, Jose Rizal didn’t like what he saw at the Vatican and so he came back to the Philippines with the Vatican’s gold. Vatican sent the gold to the Philippines for safekeeping and what Jose Rizal did was he locked that gold up in a trust account for 50 years. And the thing about a trust account for 50 years is if you say you own something and you haven’t managed to get control of it, after 50 years, you’ve lost it under something called the statute of limitations. So that gold went into hiding for 50 years and those 50 years ended in 2005 but we didn’t manage to get our gold out and the reason why is because the banks refused. The man who’s the authorized signature authority, you’ll see a little clip of him, that’s Wolfgang Struck, he kept writing to the banks, saying I have the right to withdraw the money. I have the right to find out how much money it is now because it’s been accruing interest and the banks wouldn’t give him the time of day…”

And her lecture continues with over an hour.

However, if you know your history, you’d know how impossible it is for Ferdinand Marcos to serve as lawyer for Jose Rizal, who died on December 30, 1896, when Marcos wasn’t even born yet. The late dictator was born on September 11, 1917.

Hudes also claimed that Rizal had the gold locked up for 50 years, a lease that was said to have expired in 2005. But how could Rizal have set up that lease when he died in 1896? If the expiry was set in 2005, then the lease should have been set up in 1955!

But netizen Bernard Ong has a response to all of these claims about the Marcos gold. He said there was no Maharlika, no Vatican loan, not enough ships and trucks for gold shipment, no Hitler gold for Yamashita, no Southeast Asian gold, no legitimate Marcos gold, not enough gold in the world, but yes, Marcos did steal from the Filipinos.

Sources: (youtube.com, bbc.com, facebook.com, nexusmagazine.com)

Be Informed. Beat the Trolls, Share the Truth!