Dear FLCCFighters,



Pam Stewart has made an appallingly bad choice for the state test to replace the FCAT. Not only does the American Institutes for Research (AIR) do major



Here are quotes from Dr. Effrem and Randy Osborne from our press release:



Florida Stop Common Core Coalition, Inc., and president of Education Liberty Watch. "The State of Florida is not respecting the intelligence of its parents and citizens. We are not deceived and not amused at this bait and switch effort. We now can see that our children will be tested by the company working for PARCC's evil twin, SBAC, and that our children will be psychologically profiled by this company that also promotes very controversial issues. We know that our children's tests will likely include these types of issues and that the test and other data will go to the state, the federal government, and to corporations. We also realize that our children have no protection even with the current privacy bills in the legislature that rely on federal law (FERPA), because that law has been completely gutted by the Obama administration via regulation, sidestepping Congress."



"This is completely unacceptable. Besides implementing the same deceptive plan discussed at the governor's summit in August, the state has chosen a company that has a significant history of promoting identification of the GLBT lifestyle for children as young as seven years old, among parents and in churches said Randy Osborne, lobbyist for Florida Eagle Forum. "The governor and legislature need to listen to the public that is outraged and the grassroots of the Republican Party of Florida who have rejected Common Core repeatedly via resolutions at many levels." - See more at: http://www.flstopcccoalition.org/news/2014-03/stewart-pick-common-core-testing-company-that-psychologically-profiles-kids-works-parcc-evil-twin.htm#sthash.TzOgCYTi.dpuf "Commissioner Stewart and the Department of Education have failed Florida. It is still all Common Core all the time, and the state has chosen a company promoting controversial sexuality and mental health issues to test and profile our children," said Dr. Karen Effrem, executive director ofand president of. "The State of Florida is not respecting the intelligence of its parents and citizens. We are not deceived and not amused at this bait and switch effort. We now can see that our children will be tested by the company working for PARCC's evil twin, SBAC, and that our children will be psychologically profiled by this company that also promotes very controversial issues. We know that our children's tests will likely include these types of issues and that the test and other data will go to the state, the federal government, and to corporations. We also realize that our children have no protection even with the current privacy bills in the legislature that rely on federal law (FERPA), because that law has been completely gutted by the Obama administration via regulation, sidestepping Congress.""This is completely unacceptable. Besides implementing the same deceptive plan discussed at the, the state has chosen a company that has a significant history of promoting identification of the GLBT lifestyle for children as young as seven years old, among parents and in churches said Randy Osborne, lobbyist for. "The governor and legislature need to listen to the public that is outraged and the grassroots of the Republican Party of Florida who have rejected Common Core repeatedly via resolutions at many levels." - See more at: http://www.flstopcccoalition.org/news/2014-03/stewart-pick-common-core-testing-company-that-psychologically-profiles-kids-works-parcc-evil-twin.htm#sthash.TzOgCYTi.dpuf Florida Stop Common Core Coalition, Inc., and president of Education Liberty Watch. "The State of Florida is not respecting the intelligence of its parents and citizens. We are not deceived and not amused at this bait and switch effort. We now can see that our children will be tested by the company working for PARCC's evil twin, SBAC, and that our children will be psychologically profiled by this company that also promotes very controversial issues. We know that our children's tests will likely include these types of issues and that the test and other data will go to the state, the federal government, and to corporations. We also realize that our children have no protection even with the current privacy bills in the legislature that rely on federal law (FERPA), because that law has been completely gutted by the Obama administration via regulation, sidestepping Congress."



"Commissioner Stewart and the Department of Education have failed Florida. It is still all Common Core all the time, and the state has chosen a company promoting controversial sexuality and mental health issues to test and profile our children," said Dr. Karen Effrem, executive director of theand president of. "The State of Florida is not respecting the intelligence of its parents and citizens. We are not deceived and not amused at this bait and switch effort. We now can see that our children will be tested by the company working for PARCC's evil twin, SBAC, and that our children will be psychologically profiled by this company that also promotes very controversial issues. We know that our children's tests will likely include these types of issues and that the test and other data will go to the state, the federal government, and to corporations. We also realize that our children have no protection even with the currentthat rely on federal law (FERPA), because that law has been completely gutted by the Obama administration via regulation, sidestepping Congress." Florida Eagle Forum. "The governor and legislature need to listen to the public that is outraged and the grassroots of the Republican Party of Florida who have rejected Common Core repeatedly via resolutions at many levels."



"This is completely unacceptable. Besides implementing the same deceptive plan discussed at the governor's summit in August , the state has chosen a company that has a significant history of promoting identification of the GLBT lifestyle for children as young as seven years old, among parents and in churches said Randy Osborne, lobbyist for"The governor and legislature need to listen to the public that is outraged and the grassroots of the Republican Party of Florida who have rejected Common Core repeatedly via







(850) 717-9337 or by email Please contact Governor Scott and let him know how unacceptable this is. Ask him to use his authority to take us out of the Common Core agreement and develop real academic standards with early childhood experts and university professors:



involved in developing briefs and other information promoting acceptance of the LGBT lifestyle for elementary age school children. - See more at: http://www.flstopcccoalition.org/news/2014-03/stewart-pick-common-core-testing-company-that-psychologically-profiles-kids-works-parcc-evil-twin.htm#sthash.dpZ9u2Vz.dpuf Pam Stewart has made an appallingly bad choice for the state test to replace the FCAT. Not only does the American Institutes for Research (AIR) do major behavioral/mental health testing and research and is developing the test for the Smarter Balanced Assessment Consortium (SBAC) , but they are very involved in involved in developing briefs and other information promoting acceptance of the LGBT lifestyle for elementary age school children.Here are quotes from Dr. Effrem and Randy Osborne from