No Senate for Inday Sara: Duterte daughter files COC for Davao mayor
Davao City Mayor Sara Duterte is accompanied by her husband Atty. Manases Carpio as she files her Certificate of Candidacy for mayor of Davao City on Monday, October 15 2018. Manman Dejeto, ABS-CBN News

MANILA (UPDATED) - Davao City Mayor Sara Duterte-Carpio on Monday filed her certificate of candidacy (CoC) for another term as mayor in next year's election.

Prior to filing her CoC, Duterte-Carpio has repeatedly dismissed rumors that she would seek a national post.

Duterte-Carpio is the fifth most preferred senatorial candidate among 66 probable contenders in a Sept. 1 to 7 Pulse Asia poll.

"From day 1 sinabi ko naman na hindi ako tatakbo (sa Senado)," she told reporters.

(From day 1 I already said I will not run [for senator])

She also said her younger brother, Baste, is also eyeing a political position but he has yet to talk to their father.

"Si Baste, nag-iisip pa siya. Depende sa kanilang mapapag-usapan ni President Rodrigo Duterte when he comes home later tonight," Duterte-Carpio added.

(Baste is thinking about it [running for a political position]. He and President Rodrigo Duterte will talk about it when he comes home later tonight.)

The 40-year-old, known to supporters as "Inday Sara," was vice mayor to her father before the elder Duterte ran for president in 2016.

A lawyer by profession, Duterte-Carpio made headlines when she punched a male sheriff who was leading the demolition of an informal settler community some 7 years ago.

As the eldest daughter of the President, Duterte-Carpio has assumed the role of a first lady in some functions of the chief executive.

She has proven herself to be an influential political figure and recently formed her own regional party—Hugpong ng Pagbabago.

Earlier this year, she figured in a spat with former House Speaker Pantaleon Alvarez, who was later ousted with her support, according to lawmakers.

In 2015, she replaced her father, President Rodrigo Duterte, as candidate for city mayor when the latter ran for president. - with a report from Vina Araneta, ABS-CBN News