Kellie Leitch, "Business of Supply" on Dec. 4th, 2017
Kellie Leitch Conservative Simcoe—Grey, ON

Mr. Speaker, I will be sharing my time with the member for Souris—Moose Mountain.

One of the parts of being a member of Parliament I love the most is spending time with the individuals in my riding and talking to these down-to-earth, hard-working, sensible people in Simcoe—Grey. These are people who see through all the nonsense here in this Ottawa bubble.

One of the things I am hearing more and more from my constituents is that the government could not be any worse. However, the Prime Minister continues to come up with new and shocking ways to explain to Canadians this divergence from what were campaign promises.

First, it was the disaster of the budget that went from a small deficit promised during the election campaign to an obviously substantive one. Then it was cutting infrastructure funding from small communities, such as Alliston, Angus, Everett, and others in my riding to provide for big city projects for the Liberal boondoggle known as the infrastructure bank.

Not to be outdone by that, the government has a plan to legalize marijuana and to allow four plants for every household, and for kids ages 12 to 18 to be able possess without a penalty. While the Liberals were planning to make it easier for our kids to get their hands on pot, the finance minister was out breaking many laws so that the House needed to have a whole day of debate on that, whether it was a French villa that was not registered, monthly dividend payments, stock sell-offs, or a blind trust that was never set up.

In a previous government I was part of, accountability actually meant something. An individual was even removed from cabinet for purchasing some orange juice. That entitled behaviour obviously is not something the finance minister seems to understand.

Did I also mention that multi-million ice arena sitting outside on the front lawn that none of my constituents can actually play hockey on, or the millions of dollars in payments to terrorists like Omar Khadr? There has been so much incompetence in the government, one would think the Prime Minister had been in office as long as his father, but he has actually only been at this for two years. Admittedly, it is a high bar for incompetence, but my constituents are telling me now that they have had probably the most shocking news yet.

We have learned that the government has been allowing Canadian ISIS terrorists to settle back in Canada for two years now, no questions asked, no trials, no convictions, no accountability, and apparently, no problem with that. These are people who left Canada to go to fight against our allies in favour of a radical Islamic state.

We have seen some of these people and their fellow terrorists on video threatening Canadians and threatening our way of life. In one video, a man from Ottawa who joined ISIS is seen calling for attacks like the one that killed Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent and Corporal Nathan Cirillo to continue. Fortunately, that terrorist met his maker. Otherwise, he would be flying back to Canada to pick up his life where he left it off, again with no questions asked.

In March 2016, the former director of CSIS stated that 60 Islamic State terrorists had returned to Canada. Today the Minister of Public Safety is still using these figures. Canadians have not been updated as to how many returning terrorists there are in Canada.

Only a few weeks ago, during a CTV interview, did the minister confirm that passports may be seized and terrorists may be put on a no-fly list. My question is whether that actually happened or whether it was just hypothetical. We do not know how many terrorists we have in Canada, nor how many have had passports taken, or not. How many terrorist have been put on the no-fly list? How many are being monitored and surveilled? How many have committed heinous crimes during their time abroad?

Let us remember that ISIS is the same group that rapes and enslaves women and girls. It is the same terrorist organization that throws gay men off buildings, just for being gay. I know that the Prime Minister calls himself a feminist and supports gay rights, but this is why it is even more troubling that terrorists who support the most anti-gay and anti-women philosophy in the world would be allowed to walk back into Canada without any consequences.

I recognize that verifying reports of these atrocities is difficult, but that is exactly why these terrorists need to be detained and questioned. Were any of these Canadians present, for example, in western Syria in May, when terrorists claimed 50 lives by beheading women and using bricks to beat children to death? Are any of these terrorists about to enjoy Christmas holidays?

Were they involved in the 2014 massacre of 600 Shia, Christian, and Yazidi men, who were lined up on the edge of a desert ravine and shot point blank? Did any of these Canadian terrorists play a role in an atrocity reported in 2016 that saw six men burned alive in a bakery oven and up to 250 children run through a dough maker?

I do not know, and it appears that the government does not know either, or if it does, it does not care. However, my colleagues and I care about protecting Canadians, and we want some action. Canadians demand justice for those who have suffered at the hands of these ISIS terrorists.

The previous Conservative government passed legislation to protect Canadians. The Liberal government's legislative agenda is more concerned with overseeing CSIS than monitoring ISIS. Its focus is so misguided that it even removed a key tool in the fight against terrorism: the law that strips dual citizens of their Canadian citizenship if convicted of terrorism, treason, or espionage. Allies such as the United Kingdom are doing just that.

We need to stand with our allies in this ongoing struggle against this violent Islamic extremism. While our allies have stepped up their commitment to ensuring their citizens' safety, our government is lost. In fact, the U.K. minister of state for international development, Rory Stewart, has stated, “So I’m afraid we have to be serious about the fact these people are a serious danger to us, and unfortunately the only way of dealing with them will be, in almost every case, to kill them.”

Even Brett McGurk, an appointee of President Obama to the global coalition to counter ISIS, has said, “Our mission is to make sure that any foreign fighter who is here, who joined Isis from a foreign country and came into Syria, they will die here in Syria.”

Liberals can debate the methods used by our allies to keep their citizens safe, but they are erring on the side of protecting their law-abiding citizens.

Here in Canada, in contrast, the government created the Canada Centre for Community Engagement and Prevention of Violence, which aims to prevent and counter radicalization to violence at an individual level. However, the centre does not directly intervene with radicalized individuals, so we cannot be sure how many terrorists it has worked with or if it has had any success. We are not even sure how it spends its money. What we do know is that an unnamed group received $367,000 from Public Safety Canada in September 2017 for poetry and podcasts for terrorists.

British and American terrorists can expect to be detained and have their citizenship revoked or to be killed. Canadian terrorists can expect a haiku or a podcast on why they cannot throw gays off the roofs of buildings because that is a bad idea. I wish I was making this up, but sadly, I am not.

Here is what we know. In March 2016, 60 ISIS terrorists were comfortably living back in Canada. We know that the government does not know, or say, how many have arrived since then. We know that the government has spent $365,000 on poetry and podcasts to de-radicalize terrorists.

It is time for the government to take the safety and security of Canadians seriously. That is what the people of Simcoe-Grey expect, and it is what Canadians deserve. I call on members of the House, especially those on the Liberal side of the House, to do the right thing and stand up with us and support the motion.