Bong Go bares his back to deny alleged link to drug syndicate
Senatorial aspirant, Christopher ‘Bong’ Go bares his back to deny his alleged links to an illegal drug syndicate.

Senatorial aspirant and former Special Assistant to the President Christopher ‘Bong’ Go on Wednesday bared his back to refute his alleged links to an illegal drug syndicate.

Go showed off his back to debunk claims he has a tattoo as mentioned in a series of videos uploaded by a certain ‘Bikoy’.

In the third installment of videos entitled, “Ang Totoong Narco List,” ‘Bikoy’ tagged Go as one of the big bosses in a drug syndicate who allegedly owns four local bank accounts where drug money is funneled. He alleged that Go used the codename “TESOROGOLF-TSG002,” which supposedly represents the former presidential aide’s full name Christopher Lawrence ‘Bong’ Tesoro Go.

Bikoy, who claimed to be a former member of a drug syndicate operating in Luzon and Visayas, said Go has a dragon tattoo on his back that bears the alphanumeric code “COATLIBRA-0018” from the drug transactions.

At a campaign sortie in Agusan del Sur on Wednesday, Go dispelled the accusations by baring his back.

Former Presidential aide Bong Go bares his tattoo-less back to debunk his alleged links to a drug syndicate. | Photo by Bong Go More

There was no tattoo on his back but there were circular marks, which Go said were due to ventosa cupping therapy.

In another campaign sortie in Laguna on Monday, Go denied having a tattoo and accused his political opponents of employing “desperate” tactics.

“Hindi pa po ako nagkaroon ng tatoo kailanman sa buhay ko, balat po marami ako sa likod,” he said.

(I never had a tattoo. Birth marks, I have many on my back)

He also denied involvement in the drug ring, stressing that his former boss and still close ally – President Rodrigo Duterte – abhors illegal drugs.

Malacañang has dismissed the allegations against Go, and presidential son Paolo Duterte who was also tagged as among the principals of a drug syndicate, as mere propaganda.

“We’ve been saying all along that that was a black propaganda. There are people who believe it, hook, line, and sinker. It’s now showing that it’s not true. It’s never been true,” Presidential Spokesperson Salvador Panelo said. – Robie de Guzman/Roderic Mendoza

The post Bong Go bares his back to deny alleged link to drug syndicate appeared first on UNTV News.