The Philippine Identification System Act and its Implementation
His Excellency President Rodrigo Roa Duterte has formally signed the Philippine Identification System (PhilSys) Act this 06 August 2018 formalizing the implementation of a Philippine Identification System (PhilSys). As implementing agency, the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA) will be spearheading the initiative together with National Economic and Development Authority (NEDA), Department of Foreign Affairs (DFA), Department of Budget and Management (DBM), Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT), Department of Finance (DOF), Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD), Department of Interior Local Government (DILG), National Privacy Commission (NPC), Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP), Government Service Insurance System (GSIS), Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (Philhealth), Social Security System (SSS) and Philippine Postal Corporation (PHLPost) forming the PhilSys Policy and Coordination Council (PSPCC).

Soon after the signing of the Act, Dr. Ernesto M. Pernia, Secretary of NEDA and PSPCC Chairman, will convene the council to discuss the plans for the PhilSys implementation. As head of the implementing agency PSA, Usec. Lisa Grace S. Bersales, Ph.D. will act as Co-chair.

As part of the preparatory activities, the PSA will formulate the draft of the Implementing Rules and Regulations for consultation with the PSPCC members, Office of the Solicitor General, University of the Philippines Diliman-College of Law, and stakeholders before its issuance, as mandated by the PhilSys Law. In addition, the Terms of Reference (TOR) shall be prepared for consideration by the PSA-BAC and the procurement shall be fully compliant to R.A. 9184 and the IRR.

In the coming months, the PSA, in collaboration with Council member-agencies, will be conducting a pilot implementation in selected regions in the Philippines. The pilot test aims to lay down the registration process prior to the full 5-year implementation starting 2019.

LISA GRACE S. BERSALES, Ph.D.

Undersecretary

National Statistician and Civil Registrar General