DO NOT LET YOUR CHILDREN WATCH PEPPA PIG – PSYCHOLOGISTS WARN PARENTS
A group of experts at Harvard University did a study revealing that Peppa Pig is one of the main causes of autism among children.

This animated movie has achieved great success. There are many toys, t-shirts, and many other things with this character. However, the question still remains. Is this cartoon character good for children? The answer is NO.

According to experts, there is a proof that shows an increased in adversarial, snide, questioning, confrontation, and disrespectful behavior in children which results from watching cartoons such as Peppa Pig. Peppa is downright rude and her parents allow her get away with murder. There is an episode where Peppa and her brother George refused to tidy their room, but then their parents made it into a game. When they finished, the brats trashed the room again, laughing arrogantly.

These are the unique features Peppa possesses:

Suffers from the syndrome of superiority;

Inappropriate behavior;

Imposes ideas regardless of others’ opinions;

Impolite;

Competitive (it does not how to lose);

Intolerant;

Disrespectful

Envious;

Arrogant;

Proud

There are parents who complained that their children copy the behavior of Peppa and her brother George, and some of them even banned the cartoon from being watched in their homes.

Thus, be very careful, all you parents out there. There is nothing special about Peppa Pig. The same applies to all the other programs. Around 80% of the brain develops during the first few months until 3 years old. In case they spend a lot of time watching the TV, they will copy the forms of behavior that they see on TV.

Other controversy surrounding Peppa Pig includes: Peppa and her family did not wear seat belts in the first two series. After receiving several complaints, Astley Baker Davies announced that all future animation would include characters wearing seat belts, and that the relevant scenes in the first two series would be re-animated to include them

SHARE to make Parents AWARE