Jesus Christ never existed: Pakistan PM Imran Khan drops a controversial remark
On the occasion of Islamic Prophet Mohammed’s birth anniversary, Prime Minister of Pakistan Imran Khan dropped a controversial remark about Christianity’s Prophet Jesus Christ while addressing a press conference.

“There is no mention of Hadrat Eesa (Jesus Christ) in any books of history” Imran Khan was quoted. He also added that, while there were some evidences to prove the existence of Moses, but history completely lacks any reference to Jesus Christ. Moses is one of the most revered prophets in Judaism.

On #EidMiladUnNabi, on International SeeratulNabi conference,

Imran Khan, Prime Minster of ?? says that there is no mention of Jesus Christ(Hadrat Eesa)in any books of history

Was he high again or an ignorant fool?

I mean does he knows how much he has hurt Christian community? pic.twitter.com/2KNln6Wh4b — Shama Junejo (@ShamaJunejo) November 20, 2018

The Backlash

PM Imran Khan has been subject to the backlash after the video of his comments on Jesus Christ went viral. It is seen as an insensitive disposition towards Christians, who are a minority in Pakistan.

- Advertisement - - article resumes -

Pakistan born, Islamic commentator Tarek Fatah took to Twitter, to express shock on Khan’s comment.

.

Latest pearl of wisdom from

‘Imm the Dimm’ (PBUH), Prime Minister @ImranKhanPTI of Pakistan: “Jesus Christ left no stamp on ‘human history’ the way Prophet Muhammad did … There is no mention of Christ in history.”pic.twitter.com/SyktcwjrIT — Tarek Fatah (@TarekFatah) November 20, 2018

His party members from Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf defended Imran Khan, by saying his statements have been taken out of context.

Other reactions that followed:

According to Maulana Imran Khan Niazi “there is no mention of Jesus Christ in history.” This happens, when you never shut your trap. pic.twitter.com/G6XRtQMMHI

— Naila Inayat (@nailainayat) November 20, 2018

Previous controversial remarks

In recent times this has been the second instance when Imran Khan landed in trouble for his own statements. This month, justifying the making of U-turns on many electoral promises, Imran Khan had drawn the parallels between himself and Nazi leader Adolf Hitler and French emperor Napoleon Bonaparte.

“Adolf Hitler and Napoleon Bonaparte would not have suffered losses in wars in Russia if they had taken U-turns. Leaders should always be ready to take U-turns according to the requirement of their duties and best interests of the nation. One who doesn’t take decisions according to the demand of the situation is not a true leader,” Imran Khan said last month.

He drew extreme criticism and ridicule from the opposition for same.

Imran Khan’s war of words with India

Imran Khan also has a history of launching diatribes against India and Prime Minister Modi. Last month, Imran Khan on 22nd October tweeted about “new cycle of killings of innocent Kashmiris” and referred J&K, which is an integral part of India as IOK or India Occupied Kashmir. This tweet had come hours after reports about the killing of civilians in South Kashmir emerged.

Following which, India issued a stern reply to Pakistan, and added that Pakistan should be more interested in its own issues than India’s.

Help Us Reach Every Indian, Please Share This Post