France Passes Law Saying Children Can Consent To Sex With Adults
Why did France’s government vote against having an age of consent? The answer is obvious. Muhammad married his favorite wife Aisha when she was six and consummated the marriage when Aisha was nine. Since Muhammad did that, and since he is the “excellent example” for all Muslims to follow, child marriage is acceptable in Islam. This is a sign of France’s capitulation and Islamization. They cannot set an age of consent, because Islam doesn’t have one. This is a sign of how quickly Western values erode when our leaders do not have the will to defend them.

“France Passes Law Saying Children Can Consent To Sex With Adults,” by Baxter Dmitry, Your Newswire, August 4, 2018 (thanks to Kenny):

President Macron’s government has voted against having an age of consent in France, becoming the latest nation to give in to pressure from an international network of liberal activists determined to normalize pedophilia and decriminalize sex with children across the world. Federal law in France now has no legal age of consent, meaning adults who have sex with children of any age will not be prosecuted for rape if the child victim is unable to prove “violence, threat, duress, or surprise.” The draft bill against sexual and gender-based violence, known as the Schiappa law, was signed into law by the French Parliament on 3 August, sparking outrage in France as parents and childrens’ rights groups accuse Emmanuel Macron’s government of betraying the nation’s children. The lack of an age of consent places millions of children in serious danger of sexual abuse in France, according to child protection officials. Childrens’ rights groups criticised Emmanuel Macron’s government for failing to provide a legal age of consent to protect children, pointing to the recent decision by French courts to refuse to prosecute two pedophiles for the rape of 11-year-old girls because authorities couldn’t prove the children did not consent. On Thursday, several groups, including the French Council of Associations for the Rights of the Child, issued a joint statement to express their “indignation” at the abandonment of an age of consent under French law. In a joint statement, the associations condemned the new law in the strongest possible terms: “This should be the flagship measure of the bill: the introduction of an age below which children would automatically be considered unable to consent to sex with adults.“ The French child protection associations are demanding that Macron’s government revoke the Schiappa law and establish a legal age of consent under which any sexual act involving an adult and a child will constitute rape. The abandonment of a legal age of consent has shocked French society. The controversial bill had focused on an appropriate threshold for an age of consent — 13 or 15 years. However, the choice was made to abandon the principle of a minimum age. In its final version, the Schiappa law provides that for children under the age of 15, “the moral constraint or the surprise is characterized by the abuse of the vulnerability of the victim who does not have the necessary discernment for these acts“. However, the former minister of women’s rights, Laurence Rossignol, says these notions of “vulnerability” and “discernment” leave far too much room for pedophiles to escape punishment under the law….

The Truth Must be Told Your contribution supports independent journalism Please take a moment to consider this. Now, more than ever, people are reading Geller Report for news they won't get anywhere else. But advertising revenues have all but disappeared. Google Adsense is the online advertising monopoly and they have banned us. Social media giants like Facebook and Twitter have blocked and shadow-banned our accounts. But we won't put up a paywall. Because never has the free world needed independent journalism more. Everyone who reads our reporting knows the Geller Report covers the news the media won't. We cannot do our ground-breaking report without your support. We must continue to report on the global jihad and the left's war on freedom. Our readers’ contributions make that possible. Geller Report's independent, investigative journalism takes a lot of time, money and hard work to produce. But we do it because we believe our work is critical in the fight for freedom and because it is your fight, too. Please contribute to our ground-breaking work here.

Make a monthly commitment to support The Geller Report – choose the option that suits you best. Contribute Monthly - Choose One Subscriber : $18.00 USD - monthly Contributor : $36.00 USD - monthly Patron : $50.00 USD - monthly Silver member : $100.00 USD - monthly Gold member : $250.00 USD - monthly Platinum member : $500.00 USD - monthly