Spit it out now! Trident gum contain pork, declared haraam
For some valid reasons, there always looms a risk of the products not being halal over our heads and it’s also equally important to make sure that the local markets cater to this very need and issue.

It’s not just local markets that have non-halal food coming in; turns out that imported products can be just as haraam.

It is very likely that Trident is Haram. The popular chewing gum made by Mondelez International is “not certified halal”. A post on Trident’s Facebook page confirmed this as much.

However, not being certified as Halal doesn’t necessarily mean that it is really Haram.

In an email to the relevant consumer services about Trident Layers, a certain brand of chewing gum, it was stated that even though there was no alcohol left in the gum by the time it was packaged, pork gelatin is used in the manufacturing process:

Dear Lazeena:

Thank you for contacting us about Trident Layers. Your comments and inquiries are appreciated because they provide valuable feedback about our brands.

Our Trident Layers products do contain gelatin that is derived from a pork base.

Alcohol can be used as a carrier in certain flavors in our confectionery products. Also, our gums, mints, and cough drops are not kosher certified.

There is no alcohol present in the final product (or any of our other confectionery products). Any minute traces of alcohol that might possibly be used as a flavor carrier would dissipate during the manufacturing process and would not be present in the finished product.

Thank you for taking the time to contact us. We hope that you will continue to purchase and enjoy our products.

Sincerely,

Consumer Relations

And this isn’t the first time this has happened. Just recently, the popular toasted pastry, “Pop Tarts”, was allegedly banned from local markets because it contained haraam products too.

So, inquiring about the products you are using is very important and you can always pick the alternatives that are certified as Halal.