One killed as Shiites protest Pakistan suicide bomb

Posted

One person has been killed and two hurt by gunfire in the Pakistani city of Karachi as Shiite Muslims protested over the deaths of 14 people in a suicide bomb attack on a mosque, hospital officials said.

The shootings happened in the southern port city's central Sohrab Goth neighbourhood as the Shiite demonstrators forced people in the Sunni-dominated area to shut down shops following Friday's bombing.

Mohammad Dilbar, who suffered a bullet wound, told reporters:"The (gun)fire came from an unknown direction as I was passing by."

Police used tear gas to disperse the crowd of some 150 people who were pelting officers with stones and blocking traffic, police officer Ghulam Farid Khawaja told AFP.

City police chief Tariq Jamil said "there were some injuries in the firing by unknown people" but denied it was sectarian violence.

Police detained around 50 people as violence continued for a second day in several parts of the city, with angry youths torching two minibuses.

Firefighters said more than a dozen vehicles were also gutted overnight in Shiite-dominated areas soon after the mosque bombing.

"We have detained people for burning vehicles and damaging private property," Mr Jamil told AFP.

Police and hospital officials said 14 people were killed in Friday's blast in the Shiite Haideri Mosque - including the suspected bomber, who was apparently dressed as a Shia cleric - and more than 90 others were injured.

Most of the dead were buried overnight while the funeral for one victim was held early Saturday.

The Shiite community has declared three days of mourning.

Markets and shops in most parts of the city remained closed after the business community heeded calls for a shut down to condemn the attack, local Shiite leaders said.

Community leader Syed Zafar Hasan Naqvi told AFP the violence "was spontaneous despite our advice to youths to observe restraint".

"If the authorities do not bring the culprits to book, we could not hold them from resorting to agitation," he said.

Police released a sketch of the suspected suicide bomber drawn by experts with the help of witnesses. He had a beard and a thin moustache, police said.

Up to three kilograms of explosives were used in the bomb, which was detonated among rows of worshippers, police said.

"There was no crater on the floor of the mosque which makes us believe that the attacker had explosives strapped on his upper body," Syed Kamal Shah, police inspector general of surrounding Sindh province, told AFP.

President Pervez Musharraf and Prime Minister Zafarullah Jamali strongly condemned the attack and stressed the Government's resolve to eradicate terrorism and sectarian violence.

Interior Minister Faisal Saleh Hayat blamed the bombing on "anti-state elements who want to ruin the city's peaceful atmosphere".

No group has claimed responsibility.

The Government has announced a reward of 2.5 million rupees for information about the perpetrators.

--AFP

Topics: unrest-conflict-and-war, pakistan